THE HAPPINESS OF ENJOYING, AND MAKING A TRUE AND SPEEDY USE OF CHRIST.

SETTING FORTH, FIRST, THE FULLNESS OF CHRIST.

SECONDLY, The danger of neglecting Christ, and the opportunity of grace.

THIRDLY, The LORD JESUS the souls last Refuge.

Whereunto is added, St. PAUL'S LEGACY, or FAREWELL to the men of Corinth.

ALEXANDER GROSS B. D. Minister of the Gospel, and Pastor of Bridford.

That their hearts may be comforted, being knit together in love, and unto all
riches of the full assurance of understanding, to the acknowledgment of the
mystery of God, and of the Father, and of Christ:

And whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. Col. 2.2, 3.

And of his fullness have we all received, and grace for grace. Joh. 1.16.

Omniae habemus in Christo, and omnia nobis Christus. Ambros.

LONDON, Printed by Robert Young, for John Bartlet, at the sign of the
gilt-cup near Saint Austens Gate. 1640.

TO MY MOST DEARLY Beloved, and much honored friends (howsoever dignified or
distinguished) the Inhabitants of Plympton St. Mary, the increase of all saving
grace, and everlasting bliss.
LOve among the Ancients was pourtrayed and shadowed out by, and under the
image of a woman clothed in a green garment, having written in her forehead,
Procul and Prope, afar off, and near at hand; in her breast, Mors and vita,
life and death; in the hemme of her garment, Hyems and aestas, winter and
summer; in her side, Vulnus apertum, an open wound, thorough which her heart
within might be seen. My love to you (far from me be all base flattery and
selfe-commendation) has been very fervent, like the love of women; green,
and never withering, always fresh and flourishing; not only while I was
present with you, but since I have been absent from you, the sense at least of
my love has been more abundant toward you: such has been my love to you,
that you were in my heart to live and to dye with you: I could willingly in
winter and in summer, in all changes, have continued your servant, as Jacob
served Labans flock in the heat and in the cold: My heart is open to you, as a
Bridegroomes heart and house is open to receive the Bride; and had your former
been like the last manifestations of your love toward me, I am assured all
the proffers and persuasions of the world, should never have drawn me from
you. Great is the power and strength of affection, with which faithful
Ministers love the Lords people: as grace is more powerful then nature, so is
their love stronger then the love of nature: Non minus vos diligo (says
Ambrose) quos genui ex Evangelio, quam si suscepissem conjugio; gratia quippe
vehementior est ad diligendum quam natura. I love you no less whom I have
begotten by the Gospel, then if I had begotten you in matrimonial conjunction;
because grace has more energy and vehemence in the way and work of love, then
nature. And in my unfeigned love, and as a pledge and testimony of my
never-dying love, I have sent you these papers, part of which is the last
Legacy I had to bestow upon you at the time of my departure from you: It is
very useful for all Christians to renew the memory of the past labors of Gods
messengers.

Every good child desires a copy of his Fathers will, to see his Fathers love,
to know his Fathers gift, to remember and observe his Fathers charge and
counsel: Children within some few days after their Fathers death expect the
receipt of their parents Legacy and bequeath; and loving children are ever
very glad to accept, and very careful to keep their parents last gift, though
of slender worth: the last words of Gods Ministers, our spiritual parents, do
commonly (like the words of dying men) take the deepest impression in their
hearers. True Christians think often, and put great price upon the last
labors of Gods Ministers: I therefore here present unto you that which I
published as my last ministerial Will and Testament among you, with some part
of my poor labors since bestowed on others, desiring you, like loving
children, to accept it; like provident and careful children, to make the
humble, true, and best use of it: A small gift well used, proves many times an
instrument of great inrichment.

Though I cease to be your Minister, and am now no more your Instructor, yet I
cannot cease to be your true, though weak and unworthy, perhaps despised,
friend: and as ointment and perfume (according to Solomon) rejoice the heart,
so would I gladly by hearty counsel, distill on you the drops of some
friendly, some Christian and spiritual sweetness, to the rejoicing and
revivement of your souls: and as iron sharpens iron, so am I willing by some
words of admonition, exhortation, and excitation, to sharpen and quicken your
affections.

Let me therefore as a constant lover of your souls, and a careful
remembrancer of your welfare, entreat and persuade you all, 1. To grow in the
sight and sense of your sin: Beware of hardness, keep your hearts soft and
contrite, nourish and maintain all tenderness in your consciences: sense of
misery sweetens mercy; the feeling of sin breeds both the loathing and leaving
of sin; man's sight of his own vileness, makes Christ very precious, and
breeds a low opinion of all worldly excellencies. The Heart feeling within him
the operation of the serpents poison, goes from the thorns and thickets and
passes over the green and pleasant pastures, desires nothing but the
fountain: sense of the venom of sin and uncleanness, makes man go from the
thorns and thickets of worldly cares and riches, and pass from the green
meadows of carnal pleasures, the soul being restless until it comes to
Christ Jesus the fountain of all spiritual refreshments.

Secondly, take heed, deceive not your selves with shows and shadows in stead
of substance, with a form in stead of the power of godliness: As the Poets
fable it of Ixion embracing a cloud in stead of Juno; or as mothers in haste
sometimes catch at the swaddling clothes, and leave the child behind them. It is
very dangerous to stay and applaud our selves in the ceremony of Religion and
godliness, not taking with us the Lord Jesus, as sometimes Mary and Joseph went
on with the multitude for company, and left Christ behind them: all religious
observations prove complementall, frivolous and fruitless, if in them we see
not, taste not, receive not, enjoy not Christ: religious exercises are lost
labors to the soul that gains not the Lord Jesus.

Thirdly, Be truly meek and humble, be emptied of all opinion of your own
worth and wisdom; this will make you wise unto salvation: He that is in the
low pits and caves of the earth sees the stars in the firmament, when they
who are on the tops of the mountains discern them not. He that is most
humble sees most of heaven: Bona est via humilitatis (says Bernard) qua
veritas inquiritur, charitas acquiritur, and generationes sapientiae
percipiuntur. Good (says he) is the way of humility, whereby truth is searched
out, charity is obtained, and the generations of wisdom are perceived.
Humility exalts; he that is most humble, is, and shall be most honorable.
Moses was the meekest man on earth, and God made him the most honorable,
calling him up unto himself in the mount, and making him the Leader of his
people. Gedeon was very little in his own eyes, the least of his fathers house
in his own apprehension, and God marvellously exalted him, making him the
deliverer of Israel. As man's pride is attended with infamy, so is man's
meekness waited on with glory. Vis magnus esse? incipe ab imo: Will thou be
great? begin from below, says the Father. As the roots of the tree descend, so
the branches ascend: this makes the soul capable of grace, as the low grounds
of water, and the broken earth of seed. God gives grace to the humble, as men
pour liquor into an empty vessel. The Altar under the Law was hollow, to
receive the fire, the wood, and the sacrifice: the heart of man under the
Gospel must be humble, empty of all spiritual pride and self-conceit, to
receive the fire of the spirit, and Jesus Christ, who offered himself a
sacrifice for our sins: this keeps the soul free from many darts of Satan's
casting, and snares of his spreading, as the low shrubs are free from many
violent gusts and blasts of wind, which shake and rent the taller trees. I have
read of one, that seeing in a vision many snares of the devil spread upon
earth, he sat down and mourned, and said within himself, Quis pertransiet
ista? Who shall pass through these? whereunto he heard a voice answering,
Humilitas pertransiet, Humility shall pass through them. The Devil has least
power to fasten a temptation on him that is most humble: he that has a
gracious measure of meekness is neither affected with Satan's proffers, nor
terrified with his threatenings: This makes man peaceable in conversing with his
brethren, fruitful in well-doing, cheerful in suffering, comfortable in every
condition, constant in holy walking; this makes a man precious in the eyes of
God, as a humble servant in the eyes of his Master. Qui parvus est in
reputatione propria, magnus est in reputatione divina, says Gregory: He that
is little in his own account, is great in Gods esteem. This makes the way and
work of man acceptable unto God, and also sweetens and increases man's
communion with God. If ever therefore you entend to enjoy Gods glorious and
blessed presence, labor for this humility and meekness.

Fourthly, Be servent and unfeigned in your love to God, his truth, and his
children: this will make your language very gracious. Amantium mos est, (says
Chrysostom) ut amorem suum silentio tegere nequeunt: Lovers know not how to
keep silence; lovers of God are very full of gracious expressions: this will
make you liberal, you shall give your selves to God and the service of his
Saints, as the men of Macedonia did: this will make you patient in suffering,
as Jacob in his service for Rachel: this will make you frequent the house of
God with all alacrity, frequency, and diligence, as children their fathers
house and table: this will make you joyful in hearing the word of God, as the
Bride in hearing the voice of the Bridegroom: this will make you careful,
free and full in the observation of Gods statutes, as loving children in the
observation of their fathers precepts: this will make you diligent and rich in
all good works; the more man loves God, the more he strives in all well-doing
to glorify God. Love, like fire, is not idle, but operative: Amor Dei (says
Gregory) nunquam otiosus est; operatur enim magna si est; si vero operari
renuit, amor non est: The love of God (says he) is never idle; for if it is,
it works great things; but if it refuse to work, it is not love. Love makes
the yoke of God easy, and his work delightful; it is only want of love that
makes the commandment a burden: Tanto magis delectat opus bonum, quanto magis
diligitur Deus summum and incommutabile bonum, says Augustine: A good work so
much the more delights, by how much the more God the chiefest and unchangable
good is loved.

Love among some of the Ancients was resembled to, and represented by the Sun:
the Sun inlightens the world; the more love the more light. Knowledge and
love, like the water and the ice, beget each other; man loves God by knowing,
and knows God by loving. God dwells in love, and where God is there is light:
that man's light is darkness which is not attended with the love of God and his
testimonies: the Sun makes the earth fertile; he that loves God cannot be
barren, his love makes him fruitful in all well-doing: the Sun is swift and
constant in his motion; love makes man cheerful, speedy, and unwearied in
running the race which God has set before him: the Sun is impassible, love
is patient and invincible, it endures all things; no floods can drown it, no
waters can quench it. Want of love and affection is the maine cause of man's
apostasy and backsliding: the Sun casts his beams upward and downward, to
the East and to the West, to the North and to the South; Christian love causes
its beams to ascend to God above, and to descend to man beneath; to our
friends on the right hand, to our enemies on the left hand; to them that are in
the state or grace before us, to them that are in the state of corruption
behind us: love which is not in this sense universal, is corrupt and carnal.
The Sun beginning to ascend in his circle, never goes back u^till he comes to
the highest degree thereof: true love abhorres apostasy, ascends to more
perfection, and cease not until, like Eliahs fiery chariot, it has carried
the soul to heaven: If ever you mean to see and enjoy the God of love, labor
for this love.

Fifthly, Be very serious, studious, circumspect, and careful in all your
walkings; ponder the path of your feet, like careful travelers; consider and
weigh all your doings, let all your ways of the heart within, and work
without, be ordered aright, according the rule of Gods word; every motion of
the soul is a step to life or a step to death; a step toward heaven or toward
hell: Man's labor and service is temporal, his wages and recompense eternal;
therefore as Zeuxes that famous Lymner, being demanded why he was so exact and
serious, so long, so careful and curious in his workmanship, answered, Diu
pingo, quia aeternitati pingo; I am long in painting, because I paint unto
eternity. We all paint unto eternity; every one of our actions tends to an
eternity of joys or sorrows; all our temporal actions are as seeds of
eternity sown by us: a temporal seed an eternal harvest: we speak, we hear,
we write, we read, we pray, we sing, we confer, we work, we think unto
eternity: how exact and serious should we be in our short walking, the end
whereof is eternal! Vigilanti cura (says Gregory) per cuncta opera intentio
nobis pensanda est, ut nihil temporale in his quae agit appetat, sed totam se
in soliditate aeternitatis figat: The intention is thorough all our works to
be weighed with vigilant care, that in the things which it does, it may desire
nothing temporal, but wholly fasten it self on that which is eternal: he
that walks not circumspectly deprives himself of an eternity of felicity, and
casts himself into an eternity of misery: better live strictly for a time,
then live miserably for ever; nay, be assured that even for the present, there
is more comfort in one days strict walking with God, then in a thousand days
loose conversing with men. Did men know the peace, joy, sweetness, boldness,
honor and triumph of holy walking, they would instantly and for ever abandon
all dissolute living: heaven is the paradise of all joys; he that in his holy
walking comes nearest unto heaven, is doubtless of all men the most joyful.
O say not then, as a man of noble blood and acute wit, but profane life,
sometime did, when being demanded what he thought of the austere life of the
godly, and licentious life of the wicked, answered, Cum istis mallem vivere,
cum illis mori mallem; I had rather live with the latter, I had rather dye with
the former. But as you desire to dye the death of the righteous, so be very
solicitous and studious, very vigilant and industrious to live the life of the
righteous: Never promise your selves a blessed death without a holy life.

Lastly, Be steadfast in adhering to the truth: be not like children carried to
and fro with every vain persuasion; nor like ships without anchor, tossed up
and down with the wind of every empty doctrine: But be constant in following
the truth, as the Wisemen did the star, until you come home to Christ; and
as the Israelites did the fiery pillar, until you come to the heavenly Canaan.
Buy the truth (says Solomon) and sell it not; you can never over-buy it
whatsoever you give for it; you can never sufficiently sell it, if you have all
the world in exchange for it. It is said of Caesar, Major fuit cura Caesari
libellorum quam purpurae; He had greater care of his books then of his royal
robes: for swimming through the waters to escape his enemies, he carried his
books in his hand above the waters, but lost his robe. What are Caesar's books
to Gods book, and his learning to Gods truth, more then a glow-worme to the
sun? Be you therefore more careful of the Gospel then of any earthly
possession: though you be driven into the deep waters of affliction, and
there lose all your worldly fullness, yet hold fast the Gospel of Christ Jesus:
you shall find infinitely more worth and comfort in the Gospel, then in all
the treasure of the world.

It is reported of Alexander the Great, that he had always Homers Iliads
under his pillow, and preferred them above Darius his most precious and costly
chest: what are Homers Iliads to Christ's Gospel? or Darius chest to the
invaluable treasure which is in Christ? Have therefore the book of God ever
with you, when you lie down, when you rise up, when you walk abroad; have it
in your understandings, to know it; in your imaginations, to think and
meditate upon it; in your memories, to remember it; in your hearts, to love it,
to rejoice and delight your selves in it; to solace, refresh, and comfort your
souls with it; in your tongues, to speak of it, to edify and strengthen one
another by it; give it pre-eminence above the chiefest wordly substance. The
loss of all cannot make man miserable, as long as he sincerely and fully
adheres unto, and enjoyes the Gospel.

Make this therefore your constant and perpetual light, to guide you; your
heavenly Manna, to feed you; your celestial treasure, to enrich you; your
spiritual wellspring, to refresh and fill you; your firm and sure anchor, to
sustain and stay you; your holy and gracious School, to edify you in the
knowledge, faith, and love of Chrst; to ravish your souls with the
apprehension of CHRIST'S beauties, to fill you more and more with CHRIST'S
fullness, and prepare you a sweet and entire communion of everlasting
continuance with the Lord JESUS: which he most unfainedly desires, who ever
remains,

Most entirely devoted to your spiritual service, ALEXANDER GROSS.

A TABLE OF THE Chief things contained in this Treatise on COL. 2.9, 10. For
in him dwells the fullness of the Godhead bodily, and ye are complete in him
who is head of all principality and power.
CHAP. I. The transcendency of Christ's fullness above all created fullness.
Fol. 1
CHAP. II. Christ's fullness a ground of dehortation from humane inventions.
Fol. 3 Doct. 1. Such is Christ's fullness that men ought not to join to him
other doctrines and observations to further their eternal happiness. Fol. 9
Four grounds hereof. Fol. 12
CHAP. III. The folly of not cleaving to, and quieting and contenting our
selves with Christ, but going aside to humane inventions. Fol. 18 Five grounds
hereof. Fol. 19 The vanity of humane doctrines displayed in 12. particulars.
Fol. 25 An admonition to wait on Christ, and receive all our direction from him
Fol. 27
CHAP. IIII. Doct. 2. All divine and heavenly fullness is to be found in Christ
Jesus. Fol. 30 Three grounds hereof. Fol. 34
CHAP. V. The folly of neglecting Christ, and seeking fullness elsewhere Fol.
41 Four seekers of fullness deceived. Fol. 43 1 Some leave Christ and seek
fullness in the creature. ib. Man's folly in seeking fullness in the creature
opened in 6 particulars. Fol. 46 2 Some seek fullness in themselves Fol. 50
Ignorance and unsensiblenesse of man's want of Christ the ground of this. Fol.
52 3 Some seek fullness in the naked use of the ordinances, not laboring to
see, taste, and receive Christ in them. ibid. 4 Some seek fuln^sse in humane
observations: their folly discovered. Fol. 54
CHAP. VI. The folly of man in standing aloof off from Christ, and not coming
fully home to Christ, in whom is all fullness manifested Fol. 56 Four grounds
hereof. Fol. 59 The folly of man in not coming unto Christ illustrated. Fol. 68
CHAP. VII. The valuing and esteeming of Christ above all is pressed. Fol. 73
Christ to be valued above all 6. ways. Fol. 75 Four things in Christ to be
highly prized. Fol. 81
CHAP. VIII. Persuasion to come to Christ, and get interest in Christ. Fol. 86
Three things persuading thereunto Fol. 90 The manner of coming to Christ laid
down. Fol. 98 Helps disposing and fitting man to come to Christ. Fol. 101
CHAP. IX. The making use of Christ is taught. Fol. 104
CHAP. X. Full and constant acquiescence in Christ is persuaded. Fol. 110
Consolations flowing from the fullness of Christ. Fol. 113
CHAP. XI. Doct. 3. Christ is God and man in one person by an inseparable
union. Fol. 116 Two grounds hereof. Fol. 119 Man's honor and the exaltation of
man's nature is opened. Fol. 123 Man is charged not to debase himself, but
maintain the honor to which Christ has exalted him, with the manner how to do
it. Fol. 126, 127
CHAP. XII. Man's choicest excellency consists in union with God. Fol. 128 The
benefits thereof. Fol. 131
CHAP. XIII. Doct. 4. Christ's perfection and fullness does infinitely surpass
the fullness of all creatures. Fol. 134 Three grounds of this. Fol. 135 Such as
are filled with fullness of God, are filled with choicest fullness. Fol. 139
CHAP. XIIII. The superlative excellency of Christ above all creatures is
declared. Fol. 142 Four excellencies in Christ, on which men must fasten the
eyes of their faith. Fol. 148
CHAP. XV. The happy and blessed condition of them that are partakers of Christ
is set forth Fol. 157 Illustrated in 5. particulars. Fol. 160 Doct. 5. Christ
dwelling in our flesh is true God: his names, attributes, and works prove it:
meditation whereof tends to admire, embrace, fear, exalt, and stay on Christ.
Fol. 168
CHAP. XVI. Doct. 6. Such alone as are truly holy and gracious, are complete
and perfect in Christ Jesus. Fol. 172 Profane men strangers to perfection ib.
Such alone as are gracious, partake of Christ's fullness. Fol. 173 Doct. 7.
There is a spiritual and heavenly perfection and fullness in Gods faithful
servants. Fol. 174 Several sorts of fullness. ibid.
CHAP. XVII. Four grounds of the Saints fullness. Fol. 180 Two sorts of men
strangers to Christ. Fol. 185
CHAP. XVIII. Four marks or characters of spiritual and heavenly fullness.
Fol. 189 An exhortation to spiritual and heavenly fullness. Fol. 193 Four
meditations inducing thereunto. Fol. 195

The dolefulness and danger of neglecting Christ, and the opportunity of Grace.
Doct. 1. The state of that person or people is very doleful, which continues
barren under the plentiful and powerful means of salvation. Fol. 207 Doct.
2. It ts very dangerous and fearful for any people or person to neglect the
means and times of grace which God does offer them. Fol. 242
The souls last refuge, a Sermon on Revel. 22.20.
Note. By how much the nearer communion we have now with Christ by grace and
holiness, by so much the more his second coming is desired by us. Fol. 259
Note. No man rightly desires Christ's coming but he that has assurance of the
good and benefit of his coming. Fol. 260 Doct. It is the unfeigned desire of
Gods faithful servants to have the full fruition of Christ Jesus. Fol. 263
Note. Love and mercy are sweetly knit together in Christ Jesus. Fol. 282 Note.
If Christ be not our Lord and Master first, he will never be our Savior at
last. ib.
St. Paul's Legacy. A Sermon on 2 Cor. 13.11.
Doct. 1. The Ministers long and frequent preaching must be attended with much
perfection in the people. Fol. 8 Doct. 2. There is in all Gods faithful
Ministers a very servent and unfeigned love to their hearers. Fol. 19 Note. The
labors of Gods choicest Ministers are not everlasting, but of a short
continuance. Fol. 25 Doct. 3. The full and thorough conforming of our selves to
the doctrine of Gods Messengers, ministers great joy and gladness though they
depart from us. Fol. 26 Doct. 4. It is the duty, and must be the care of Gods
children to strive to more spiritual perfection. Fol. 34 Doct. 5. Gods
children ought to be very comfortable, though many changes and afflictions do
attend them. Fol. 38 Doct. 6. There must be unanimity and consent between Gods
children in matters of doctrine and religion. Fol. 41
ERRATA.
Page 82. line 24. read communication. p. 86. l. 25. read thirst. p. 185. l
8. r. just. p. 197. l. 10. r. sincere.

FINIS.
A HEAVENLY DISCOURSE OF CHRIST'S FULNESS: TENDING TO The making of Christ most
amiable and glorious in the eyes, and most joyous and pleasant, sweet and
satisfactory, to the Souls of all believing CHRISTIANS; That their hearts may
be comforted, being knit together in love, and unto all riches of the full
assurance of understanding, to the acknowledgment of the mystery of God, and of
the Father, and of Christ; in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge, Col. 2.2, 3.

And of his fullness have we all received, and grace for grace. Ioh. 1.16.

Omnia habemus in Christo, and omnia nobis Christus. Ambros.

By A. G. B. D.

LONDON, Printed by R. Young, for John Bartlet, at the gilt Cup near Saint
Austins gate, 1640.

CHRIST'S FULNESS TRANSCENDENT.
COLOS. 2.9, 10. For in him dwells the fullness of the Godhead bodily, and
ye are complete in him who is head of all principality and power.


CHAP. I. Showing the transcendencie of Christ's fullness above all created
fullness, and opening the scope of the words.
OF all Fullness, Divine and Heavenly fullness is the choycest: The nearer any
creature comes unto God, and the more it does participate of the fullness of
God; the greater is the perfection, the more excellent is the fullness thereof.
There is a fullness of light in the Sun, a fullness of waters in the sea, a
fullness of strength in the rocks, a fullness of riches in the earth. Psa.
104.24.
The earth (says the Psalmist) is full of thy riches, so is the great and wide
sea, wherein are things creeping innumerable, both small and great beasts: Yet
of all this fullness, in comparison of their fullness who are filled with the
fullness of Christ, may we say, as Gideon sometime said of the vintage of
Abiezer, Judge. 8.2.
The gleanings of Ephraim are better then the vintage of Abiezer; so the
gleaning, the smallest gatherings of the fullness of Christ, are better, more
excellent, more satisfactory, more permanent, then the full and greatest
vintage of the world: this is a fullness making like God, endearing to God,
leading to heavenly and sweet communion with God: the least of Christ is better
then the greatest abundance of the earth: There is a fullness of wisdom and
purity, a fullness of strength and sagacity in the Angels: there is a fullness
of holiness and righteousness in the Lords faithful servants; yet is their
fullness in respect of Christ's fullness, as no fullness; as the fullness of the
Star is as no fullness in respect of the fullness of the Sun; and the
fullness of the vessel as no fullness in comparison of the fullness of the
fountain: their fullness is a derivative, a borrowed fullness; it is in them
by participation, as the Moon has her light from the Sun, rivers their
waters from the fountain, and the eye her sight from the soul; but it is in
Christ originally, naturally, and of himself: their fullness is in them by
measure, according to the gift of God; in Christ it is Ephesians. 4.7. Job. 4.33.
Ioh. 1.16.
infinite and above measure. The Moon is full of light, but the Sun is more
full: the Rivers be full of waters, but the Sea is more full; their fullness is
not communicable to others, they cannot derive their graces to others; but
Christ as a head and fountain, imparts his fullness to others; and therefore
the Apostle says here of him, In him dwells the fullness of the Godhead
bodily, and ye are complete in him who is head of all Principality and power.

The Apostle having dehorted and dissuaded from harkening to, receiving,
Christ's fullness the ground of the Apostles dehortation from humane doctrine.
and embracing the doctrines, traditions, devices and inventions of men, as
from empty Lamps, wherein is no light to discover sin, to reveal God in
Christ, to make man wise unto salvation; as from wooden swords fairly guilt
and flourisht over, but having no edge, no power to penetrate the heart, to hew
down sin, to cast down the holds of ungodliness; as from broken Cisternes,
wherein is no pure and living water to refresh the soul, to satisfy the
thirst thereof; as from Chafe, wherein is no nourishment to strengthen the
inward man; and as from false Physic, wherein is no virtue to heal the
breaches of the soul, and to cure the wounds of the Conscience: Having
dissuaded from this by an argument drawn from the vanity, emptiness,
idleness, unprofitablenesse, and deceitfulness of such doctrines and
observations, he here persuades by another argument drawn from the perfection
and fullness of Christ: In Christ is the height of all perfection, such
perfection that no more can be added to him; in him meets the fullness of all
perfections, as of beams in one Sun, and lines in one Center, and rivers in
one Ocean. Whatsoever fullness or perfection can be mentioned, desired,
imagined, it is to be found in him. It is absurd to run to a rotten Cisterne
for water, having by us a full and living fountain; to go to a glow-worme for
light, having the Sun to guide us. It is a great folly to have recourse to
humane traditions, Philosophical doctrines, vain and empty ceremonies, having
Christ in whom dwells the fullness of the Godhead bodily, and in whom we are
complete.

In the words we have a double plenitude or fullness; The first of Christ, A
double Fullness.
verse. 9. The second of his members, verse. 10. The first is original,
absolute, independent: the second, communicated, derivative, and borrowed. The
first is the fountain, the second the stream: the first the root, the second
the branch: the first is of the head, the second is of the members: the first
is like the fullness of the Sun, the second is like the fullness of the
Stars: the first like the fullness of a King, the second like the fullness of
a Subject: the former like the fullness of the Lord and Master of the house,
the later like the fullness of a Servant in the house: For in Christ dwells
all the fullness of the Godhead bodily, and we are complete in him who is
head of all principality and power.

First, of the former of these, An^lysis.
the plenitude and fullness of Christ; For in him dwells the fullness of the
Godhead bodily. In the words we have, 1. Terminus connexionis.
First a term or note of coherence, For; which is a particle redditive,
rendering the reason of the foregoing sentence, Beware lest any man spoil you
through Philosophy and vain deceit. Be not a scholar in their school,
understand not, believe not, adore not after their doctrines, there is no need
of having recourse to them: you have all in Christ; For in him is the fullness
of the God head; all fullness appertaining to life and happiness is to be
found in Christ Jesus. 2. Subjectum.
Secondly, here is a subject, in him; in Christ in his person as he is the
Son of God by eternal generation, as he is God and Man in one person, as he
is Mediator, a middle person between God and Man by divine ordination, by his
office of mediation. In Christ is such perfection that there needs no addition.
3. Actus.
Thirdly, here is the act, dwells; an act of duration, Christ's humane nature
and his Godhead are never separated. Fourthly, 4. Tantum.
here is the matter which is in Christ, and that is a fullness, a perfection,
the highest perfection, the greatest fullness: the fullness of any thing is the
excellency of the thing; fullness of corn in the ear, fullness of branches
and fruit on the tree, fullness of children in the house, as of arrows in a
quiver, fullness of light in the Sun, fullness of precious substance in a
pearl is the excellency of the ear, the tree, the house, the Sun, the
pearl; divine and incomprehensible fullness is the excellency of Christ Jesus
above others. Such is Christ's fullness, that in comparison thereof, the
fullness of all creatures is but emptiness. 5. 5. Quale.
Here is the quality or condition of Christ's fullness, The fullness of the
Godhead; a fullness communicable to no creature. In Saints and Angels there is
a finite fullness of divine qualities, in Christ there is the infinite fullness
of the divine essence, a fullness by which Heb. 1.4.
he has obtained a more excellent name then the Angels. He that partakes of
God above others, is more excellent then others; the Lord Jesus is far
exalted above all creatures. Sixthly, 6. Modus.
here is the manner how this fullness dwells in Christ, Bodily; not seemingly,
but really, truly, and in deed; not figuratively, and in shadow, as he dwelt
in the Temple, but completely; not by power and efficacy, as he dwells in
all creatures, nor by grace as in the Saints, nor by glory as in the blessed in
heaven: but Essentially, Substantially, the humane nature being assumed into
union with the person of the Word. Great is the difference between the dwelling
of the Godhead in Christ, and in his members. Such is the presence of the
fullness of the Godhead in Christ, that he is abundantly able to fill all
that come unto him.

CHAP. II. Declaring the vanity of joining humane observations to Christ Jesus.
1. Terminus connexionis.
BUt first of the term of connection, the particle For, rendering the reason why
we should abstain from all foreign and strange guides to direct us, from
all the rotten pillars of humane inventions to support us, and from the broken
Cisterne of all the traditions and observations of men to fill us, to perfect
us, to promote the welfare of our souls; for, or because in Christ there is
all fullness, and therefore no cause, no need of stepping out from Christ, of
casting our eyes abroad on other lights, of joining other things to Christ, of
mixing and mingling other things with Christ. Whence we learn, that

Such is Christ's fullness, that men ought not to join to him other Doctrines
and observations to further their eternal happiness. Such is the fullness of
the light of the Sun, that the traveller need not join a candle of his own
thereunto, to help him in his travel. Such was the fullness of light issuing
from the fiery Pillar, that the Israelites needed not the light of any lamp
besides to guide them in their journeyes to the land of Canaan. Such a fiery
Pillar, such a bright and shining Sun is Christ, that we need no other light
to guide us in all our doings, in all our progress to the heavenly Canaan, but
only Christ shining in the sacred Scriptures, and in the labors of his
faithful Ministers: Therefore we are sent to him, as to the only Mat.
23.9.10.
Master, having both authority and wisdom to command and instruct us. This
was commanded by the voice from heaven, Mat. 17.5.
Hear him: as if the Lord had said, I will not that ye depend on any other,
whether Moses or Elias, but on Christ. Moses and Elias vanished, Christ
remained; the Ceremonies of the Law were abolished, the predictions of the
Prophets fulfilled, Christ alone remains, and him we must hear; as a
Scholar his Teacher, receiving all instruction from him; as a Servant his
Lord, yielding full and constant obedience to him: Him we must hear in his
Word, as a King in his Proclamation; in his Ministers, as a King in his
Ambassadors, as a Bridegroom in his Friends: Him we must hear in his
precepts obeying him, in his promises believing him, in his judgments fearing
him, in his mercies drawing nigh unto him, and rejoicing in him, every way
quieting and contenting our selves with him: And for this cause he is styled
our Prophet, a Prophet Deuteronomy. 18.15, 18, 19.
like unto Moses, in nature and office, being a Man and a Mediator, as Moses
was, though more excellent, and in a more singular sort; Moses as a Servant,
Christ as a Heb. 3.
Son and Lord of his Church; a Prophet revealing the counsel of his Father
concerning our redemption, a Prophet giving power to his Word to work for our
conversion. As he called Lazarus by his voice, and raised him by his power; so
he calls us by his Word, and converteth and raises us by his grace. And as
the eyes of Israel were on the fiery Pillar to guide them, and as that moved
they moved: so must our eyes be on Christ, conforming our motion according to
Christ's prescription: all other doctrines are excluded, we are denied to
hearken to them, to embrace or entertain them. 2 Epist. Ioh. v. 10.
If there come any unto you, and bring not this doctrine, the doctrine of
Christ, but his own doctrine, receive him not to house, have no acquaintance
with him, give him no audience, show him no countenance, neither bid him God
speed, salute him not, afford him no speech, wish him no success, shut your
ears at him, withdraw your selves from him. Though we, or an Angel from
heaven, says Saint Paul, whosoever he be, be he never so famous for his
learning, or renowned for his sanctity; if he speak or live in external
appearance as an Angel; yet if he preach another Gospel, another doctrine Gal.
1.8.
then that which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed; let him be
vile and execrable in your eye, odious and abominable in your apprehension.
Look to Christ, cleave to Christ, turn not aside from him, look for no other
Instructor to make thee wise unto salvation. Look (says Chrysostom) for no
other Master; Noli exp^ctare alium magistrum, nemo te potest sic docere. Chrysostom.
thou have the words of God, no man can so teach thee. And, I (says our
Savior of himself) am the way, the Truth, and the Life. Ambulare vis? (says
Augustine of Christ) ego sum via. Falli non vis? ego sum veritas. Mori non vis?
ego sum vita. Will thou walk? I am the Way. Will thou not be deceived? I am
the Truth. Will thou not dye? I am the life. So that in Christ there is such
fullness, that we have no cause of going to others, to join other doctrines
and observations to Christ Jesus.

Four grounds of this truth.
In regard of the perfection of Christ: It Col. 1.19.
pleased God that in him should all fullness dwell; fullness of wisdom to
direct, Rock for his strength to support us; a Counselor for his wisdom to
guide us; a Fountain opened for his readiness and preparedness to wash away
our uncleanness; a Tree of life bearing twelve sorts of fruit every month, for
the plenty and perpetuity of joy and gladness, and other fruits of the Spirit,
which he ministers to true believers: To a river of living water, clear as
Crystal, for that ineffable purity, perfection, comfort and satisfaction which
Christ ministers to the souls of his children: To a precious Pearl for his
worth: To a Storehouse for his fullness of all spiritual treasure. O^^e
h^ppiness of the soul that enjoyes Christ! He that has the Lord Jesus, n^e^
not look elsewhere for any perfections. H^ving Christ we have all, says
Ambrose: he may say^: Jacob did, I have enough. The Rev. 12 1.
woman, ^ne spouse of Christ, is describ^d clothed with the Sun, and a
Crown of twelve Stars upon her head, the righteousness of Christ clothing her
as the Sun, and his doctrine guiding her as the light of twelve Stars, and in
him are Col. 2.3.
hidden all the treasures of wisdom. Surely the man never knew, never saw,
never apprehended Christ's fullness, that dotes on foreign d^ctrines, that
admires humane inventions.

In regard of the vanity of all humane Ezekiel. 13 7. Lam. 2.14
vain vision, a vision composed of vain and foolish things; they are an
empty Lamp, wherein is no light, they discover not the sin of man's heart,
they do not reveal God in Christ, they shine not into the heart, they make
not wise unto salvation, they are a School wherein men are ever learning, and
yet 2 Timothy 3.7.
never come to the knowledge of the truth. He that is most devoted to humane
observations, is commonly most ignorant of the mysteries of godliness. As long
as Saint Paul was a Scholar in this School, he remained ignorant of his own
estate, he st^ll beheld himself in a false glass. Romans 7.9.
I was alive (says Paul) once without the Law. He knows little of the Law of
God, that makes men's traditions a law to direct him in the service of God; no
light discloseth the heavens, but that which shines from heaven; no doctrine
shows forth God, and the way to heaven, but only that which God himself has
given: Of all other doctrines we may say as Job did of his friends, Job 13.5.
They are Physicians of no value, they neither discover nor cure the disease of
the soul: And as sometime the Lord said of the Egyptians, Isa. 30.2.
The Egyptians shall help in vain, and to no purpose; their strength is to
fit still: so may we of all humane and carnal doctrines, they help in vain,
and to no purpose, they can do nothing by way of mortification to sin, by way
of corroboration against Satan's temptations, by way of pacification in quieting
the conscience: In such cases their strength is to sit still; they do not
profit the receivers of them. It is but the sowing of chafe, that brings forth
no fruit; or feeding on husks, that ministers no strength; a labor which does
not Ier. 2.8.
profit. He that looks beyond or beside Christ for light to direct him, his
labor is altogether unprofitable.

In regard of the foolishness of man to Schechem to refuse Iud. 9.9.
the Vine, the Olive, and the Fig Tree, and choose the Bramble; to leave the
sons of Jerubbaal, and choose Abimelech to reign over them. What is Christ
but a living fountain, a bright and shining Sun, a Vine, an Olive, a
Fig Tree, full of all light, replenished with the greatest fullness of all
divine and heavenly fruit? And what are humane doctrines and observations, but
an empty pit, a very snuff that gives no light, a barren bramble that bears
no good fruit? Man never more manifests his foolishness, then in leaving the
Lord Jesus. Ier. 2.11, 12, 13.
Has any nation (says the Lord) changed their gods, which are yet no gods?
But my people have changed their glory for that which does not profit. Be
astonished, O ye heavens, at this, and be horribly afraid, be ye very
desolate, says the Lord: for my people have committed two great evils; they
have forsaken me, the fountain of living waters, and hewed them out
cisternes, broken cisternes that can hold no water. Who is the fountain of
living waters, but God and his Christ? What are the broken cisternes, but
humane inventions, which have no water of life in them? Who is censured in the
Parable as a fool, but he that left the Rock, and built upon the Sand? Who is
the Rock but Christ? What is the Sand but the vain and idle observations of
men? And who so foolish as he that leaves the former, and builds his faith and
salvation upon the latter? He is certainly, in Gods account, a man of no
understanding that leaves Christ, in whom are hidden all the treasures of true
wisdom.

In regard of peril: It is very dangerous Mat. 7.15.
Wolves in sheeps clothing, and Ier. 6.14.
false Physicians, who heal the disease of the daughter of Gods people
deceitfully. The men of Israel exposed themselves to great danger when they
left David their true King, and 2 Samuel 20.2.
followed Sheba that blew the trumpet of rebellion. The man that leaves Christ,
and follows them that blow the trumpet of vain and idle, Omne quod non
aedificat audientes in periculum vertitur au^ientum. Ierom.
carnal and unsound doctrine, exposes his soul to the danger of infection,
seduction, and utter ruin. Unsound doctrines are instruments of great
prejudice to their receivers, the bait by which Satan, like a Fowler, allures
them; the snare in which, like a Hunter, he intangles and takes them. The
Prince of darkness has no such agents as deceitful Teachers: he does more
advance his kingdom and bring greater ruin to the souls of the people by bad
seeds-men, then by the men of any one calling besides them: a lying speech out
of the mouth of an 1 Kings 13.8.19.
old Prophet, prevails and draws to disobedience, more then a Kings persuasion.
Satan ordinarily works the greatest mischief by being a 1 Kings 22.22.
lying spirit in the mouth of some Prophet. The state of man's soul is very
dangerous that sticks not close to Christ Jesus.

CHAP. III. Disclosing the folly of not cleaving to, and contenting our selves
with Christ, but going aside to vain inventions.
THis discovers the vanity of their minds, the folly of their hearts, the
peril of their souls, who cleave not to Christ, who rest not, quiet not,
content not themselves in Christ and his fullness; but step out, go aside,
turn away from Christ to vain doctrines, humane devices, and carnal
observations: like the two 2 Samuel 15.11, 12.
hundred men of Jerusalem, that turned aside from David, and went after
Absalom. As they went in the simplicity of their hearts; so these in the folly
of their souls: As they knew not any thing; so these know not any thing truly
and savingly of God, of Christ, of the deceit of Satan, of the danger of their
estate and doing: As they took unto themselves Achitophel, a Counselor of
David; so these take unto themselves some Teacher, some Minister, who by
calling is one of Gods Counselors, one that should plead Gods cause, and open
Gods counsel: And as their conspiracy was strong against David; so is these
men's conspiracy strong against God, against his truth, against the good of
their own souls. He that cleaves to corrupt doctrine, conspires against
Christ and his own salvation. And whence is it that falsehood is more welcome
then truth; a man that comes in his Ioh. 5.43 Five Grounds hereof.
own name, more acceptable then he that comes in Gods name, but, first, from
the dominion and fulness of corruption? A deformed face pleases Ahab having 1
Kings 22.
sold himself to commit wickedness, was very attentive to the false Prophets.
Men (says our Savior) Ioh. 3.19.20.
love darkness rather then light, because their deeds are evil. He that does
evil hates the light, neither comes he to the light, lest his deeds should
be reproved. Job says of Thieves, Job 24.17.
The morning is to them as the shadow of death: if one know them, they are in
the terrors of the shadow of death. To men that rob God by their impieties,
the morning, the truth which shines forth like the 2 Pet. 1.19.
Morning star, is as the shadow of death; if one know them, if the Minister
detect and lay open their sin, their profane and evil estate, it is a great
terror to them, it troubles them, as the star did Mat. 2.2.
Herod and the men of Jerusalem. Man can never take pleasure in that fullness
of light which shines from Christ Jesus, until he has emptied himself of 2
These. 2.9, 10.
received not the love of the truth that they might be saved; for this cause,
says the Apostle, God shall send them strong delusions, that they should
believe a lie. Corrupt and carnal doctrine is very welcome where the love of
the truth is wanting: he that receives not the truth into his affection, as
well as into his judgment, will soon be drawn from it. Under the Law it was
usual for a man that married a Deuteronomy. 24.1.
woman, if he loved her not, to give her a bill of divorcement, and send her
out of his house: It is common with men under the Gospel, who, in regard of
external covenant and profession, are married to the truth; yet afterward,
through the want of love, they give the truth a bill of divorce, and become
strangers to it. It is love to the truth that causes man to continue constant
with it. Cant. 8.6, 7.
Love it and you shall never depart from it. Thirdly, from a desire of novelty:
Men naturally desire new things; Saint Paul tells Timothy, that the time will
come when men will not 2 Timothy 4.3.
endure sound doctrine, but after their own lusts shall they heap unto
themselves teachers, having itching ears. Men having the itch, delight in
scraping; men over-spred with the loathsome scab of unclean lusts, desire to
be soothed, daubed, flattered in their sins, and to have their ears tickled
and pleased with some new and strange things, with Isay 30.10.
smooth things, and deceits, with the 1 Cor. 2.3.
enticing words of men's wisdom. The Israelites Numb. 11.5.
loathed the Manna, and lusted after the Onions of Egypt. Men of corrupt
hearts, after a while, loath the pure and plain preaching of Christ, and fall
a lusting after Philosophical, superstitious and vain doctrines. No man so
desires change of new and strange doctrines, as he that means not to change
his conversation: were the hearts of men truly changed, the true and common
doctrine of Christ would be very pleasant, the soul between Christ and their
hearts; they have not Ephesians. 4.21.
learned Christ as the truth is in him; they have not learned the wisdom of
Christ to be guided by him, the authority of Christ to subject themselves
unto him, the beauties of Christ to admire him, the love of Christ to delight
themselves in him, the death of Christ to mortify their lusts, the
resurrection of Christ quickening them to a new life, the power of Christ to
depend upon him, the holiness of Christ to imitate him, the all-sufficiencie
of Christ to content themselves with him. Christ is to them a Rev. 2.17.
hidden Manna whom they taste not; they see Isay 53.2.
nothing in him for which they should desire him. It is recorded of Agesilaus,
coming to help the King of Egypt in his distress, that, ob corpus incultum,
and vestis vilitatem venit in contemptum ejus gentis hominibus, qui sperarunt
se visuros Spartanum regem talem, qualis esset rex Persarum, corpore
decentissime ornatum: for the unhansomnesse of his body, and baseness of his
garment, he was had in contempt among the men of that nation; who hoped to
have seen a Spartan King, such as the King of the Persians, most comely
adorned in his body: So Christ coming to help us in our distress, for the
want of external pomp in his Ordinances, and worldly glory in his Ministers
and Members, and the splendour of humane eloquence in his doctrines, is despised
by the men, who frame and form unto themselves a Christ like to one of the
mighty Monarchs of the earth. He that discernes not the spiritual beauty of
Christ in his doctrine, does easily degenerate to humane superstition. 1 King.
22.8.
Ahab hated Micaiah, because he never prophesied good to him. Such is the
brightness, the holiness, the power of it, that they cannot endure it; they
are loath to be searched, to have their sin discovered, as Rahel when she
sat upon her Idol, unwilling to be reproved; to have their lusts mortified,
as David was to have Absalom put to 2 Samuel 18.3.
death, and therefore charged the Captains of his Army to deal gently with
the young man. The rough handling of profane men's vices, makes them weary of
Gods ordinances, and moves them to seek out some more gentle and easy
doctrines.

But, brethren, The vanity of humane doctrine displayed.
as Solomon sometime said of Laughter, It is mad; and of Mirth, what does it?
so let me say to you of this rotten, deceitful, and pleasant doctrine, It is
mad, the words of wisdom and soberness are Isai. 8.20.
not discover sin: they search as Laban did, not as the Master in Jonah did;
they are but a key of straw, they open not the door of the heart, they leave
man ignorant of God and himself. No doctrine can show us God, but that which
is from God. Secondly, they humble not the Zebah and Zalmunna said of Iether,
Judge. 8.21.
Such as the man is, such is his strength; so, such as the doctrine is, such is
its strength. The Devil regarded not the sons of Acts 19.15.
Sceva's adjuration, his holds are never cast down by a humane doctrine.
Thirdly, they nourish not. The Luke 15.
Prodigal was like to starve before he returned to his fathers house. He
that feeds on the husks of foreign and strange doctrines, will starve his
soul, if he return not to God his fathers house, where is heavenly bread
enough: man may feed on these plentifully, and yet like Pharaohs lean Genesis 41.
kine after their Fourthly, they pacify not: Like Jobs friends, they are
miserable Job 16.3.
comforters; they Zach. 10 2.
comfort in vain: The Mark. 5.29.
woman in the Gospel spent all upon the Physicians, and yet could not be cured,
until she came to Christ; there is no cure for wounded consciences, unless
they 2 Corin. 11.3.
they deceive, as the Serpent deceived our first parents; and as 2 Kings 18.
Rabseca would have deceived Ezekiahs subjects. Sixthly, they allure and Prove.
7.
harlot allured the young man. Seventhly, they impoverish whorish woman, a man
is brought to a morsel of bread. Delila by her singing caused Sampson to
sleep, as tares corrupt the wheat, and as a little leaven does season the
whole lump. Tenthly, they derogate from the dignity hold fast that form of
doctrine which Christ has taught you, walk in that light which he has set up
to conduct you; and beware of making the doctrines of men the rule of faith or
life; feed not on them, lest they poison you; build not upon them, lest they
sink under you; lean not on them, lest they pierce you; walk not after them,
lest they deceive you: but take all your direction from Christ Jesus, in whom
is all fullness.

This must teach us to suffer our selves in all things to be guided by Christ,
2. An admonition to wait on Christ, and receive all direction from him.
to wait upon him, to take all our direction from him. As Moses received the
whole pattern of the Tabernacle from the Lord, and accordingly framed it: so let
us receive the whole pattern of our faith and life from Christ, and accordingly
believe and walk, repent and obey. Let us wait upon him, and receive our
commission from him, as 2 Samuel 18.
Ahimaas sometime waited upon Ioab, and ran when he bid him. Let us feel
Christ in his fullness shining into our hearts, as the Sun in the fullness of
his strength shines into the air, filling us with such divine and heavenly
light, that we may see our own vileness, as a man in a glass beholds his
spots; that we may discern the things that differ, as in the day men discern
colors; that we may be humbled in the apprehension of our own
unworthiness, as Paul fell unto the ground when the light shined about him;
that we may know and feel the vanity and emptiness of the creature, as the
children of the Nobles knew the Ier. 14.4.
emptiness of the pits, when they came and found no water in them; as Jacob
knew the vanity of Laban, having changed his wages ten times; that we may see
the necessity we have of Christ, as the Elders of Gilead saw the need they had
of Ieptha, and the Gibeonites their need of Joshua; that we may behold God in
Christ, as a Father regenerating us, as a King of mercy pardoning us, as a
gracious friend coming near unto us, bestowing all heavenly gifts upon us,
enriching us with all blessings in Christ Jesus: that we may have a clear
apprehension of Christ's beauties, and be thereby drawn to value him above all
treasures, to love him above all friends, to honor him above all commanders,
to desire him above all riches; to solace our selves in him, as in the Paradise
of all our comforts, to stay upon him in all distresses, to intend him in all
our undertakings, to meditate upon him at all seasons, receiving daily more and
more of the fullness of his grace, that at length we may reign with him in the
fullness of his glory.

CHAP. IV. Setting forth the beauty of all divine and heavenly fullness in
Christ.
THe second thing in these words is the Subject, in which all fullness
dwells; Subjectum
and that is, in him: in Christ, in the person of Christ, as God and Man in one
person, in the humane nature assumed into the unity of the second person in the
body of Christ, as in a In corpore Christi, ceu in Templo.
Temple, says Augustine. Corpus Christi vere est Templum, in ipso enim voluit
habitare corporaliter tota plenitudo deitatis, says Cyril. The body of Christ
is truly a Temple, for in it would all the fullness of the Godhead dwell
bodily. From whence we learn, that

All Divine and Heavenly fullness is to be found in Christ Jesus. All the
fullness of the land of Egypt was to be found with Joseph: All the fullness of
God, of grace, of peace, of glory, is found with Christ. It Col. 1.19.
pleased God (says Saint Paul) that in him should all fullness dwell: the
fullness of wisdom, righteousness, holiness, and of all good things have
their abode and dwelling in Christ; in him they are found in their complete
perfection, and Christ is said to Ephesians. 1.23.
fill all in all. The Sun fills all the Stars with light, the Sea fills
all the Rivers with waters; Christ fills all the creatures with a natural
fullness, Christ fills all the children of God with a spiritual and heavenly
fullness, and of his fullness they are said to Joh. 1.16.
receive, as streams from the fountain, branches from the root, and members
from the head, Grace for grace; The grace of the new Testament for the grace of
the old, permanent for shadowish grace, or rath^r grace upon grace, one grace
of the Spirit after another, the Spirit of Christ daily pouring a new increase
of grace upon us. Such is Christ's fullness, that he more and more fills the
souls of his servants: and this fullness of Christ is sometimes expressed by
likening Christ to a Storehouse, wherein is all treasure, in Col. 2.3
whom are hidden all the treasures of wisdom; to a Rev. 2^.2.
Tree, on which grows all variety and fullness of fruit; to a Rev. 19.16.
King, for the fullness of his majesty, glory, dignity, excellency. All
creatures are but beggars in comparison of Christ Jesus: to a man that keeps
open house for his fullness, freeness, readiness to communicate to hungry
souls; Isa. 55.1
Ho, says the Lord by the Prophet, every one that thirsts, come ye to the
waters, and he that has no money, come, buy and eat; yea come, buy wine and
milk, without money, and without price: Sometimes to a Fountain, in whom is
all plenty of water: Sometimes to the Cant. 2.^.
Rose of Sharon, and the Lilly of the valleys, for the surpassing beauty, and
transcendent excellency of graces in himself, and for the sweet and
plentiful, pleasant and delightful communication of himself to the souls of
his people. Sometime to the Apple tree among the trees of the wood, for his
dignity, worth and excellency above other persons; as the Apple tree excells
the trees of the Forest in comfortablenesse of shadow, sweetness of smell,
pleasantness and plenty of fruit; and the Spouse describing the height,
fullness, and perfection of the excellencies of Christ her Bridegroom, says
of him that he is (...). ^.5.
white and ruddy, the fairest of ten thousand; white, for his innocence in
himself, for his victory, peace, joy and comfort in his God, and for his
administration of grace and mercy to penitent and believing sinners: and
ruddy, for the imputation of our sin unto him, for his suffering, and for his
justice to punish his enemies: and the fairest of ten thousand, for his beauty,
majesty, authority, worth and fullness, surpassing all Men and Angels. The
Lord Jesus is exceeding glorious in the eyes of his unfeigned friends and
lovers: he is indeed beautiful only in their eyes who love him. The more man
loves him, the more clear and comfortable is his apprehension of that f^^^esse
which is in him. This perfection and fullness of Christ was shadowed in the
high Priest, being washed with Exodus 29.7.
water, and anointed with holy oil, signifying Christ's sanctity, and his
unction with the oil of gladness above his fellows: The high Priest having
his loins Exodus 28.2.
covered with clean linen, his body gloriously apparelled, and a holy crown
upon his head, signifying the clothing of Christ's humanity with true holiness,
the adorning of it with perfect righteousness, and the crowning thereof with
Majesty, as King of his chosen. This was likewise figured by the Temple, that
was a stately and glorious edifice, full of light; in it was the Arc, there
God appeared, and filled it with his glory; so is the fabric of Christ's humane
nature, immaculate and spotless, full of heavenly knowledge, the full treasure
of true wisdom, grace and knowledge being hidden in him, the Godhead
personally there Ioh. 1.14.
dwelling, and filling him with all grace and glory. This was also signified in
Genesis 39.6.
Joseph: Joseph was a beautiful person; Christ is fairer then the children of
men. There was none like Joseph in understanding and wisdom, in whom the
Spirit of God was, as in him: Verse. 38.
there is no^^ comparable to Christ in wisdom; Men and Angels are his
Scholars. Joseph was set over the whole land in general, over the Kings house
in special: Christ is Lord of the whole earth, but chiefly over Gods Church.
Joseph had the custody of the Kings garner, and therewith fed all Egypt, and
other nations: Christ has all the fullness of God, and therewith feeds Jew
and Gentile, the believers of all nations; And such fullness of Christ was
requisite,

Three grounds of Christ's fullness.
In regard of the dignity of his person: As the second person he was the Son
of God by eternal generation; as Man, he of very God: we are the sons of
God begotten not of his essence, but by the operation of his Spirit: Christ is
the proper and only begotten Son of the Father, we are the adopted sons
of God, not borne sons by nature, but made sons by grace. Many of us, says
Mulli nos filii Dei, sed non talis hic filius est; hic enim and verus and
proprius filius est, orgine non adoptione, veritate non nuncupatione.
Hilary, are sons of God, but this Son is not such: for this Son is a
true and proper Son, by original, not by adoption; by truth, not by
nuncupation; by birth, not by creation; and who does inherit his Fathers
fullness, but the Son, the beloved Son, the only begotten Son, the Son
of the Fathers delights? Thou art my Son (says God the Father unto Christ)
this day have I begotten thee, there is his eternal generation: Ask of me
and I shall give thee the heathen for thine inheritance, and the utmost parts
of the earth for thy possession; there is the fulness of the gift communicated
to him. Joseph gave portions to all his brethren, but to Benjamin a portion
five times as good as what he gave the residue: God gives blessed and liberal
portions to all his adopted sons, but Christ's portion does far excel them;
their receivings are from and through him; he is the Heb. 1.4.
heir of all, more excellent then the Angels, having obtained a more H^b. 1.4.
excellent name then they; as the name of a Son is more excellent then the
name of a Servant, and the name of a King more excellent then the name of a
Subject. Christ is both Son and King, far above Men and Angels in all
divine fullness, Heb. 1.3.
being the brightness of his Fathers glory, and express image of his Fathers
person, upholding all things by the Word of his power, having by himself
purged our sins, and sat down at the right hand of Majesty on high.

Ephesians. 1.22.
head over all things to the Church. The head is above the members, rules the
members, and communicates sense and motion to the members; Christ has
pre-eminence above all the members of his Church, rules and guides them,
communicates spiritual sense and motion to them: And the Father, (says Saint
John) has Joh. 5.20.
committed all judgment to the Son; the judgment of administration and
government of all things, the judgment of ruling and guiding his chosen, in
absolving their sins, in inspiring all his graces into them, that he may
live in them, and they in him, preserving them safe to life eternal. God has
made him the great and high Steward, and the Church his House, to whom Christ,
like a Steward, or rather Son, dispenses all the fullness which his Father
has committed unto him, being Heb. 3.6. 1 Cor. 1.30.
faithful as a Son over his house. And as God dispenses all fullness by
him; so, of necessity, all fullness must be placed in him; accorcording to
that of Ambrose, Christus omnibus omnia factus est, Christ is made all things
to all men.

In regard of Christ's office and undertaking Ioh. 5.26.
life in himself originally, absolutely, infinitely, he could not minister
life unto them. Christ shows no less power in raising the souls of men, then
he did in raising the body of Ioh. 11.44.
Lazarus. Such is their blindness, that were not Christ the true Ioh. 1.9.
light that comes from above, he could never shine into their hearts; had he
not the treasures of all wisdom, he could never make them wise unto
salvation; had he not the Rev. 3.7.
keys of David, which open and no man shuts, he could never open the eyes
of their understanding. Such is the obstinacy and hardness of their hearts,
that the hammer of the Word without the almighty hand of God, can never break
nor bruise them. Such is the distance and difference between God and the souls
of men, that were not Christ a person of infinite worth, he could never make
any satisfaction, never work a reconciliation. No hand can cure man's miseries,
but that which has an infinite fullness.

Secondly, such is the opposition made David 1 Samuel 17.34.
delivered the sheep from the Lion: He is a man of Luke 11.21.
war so potent and politic, and so fortifying his holds in the hearts of
men, that were not the power of Christ almighty, he could never vanquish and
cast him out. Liberty from Satan's bondage and temptations comes altogether from
Christ's fullness.

Thirdly, such is the profundity and depth of the mysteries of godliness,
that, Ioh. 1.18.
bosom of the Father, and knew all things, he could never show us the Father,
he could never Rev. 5.8.
open the Book sealed with seven Seals, which no creature can open; he could
never open our hearts, and fill us who are Ephesians. 5.8.
darkness, with a mavelous light: the inlightning of man's understanding is
an almighty work; he can be no less then God, that gives us the Spirit of
wisdom and revelation to know God, and the riches of his goodness toward
the Saints.

Fourthly, such are the afflictions of Christ's members, Satan does so besiege
and assault them, as sometimes the Amoritish Princes did the Ios. 10.6
Gibeonites, that, were not Christ filled with the fullness of all power, he
could never give them deliverance. Freedom comes to Gods children from the
assaults of their enemies, only by the mighty power of Christ Jesus: he is
the Arc that keeps them from drowning in the deluge of affliction; it is he
that walks with them, and keeps them that the fiery furnace of trouble does
not burn and consume them; as he sometime Dan. 3.
walked with the three children, and preserved them.

Fifthly, such is the perfection that God requires in his people, that, were
not the fullness of the Godhead in Christ, he could not cloth them with his
righteousness; he could not purge out their corruptions, as Jordan purged
Naaman; he could not Ephesians. 5.26.
present them without spot and blemish in Gods presence. It is the mighty power
of Christ that prepares and keeps Gods children unto salvation. And thus you
see the necessity and verity of the being of all divine and heavenly fullness
in Christ Jesus.

CHAP. V. Setting forth the folly of neglecting Christ, and seeking fullness
elsewhere.
THis discovers the folly of such as neglect Christ, leave Christ, step out,
Shechem in Iotham's Parable, Judge. 9.9.
leaving the Vine, the Olive and the Fig Tree, addressing themselves unto the
Bramble, and hiding themselves under the shadow thereof. All that is without
and beside Christ, is but a Bramble in comparison of Christ, ministering no
safety, no defense, no sure and comfortable shadow of refreshment to them that
have recourse unto it. It is our greatest foolishness to leave the Lord Jesus,
to seek out other proppes and pillars to support us; an evil very common, and
incident to the souls of men, an evil of which our Savior does complain,
Joh. 5.40
Ye will not come to me, that ye might have life: ye will not come to me,
ye will not believe in me, ye will not love and embrace me, ye will not
rest and rely on me, ye will not subject your selves to me, ye will not
solace and delight your selves in me, ye will not quiet and content your
selves with me, ye will not come to me, as Scholars to their Teacher to be
taught of me, to Ephesians. 4.22.
learn me, as the truth is in me: ye will not come to me, as sick men to
their Physician, to be healed and cured by me, as they that sit in darkness
come to the light to be ruled and guided by me, who am the true light; ye will
not come to me, as the poor to the rich, to be fed and clothed by me; as
the thirsty to the fountain, to be refreshed and filled by me; as the servant
to his Lord, to fear and serve me, to honor and exalt me: ye will not thus
come to me. There is in the souls of men a very strong and wonderful
backwardness to come to the Lord Jesus, to come fully and freely off from the
creature unto Christ, as the wife comes off from her Psa. 45.10.
own people, and her fathers house, to live and abide with her husband, to set
her love on him, to quiet her self with him. There is again in the souls of
men, a very strong and mavelous pronenesse to decline to go from Christ to
earthly vanities.

Some leave Christ and seek for fullness in the outward and common creatures; 4
Seekers of fullness deceived.
but the fullness of God is not in them, but in Christ: the creature is full of
vanity, Christ alone is the subject of all sufficiency; without Christ the
whole creation is but an empty vessel, as Job sometime said of wisdom, Job
28.15.
Where shall Wisdom be found, and where is the place of Understanding? Man
knows not the price thereof, neither is it found in the land of the living:
the Depth says, It is not in me; and the Sea says, It is not with me: So
may we say of fullness, Where shall fullness be found? and where is the place
of all-sufficiencie? Man knows not the price thereof, neither is it found in
the land of the living: Honors and high places, fleshly delights and carnal
pleasures say, It is not in us: riches, strength, beauty, art, wit, say, It is
not with us. Man is exceedingly deceived, that leaves the Lord Jesus, and
seeks for fullness in the creatures. For,

1. Folly of seeking fullness in the Creature. 1. Emptiness.
First, the creature without Christ is an empty thing, a lamp without oil, a
bone without marrow: The house without the husband, seems empty to the wife:
the Throne without the King, appears empty to the subject: without the Lord
Jesus the soul meets with emptiness in the greatest worldly fullness; it is
Christ that Ephesians. 1.23.
fills all in all. He puts a fullness into all the things of his servants; a
fullness into their possessions, that they rest contented: a fullness into
their low estates, that they rejoice in it: a fullness into their cup, whereby
their thirst is quenched: a fullness into their bread, whereby their hunger is
removed: a fullness into their dinner of green herbs, satiating them as a
stalled Ox: a fullness into all his Ordinances, making them instruments to
fill the souls of his servants with all saving graces. It is not the abundance
of the creature, but Christ Jesus that ministers the fullness: Christ is the
marrow and fatness of the feast; with Christ there is satisfaction in the
slenderest portion, without Christ there is nothing but Hag. 1.6
emptiness in the greatest fullness: without him man can never have Isa. 56.11.
enough. He that does not gain Christ, earnes naught: he that drinks not of
this fountain, Eccles. 5.10.
increases his thirst by drinking.

Secondly, 2. Feebleness.
the creature without Christ is a feeble and weak thing, as a tree without
roots, like Ieroboams withered 1 Kings 13.4. Isa. 30.^
arm. Without Christ the strength thereof is to sit still; like Pharaohs
Chariots, when the wheels were smitten off, it cannot carry us out of the
waters of distress, it can do nothing. Gehezi with his masters staff, could
bring 2 Kings 4.
no life, nor heat into the child, until his master came: the creature can do
nothing for us, if it be not attended with Christ's power and presence.

Thirdly, the creature without Christ, Troublesomnes.
is troublesome: a bed of Thorns, and not of Down; a tempestuous sea, and not
calm waters; bread of sorrows, and not of peace; poison, and not pleasant
wine. Aurum amplius cruciat apud quem largius fuerit; aurum amanti nihil de
possessione sua permittit, says Augustine, Gold torments him most that has
most; it suffers him to enjoy nothing of his possession, who pursues it with an
inordinate affection. Sooner or later the creature is possessed with much
torment, if we enjoy not Christ in and with it; as the possession, so the
trouble increases, i^ we have not Christ to sanctify it; like ^he waters of
Marah without the tree, they that possess them cannot drink a comfortable
draught of them.

Fourthly, 4. I^^^^^^^^^^nt.
the creature without Christ inbondageth, usurps authority over the soul,
causes it to bow down, as I^dg. 7.5.
Gideons Soldiers to the waters, takes away all the liberty thereof,
inthralles it to the world, and subjecteth it to the command thereof, as the
Soldiers to the command of the Mat. 8 8.
Centurion. Men that will not serve the Lord Jesus, become sla^es to the
creatures: God makes them shamefully to serve the creature, who will not
joyfully serve Christ their Lord and Master. Man's denial of obedience unto
Christ, gives the creature dominion over him; the creature is ever that man's
Mat. 6.^4.
master who will not be Christ's servant. As the Lord threatened the children of
Israel, saying, Deuteronomy. 2^.47.
Because thou servedst not the Lord thy God with joyfulnesse, and with
gladness of heart for the abundance of all things, therefore shall thou serve
thine enemies which the Lord shall send against thee, in hunger, and in thirst,
and in nakedness, and in the want of all things; and he shall put a yoke of
Iron upon thy neck, until he has destroyed the. Thus man that will not
serve the Lord with joy and gladness, with sincerity and singleness, the Lord
gives him over to serve the creature in hunger and thirst, with tormenting care
and distraction, with much grief and labor, in great straights in the midst
of his sufficiency, the creature putting an Iron yoke upon his neck, making
him such a wretched slave to the world, Eccles. 6.1, 2.
that he has no power to eat of what he does possess. Qui pecuniae servit,
and praesentibus compedibus constringitur, and futuris paratur, says
Chrysostom. He that serves money, is bound with present, and prepared for
future fetters; so chained, that he cannot come to God; so bowed down, that
he cannot look up to God; God is not in all his thoughts, he is altogether a
stranger to him.

Fifthly, the creature is transient, 5. Transitory.
a servant that changes many masters, it ebbes and flows like the Sea, waxes
and waneth like the Moon: There is stedfastness in Christ, Heb. 13.8.
he is the same yesterday, to day, and for ever: there is mutability in the
creature, constant only in alteration; this goes and comes like the Soldiers
at the command of the Centurion; like Jonahs gourd, that Iona 4.8.
came up over Jonah to be a shadow over his head to deliver him from his
grief; and Jonah was exceeding glad; but when the morning arose, a Worm smote
the gourd, that it withered, and the Wind and Sun did beat on Jonahs head,
that he fainted: The creature, like a gourd, is to day a shadow to us, and we
much rejoice in it, to morrow it is withered, and we have much discomfort: The
joy of the creature does usually turn to sorrow, it ministers more grief in
the losing then ever it gave joy in the possessing: and hereupon Solomon
disswades man from the creature, Labor Prove. 23.4.
not (says he) to be rich, cease from thine own wisdom, will thou set
thine eyes on that which is not? for riches make themselves wings, they fly
away as an Eagle toward heaven.

6. Deceitfulness.
Sixthly, the creature is very fraudulent: Laban changed Jacobs wages ten times;
many are their changes who serve the creatures. The Psalmist says of them that
Psalm. 107 26.
go down to the Sea in ships, and do business in great waters, They mount
up to the heavens, they go down again to the depths, their soul is melted
because of trouble: The like may we say of them that go down to the
creature, and seek for great things, and do great business in the sea of
this world, They mount up in honor, in wealth, in favor, and they go down
again in poverty, disgrace, contempt and hatred, and their soul does even melt
with trouble; never man trusted the creature, but was deceived by it, his soul
smarted for it; when the promises thereof are greatest, the deceit thereof is
most dangerous: as Diogenes sometimes styled flattering speech, Melleum
laqueum, a honey snare; such a snare ^re the honey-sweet promises of the
creature: this like a Delilah, sings us asleep, makes us secure, shaves off
our locks, robbes us of our spiritual strength, and delivers us into Satan's
bondage. When Absalom feasted Amnon, and Amnons heart was merry with wine, then
Absoloms servants fell on Amnon and murdered him: when the world feasteth man,
and the heart of man is merry with the worlds wine, drunken with the fullness
of the world, then honors, riches, pleasures, the worlds servants, fall on
man, betray man, and murder the soul of man, frustrate the expectation of
man, prove a deceitful Bow, and a sandy foundation unto man, and the folly of
man is made manifest in seeking fullness in the creatures, wherein, without
Christ Jesus, the soul of man meets with nothing but emptiness, weakness,
bondage, changes and deceitfulness; all is vain without Christ, a thing of
naught, a very nullitie, a non-ens, like Jobs friends, Job 13.5.
Physicians of no value; they cannot cure us, help us, ease us, fill us, they
can do nothing for us.

2. Folly of seeking fullness in our selves.
Some seek for fullness in themselves, they please themselves with themselves,
they go not out of themselves, they look not beyond, nor above themselves for
any thing to fill them, to enrich them, to make them happy; they suppose they
have water enough in their own Well, treasure enough in the storehouse of
their own souls. Goliath supposed he had fullness enough of strength in his
own arm, in his own weapon, and looked out for no other fullness to assist
him in the conflict with David. Vain man, corrupt man, supposes he has
fullness enough in himself; fullness enough of wisdom to guide him, of
liberty to convert himself, of power to vanquish the adversaries of his
soul, of righteousness to justify himself in the sight of God, of merit to
procure salvation at the hands of God, and therefore he goes not out of
himself, he addresses not himself to Christ, he seeks not to be filled with
the fullness of Christ; they trust in themselves that they Luke 18.9.
are righteous; they look for no righteousness, but their own; for no
garment to cloth them, but that which grows at home, is spun and woven at
home, in the house of their own flesh; for no Well to refresh them or wash
them, but what they dig out of their own earth; for no armor to defend
them, but that which is framed and made at home of their own metal; they are
Rev. 3.17.
rich and full, and want nothing, in their own opinion; they are wise in their
own eye, and lean to their own Pro. 3.5.
understanding, and trust not to the Lord, look not unto him, regard not to be
filled with his knowledge, with his power, with his goodness: he that has
highest thoughts of his own fullness, does ever least regard the fullness of
Christ; he is ready to say to Christ, tendering to him his fullness, as Esau
did to Jacob sending him a present, I Genesis 33.9.
have enough, my brother, keep that thou have unto thy self. It is wonderful
to consider how men's ignorance, and unsensibleness of their own wants, does
cause them to under-value the fullness of Christ. O how little do they who have
high thoughts of their own fullness, discern or taste of Christ's fullness! And
what is man without Christ, that he should seek for fullness in himself? but
an Romans 7.18. Ephesians. 2.^2.
empty house, wherein dwells no good; a dead man, in whom is no life; a blind
man, in whose soul is no light; a loathsome leper, on whom is no beauty; as
the world without the Sun, the flock without a shepherd, the members
without a head, the rush without mire, and the flagge without water, as
sometime Job spoke; as the field of the sloathfull without a diligent hand to
dress it, is over grown with thorns and nettles, so and such is the soul of
man without Christ. Did man see his own emptiness and vileness without Christ,
he would never be at rest until he were filled with Christ's fullness.

Folly of s^eking fullness in naked use of ordinances.
Some seek for fullness in the naked presence, and bare use of Gods ordinances,
never laboring to see Christ, to taste Christ in them, to receive Christ and
his fullness through them, to be brought to the enjoyment of Christ by them.
Asa 2 Chronicles. 16.
promised himself a fullness of health from the Physicians; he looked not
beyond and through them to the Lord; he sought not to the Lord, but to the
Physicians: Gods ordinances are the physic, his Ministers the Physicians:
Some seek to them, stay in them, promise themselves fullness of health from
them, they seek not, they come not home to the Lord by them, they partake not
of Christ and his fullness in them. The Jews Ier. 7.4.
promised themselves fullness of defense, safety, victory, salvation, from the
naked presence of the Temple, without amendment of their doings, without
obedience to the God that dwelled in the Temple. Micah persuaded himself of
the fullness of all blessing, because he Judge. 17.13.
had a Levite to his Priest, though he still retained his Idol, and learned not
of his Priest how to serve that God aright, from whom comes all blessing. How
many men do turn the means of salvation into means of destruction, not
learning God in them, not being led home to God by them. Questionless man's use
of Gods Ordinances is fruitless, until in them he both see and enjoy Christ
and his fullness. As therefore the Shunamitish woman thought it not enough that
Gehazi was sent with his masters staff, but 2 Kings 4.30.
laid hold upon the Prophet, and would not go till he himself went with her:
so think it not enough that ye have Christ's servant, and Christ's staff,
Christ's Minister, and Christ's Word; but lay hold of Christ, cleave to Christ,
and carry Christ with you: You come to the Ministry to little purpose, if you
carry not home with you Christ Jesus, if you be not filled with his fullness.

Folly of seeking fullness in humane inventions.
Some seek for fullness in humane observations, in serving God after their own
fancies, or the doctrines of men, Lev. 10.2. Ier. 2.12. Ier. 23.28. Genesis 11.
in offering sacrifice with strange fire, in a false worship, in a devised
religion: these seek for fullness of water in a broken cisterne, for fullness
of ight in an empty lamp, for fullness of bread in a heap of chafe, for
fullness of figs upon a thistle: these, like them that builded Babel, build to
their own confusion: these are like men running from the Sun, and seeking light
in a Glow-worme; like the Prodigal that Luke 15.
ran from his fathers house where was all fullness of bread, and sought his
meat among the swine; to whom I may say, as sometimes the Angel did to the
women, Why Luke 24.5.
seek ye the living among the dead? So why seek ye life, salvation,
spiritual fullness, among dead, vain, and empty ceremonies? The diseased
woman Mark. 5.
sought in vain for health among the Physicians until she came to Christ; and
man seeks in vain for fullness until he comes to the Lord Jesus: Therefore
as Peter sometime said to Christ, Lord, John 6.68.
whither shall we go? thou have the words of eternal life: so, brethren, let
me say to you, Brethren, whither will ye go? on what rock will you build?
what guide will you follow? what friend will you choose? what treasure will you
seek? Christ and none else has the fountain of all fullness: O therefore
leave all, and come unto him, that he may fill you with his grace first, and
with his glory last.

CHAP. VI. Discovering the folly of not coming fully home to Christ, in whom
is all fullness.
Jephtha his brethren (...) 1.
rejected him, though the Lord had appointed no other to deliver them; in like
sort many refuse Christ, keep a great distance from Christ; they will not come
unto him, receive him, lay hold on him, though the Lord has appointed no other
helper, no other deliverer, given no other name whereby ^ct. 4.^2.
they may be saved. It is usual with men to put the lowest price on that which
God has ordained to be the means of their greatest good. Men are commonly
very evil chusers, very unhappy refusers in matters concerning their
everlasting happiness. Christ, says the Evangelist, came among his Joh. 1.11.
own, and his own received him not: He came among his own by incarnation,
taking our nature upon him, appearing in the form of a servant, but they
refused his service; he came in the ministry of the Gospel as an Ambassador,
publishing the tidings of salvation, but they stopped their ears, and would not
hearken to him; as a glorious and a shining Sun, but they shut their eyes and
would not behold him: he came as a Physician to heal them, but they regarded
not his medicine; he came as a Shepherd to gather them home into his Fathers
fold, but they would not be gathered by him; he came as a full and living
fountain to fill them, but they would neither draw nor drink of the wells of
salvation which he opened to them: they received him not by knowledge as their
counselor to instruct them, by faith as their garment of righteousness to
cloth and cover them, as their rock to support them; by love as their
bridegroom to marry their souls unto him, by fear as their Prince to subject
themselves unto him. Christ's blessed, free, and gracious tender of eternal
happiness is very slenderly esteemed, very ungratefully refused by many
persons: Ordinarily nothing is more unwelcome then that which most concerns
man's salvation. Mat. 23.37.
O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the prophets, and stonest them that
are sent unto thee, How often, says Christ, would I have gathered thee
together, even as a hen gathers her chickens under her wings, and ye would not?
Christ, like a hen to her chickens, showed his love to them, his care for them,
his willingness to gather them home unto himself, his readiness to hide and
protect them under the wings of his power, his grace and fullness, from the
Devil and other instruments of cruelty which, like kites in the air, sought
to make a prey of them; but they would not, they would not come unto him, they
would not believe in him, they would not embrace and receive him. The souls of
men are great enemies to their own happiness, very profanely refusing Christ's
choicest mercies, highly valuing the emptiness of the world, basely prizing
Christ's fullness: So that as sometime Diogenes taxed the folly of the men of
his time, quod res pretiosas minimo emerent, venderentque vilissimas plurimo;
statuam tribus nummum millibus emunt, quum farinae choenix duobus aereis
veniret: because they would buy precious things cheap, and sell base things at
a dear rate; because they valued a statue at three thousand pieces, and sold a
measure of corn for two farthings, though the life of man had no need of a
statue, but could not live without corn: Thus may we justly tax the folly of
men for under-valuing Christ, the most precious of all things; for over-valuing
the world, which is but dung Phil. 3.8.
and dross in comparison of Christ; selling their liberty, peace, quiet, even
their very souls, for the world; unwilling to depart with any thing for the
enjoyment of Christ, when yet the world is but even a dumb statue, a dead idol
which can do little or no thing for them, and Christ is the true Manna, the
Ioh. 6.1
bread of life come down from heaven, giving life to all that beleevingly come
unto him; without whom men have no life of God within them; for, 1 Ioh. 5.12.
he that has the son has life, he that has not the son has not life.

And whence is it that men are so backward to come to Christ, to entertain
Christ, Four grounds of this.
to receive of Christ's fullness, to Prove. 9.
eat of his bread, and drink of his wine which he has mingled, to partake of
all the good things which God the Father has given him to communicate and
bestow upon the souls of men, but 1. from their ignorance Ignorance
of Christ; the Ioh. 1.10.
world does not know Christ. As the blind man does not know the Sun, though it
shine upon him; no more does the carnal and worldly man know Christ, though he
shine upon him in the Gospel: for the light Ioh. 1.5.
shines in the darkness, and the darkness comprehends it not. Such is man's
ignorance, that as the light shining in Goshen, did not pierce the darkness
Exodus 10.
where the Egyptians sat; no more does the light of the Gospel penetrate their
souls, but they sit in darkness and the shadow of death; at the Isa. 59.10.
noone day of the Gospel they are in the midnight of ignorance: To such our
Savior says, Ye neither Ioh. 8.19. Isa. 53.2.
know me nor my Father: They know not the beauties of Christ, they see no
comeliness in him for which they should desire him; he is no more to them then
another beloved: They know not the power of Christ in softning their hearts, as
the ground knows the power of the dew in suppling it; in quickening their
souls, as Lazarus knew the power of Christ in raising his body; in restoring
them to spiritual liberty, as Peter knew the power of the Angel in smiting
off his fetters, in setting him free from Herod's prison: They know not the
death of Christ, as the members know the death of the head, and the branches
the death of the root, in withering and dying with it: they do not so know his
death, that their Romans 6.6
old man is crucified with him, that the body of sin is destroyed, and they no
more serve sin: They know not the resurrection of Christ, coming forth of the
grave of their sin, as the dead knew the resurrection of Christ, their bodies
coming out of the grave with him: They know not the gracious presence and
inhabitation of Christ in their souls, as Obed-Edom knew the presence and
dwelling of the Ark in his house, causing all that he had to 2 Samuel 6.11.
prosper, making their souls flourish in all saving graces: They know not the
love of Christ, as the Bride in the Bride-chamber knows the love of the
Bridegroom, as the guests in the banqueting house know the love of the master
of the feast, as David knew the love of Jonathan: Christ is not like Jonathan
to David, very 2 Samuel 1.26.
pleasant unto their souls; his love is not to their sense and feeling
wonderful, passing the love of women: They know not Christ in his Gospel, as a
friend in his letters, as a King in his Ambassadors of peace; as a Musician in
his musical instrument, making a joyful sound in their ears; as the lame
John 5.4, 5.
man knew the Angel in Bethesda healing their diseases: They know not Christ's
fullness as the seeing eye knows the fullness of light in the Sun, as the
thirsty palate knows the fullness of water in the fountain; and because they
do not know him, they regard not to come unto him. Ignorance is a great
impediment of man's coming to Christ Jesus. Hagar Genesis 21.
came not unto the Well, until her eyes were opened to see the Well: No man
embraces Christ, until his understanding is enlightened to see and discern
Christ aright. Men through ignorance have very dishonorable opinions of
Christ, remain great strangers to Christ, and are very injurious against
Christ.

2. Unsensiblenesse.
Unsensiblenesse of the want of Christ: It was a law of Plato that no man should
draw water out of his neighbors Well, until he had dug to the Potters
earth in his own court: It is a law in nature, Man never comes unto Christ,
never endeavors to partake of his fullness, until he has tried, and knows
his own emptiness, until he discernes his want of Christ. The Ios. 10.6.
Gibeonites sent not to Joshua until they saw themselves besieged by the
Amoritish Princes. Iud. 11.
The Elders of Gilead hated Ieptha, and expelled him out of their fathers
house, came no more unto him, until they were in distress, saw their want of
him, plainly perceived that none else could help them. Man's opinion of his own
fullness makes him under-value the fullness of Christ. Christ is never precious
in the eyes of man until man feel his want of him: As man is more or less
sensible of his want of Christ, so he is more or less industrious in
approaching unto Christ. The Prove. 27.7.
full stomach regards not the honey comb: The full soul Io. 9.41. Matthew. 9.
Rev. 3.17.
loatheth Christ, who is sweeter then the honey or the honey comb. Christ is
ever most precious with the soul that knows its own emptiness.

Unwillingnesse to be at the cost of coming unto Christ: 3. Unwillingnesse.
Though Christ proffer himself freely, yet man must be at some cost, or he
cannot come to Christ, he cannot enjoy Christ. Genesis 35.2.
Jacob cannot come to Bethel unless he put away way his Idols. Exodus 3.5.
Moses cannot come nigh the burning Bush, unless he put off his shoes from
his feet. Man cannot come nigh unto God and Christ, Ia. 4.8.
unless he purge his heart, and cleanse his hands. The Merchant in the Parable
sold Mat. 13.44.
all that he had to buy the precious pearl, to make that his own: Man that
will come to Christ, and make Christ his, must sell all that is his own: Man
must first come out of himself, before he can come to Christ. If Luke 9.23.
any man (says Christ) will come after me, let him deny himself and take up
his cross daily and follow me: He that will come to Christ, must deny his
own wisdom, and be as a 1 Cor. 3.18. Romans 7.18
fool in his own apprehension; he must deny his own fullness, and be as an
empty house in his own sense and feeling; he must deny his own
righteousness, and be as a naked man in his own understanding; he must deny
his own reputation in the eyes of men, and be contented to have his name Luke
6.22.
cast out as abominable, and to be accounted more vile, as David for dancing
before the Arc: 2 Samuel 6.22.
he must be willing to be in the world as nothing, who will have Christ and
his fullness to be all in all unto him: Men are loath to be at this cost, and
therefore come not to Christ. The young man that came to Christ, hearing he
must sell all, and follow him, Mat. 19.21.
went away sorrowful: He that carries the love of the world in his heart,
will faint by the way, and never come to Christ. The over-valuing of the world
makes the doctrine of the Gospel a sorrowful doctrine, and man's endeavor to
come to Christ, unfruitful. Many Ioh. 12.42.
among the chief Rulers believed on Christ, made some steps toward him, but
because of the Pharisees they did not confess him, they came not boldly,
freely, and fully home to Christ, lest they should be put out of the
Synagogue. He that cannot esteem all as nothing for Christ, as dung and
dross in comparison of Christ, will never really and in deed come to Christ:
He is but like a man that cheapes and buys not, because he will not give the
price.

Subjection under the creature: Subjection under the creature.
They are under the power and command of the creature; this is fastened on them
as Birdlime on the wings of the Bird, that they cannot mount up to Christ; they
are entangled in this, as the feet in snares and fetters, that they cannot move
nor come to Christ. As Pharaoh said of the children of Israel, They Exodus 14.3.
are entangled in the land, the wilderness has shut them in; so may we say of
many men, They are entangled in the creature, the world has shut them in, so
shut them up, that they cannot come to Christ; it has so shut up their
understanding, that they cannot discern Christ; their wills, that they cannot
embrace Christ; their imaginations, that they cannot meditate upon Christ; and
their affections, that they cannot fear, trust, love, nor rejoice in Christ.
As the Ios. 10.
five Kings were hid in a cave, and Joshua rolled great stones upon the mouth of
the cave, and set men by it to keep them, that they might not come forth: so
worldly men are shut up in the cave of the world, and hardness of heart, like
a great stone, is rolled upon them, honors, riches, pleasures, like so many
keepers, do so beset them, that they cannot come forth; they are held and kept
under the creature as a Matthew. 6.24.
servant under his master, as an adulterer Iam. 4.4.
under the harlot, as Issacar Genesis 49.24.
under his burdens; the worlds employments keep them under as Pharaohs Exodus
1.11. Iud. 16.
Taske-masters the Israelites: These, like Delilah, shave off their locks, and
make them weak, that, like Sampson, they cannot go forth, they cannot come to
Christ: Matthew. 22. Luke 1^.14. Matthew. 13.22.
This withheld the guests in the Parable from coming to the marriage feast of
the Kings son: this made the Pharisees despise Christ's doctrine: this
frustrates all holy instruction and gracious persuasion, as the thorns make
the sowing of the seed unfruitful: this extinguisheth the love of Christ, as a
strange lover in the bosom of the wife, puts out the love she should have to
her husband. The soul which is not divorced from the world, cannot marry
Christ. Christ is never precious in man's apprehension as long as the world
seems glorious to him. Bern.
Cui Christus incipit dulcescere, necesse est amarescere mundum, says Bernard:
as we begin the relish sweetness in Christ, so the world begins to be
bitter to us; the more sweetness we taste in the one, the more bitterness we
taste in the other: If the world be as a pleasant feast, Christ is but as an
empty dish. And these are maine grounds of man's neglecting Christ, standing
aloof off from Christ, and refusing to come freely and fully home to Christ.

Folly of not coming to Christ illustrated.
And this is a very great folly of man: For what is man not coming unto Christ,
nor partaking of Christ in whom is all fullness, but an empty man, a broken
cisterne, wherein is no water of grace; an empty Hos. 10.1.
Vine, whereon grows no good Lazarus remained dead in the Ioh. 11.44.
grave till Christ came and raised him: so does man in the grave of sin,
until Christ comes to him, 1 John 5.12.
and he to Christ; for he that has not the Son, has not life; 3. A Heb. 6.7,
8.
barren man, as no man Mat. 11.27.
knows the Father but the Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal him.
Without the knowledge of God and Christ Jesus man's greatest knowledge is but
ignorance; 5. A bondman, as Peter freedom comes to Gods children only Ioh.
8.56.
by Christ; none brings the soul a discharge from Satan's bondage, besides the
Lord Jesus; 6. A sick Naaman continued leprous until he came to Jordan: 2
Kings 5.
the woman diseased of the bloody issue had her flux of blood running on her
until she came to Christ: Mark. 5.
None but Christ Jesus purges the leprosy of sin, 1 Ioh. 1.7.
and the flux of ungodliness from the soul of man; if we come not to him we
continue unclean; 7. A Isa. 20.4
Assyrian led away the Egyptians naked and barefoot: without Christ the Prince
of darkness leads man captive, Rev. 3.17.
poor, blind, naked, miserable and wretched; 8. A base man, a dishonorable
man; base for his birth, delighting himself in nothing, but, like a base
worm, in the slime and mud of the world; base in the whole way and work he
undertakes, having base thoughts, base purposes, and base intendments. Very
great is man's baseness without the Lord Jesus, who is the only crown and
glory Psa. 42.2.
chased Heart without the water brooks. The Dove found no rest for the sole of
her foot, until she returned to the Genesis 8.
Ark: the soul never meets with true rest until it come to Christ; but, As
the Disciples in the ship were tossed with the storm, and had no Matthew. 8.26.
rest until they came to Christ, cried to Christ, and Christ awakened, and
rebuked the winds and waves, and made the Seas calm; thus the souls of men are
as a tossed Sea, until Christ speaks peace unto them: he is the Prince Isa.
9.6.
of peace, and peace is a privilege belonging to the subjects of his Kingdom,
and he is styled Ephesians. 2.14.
our peace; by way of declaration he reveals it, by way of merit he has
purchased it, by way of communication he ministers it by way of preservation
he maintains and perfects it. The nearer man comes to Christ, the more he
enjoyes of Christ, the sweeter and stronger is his peace: The more man is
estranged from Christ, the further he is from true peace; 10. A discontented
man, a man Pharaohs Genesis 41.
lean Kine that fed upon the fat, eat them all up, and yet were still lean
and ill-favored: so this, after long feeding upon all the fat of the world,
yet as hungry and greedy as ever; the more he eats, the more he hungers, he
is ever discontented, nothing long pleases him, nothing fully answers him:
the eye that does not see Christ, is never Eccl. 1.8.
satisfied with seeing; the ear that does not hear Christ, is never satisfied
with hearing; the palate which does not relish Christ, is never satisfied with
tasting; nothing is sweet and full without Christ: as Augustine sometime having
read Cicero's works, commended them for their eloquence, but passed this
sentence upon them, Dulces non sunt, quia nomen Jesus non est in illis, they
are not sweet, because the name of Jesus is not in them. Without Christ the bed
is a bed of thorns, the bread is full of gravel, the cup is full of gall;
nothing fills, nothing satisfies, but every thing vexes, displeases,
leaves a sting behind it, and the heart, like the horse-leeches daughter, ever
cries Prove. 30.15.
Give, give, and never can have enough. And here is the misery of man without
Christ, the folly of man that will not come to Christ, without whom he must
starve, Luke 15.
as the prodigal without his Fathers house; without whom he must abide robbed
of all his spirituals, and wounded, Luke 10.
and half dead in his naturals, like him that lay robbed and half dead between
Jericho and Jerusalem, before the Samaritan came and cured him; without whom he
must continue besieged, assaulted, vexed with temptations, fears, troubles,
distractions, as Gibeon Ios. 10.6.
with the Amoritish Princes before Joshua came and removed them; without whom
they must needs perish, as the old world that came not to the Arc. It is man's
greatest folly and madness to estrange himself from Christ Jesus.

CHAP. VII. Showing how Christ is to be valued and esteemed above all.
IS all divine and heavenly fullness in Christ? then let us value and esteem
Christ above all: things are usually valued and prized according to their
fullness; the Sun for his fullness of light is prized above all other lights;
the Apple Tree for his fullness of fruit is esteemed above all the trees of the
wood; the Pearl for his fullness of precious substance is valued above all
other metal. The fullness of Christ is the most eminent, transcendent, and
superlative fullness, a fullness surpassing the fullness of all Men and Angels;
him therefore we should prize above all others, as the King above the
Subjects, as the Master above the Servants, as the Sun above the Candles, as
the Fountain above the Bottle. As the people esteemed David above themselves,
saying, Thou art 2 Samuel 18.3.
worth ten thousand of us: so should we esteem Christ worth all the ten
thousands of the earth, whether riches, honors, pleasures, or whatsoever else.
As the women said of Ruth to Naomi, Ruth. 4.15.
that she loved her, and was better to her then seven sons: so should Christ,
who loves us, be better to us then seven sons, of more esteem with us then
all sons and daughters, then all fathers and mothers, then all wives and
husbands, then all friends and acquaintance, then all the dearest and choycest
possessions; unless we thus value him, we cannot be his Disciples, we
discern him not aright, we learn him not as the truth is in him. Luke 14.26.
If any man come to me (says Christ) and hate not his father and mother, and
wife and children, brethren and sisters, yea and his own life also, he cannot
be my Disciple. He that does not esteem me above all friends, above all
possessions, above himself and his very life, he cannot be my Disciple, he
cannot learn my will, he can have no communion with me, no interest in me.
Gods people have Mat. 9.9
valued him above their profit, above their friends, above their ease, their
credit and their lives. Matthew left the receipt of custom, Mat. 4.22. Rev.
12.11
James and John their ship, their nets, their father, and followed him; and
many for his sake loved not their lives unto the death. Nothing should be so
dear and precious to us as the Lord Jesus: 1. Christ valued above all in our
knowledge.
Him let us value in our knowledge above all Art and Learning. As the light of
the Sun is sweet unto the eye, and the eye esteems it above all other light: so
let the light of Christ, the knowledge of Christ, be most pleasant, and of
choycest esteem with us; him let us Ephesians. 4.22.
study and learn as the truth by whom we must be guided, as the way in which
we must walk, and as the life by whom we must live. In Christ are hidden all
the treasures of wisdom. Col. 2.3.
Among wise men he is the choysest that knows most of Christ Jesus. There is no
fullness, no divine excellency in that man's knowledge, that knows not Christ.
2. 2. In our choice.
Him let us prize above all in our choice, him let us select and take out unto
our selves among all the creatures. As a woman among many men selects and
singles out one to be her husband, on whom she sets her love, to whom she
intends to give herself, whom she purposes to make the guide of her youth,
and the stay of her old age, with whom she intends perpetual consulship: thus
must we in our choice assume unto our selves Christ, as the husband of our
souls, as the guide of our youth, as the staff of our age, as the most sweet
and everlasting companion of our souls. Pharaoh finding Genesis 39.
that such wisdom, and the Spirit of God was not so in any man as in Joseph,
chose him out among all the residue, and set him over all his land: Man
discerning that wisdom and the Spirit of God are neither in Man nor Angel as
they are in Christ, must choose Christ, and set Christ over all, as a King to
command, as a Counselor to guide, as a Friend to comfort, as a Pearl to
enrich. It is man's wisdom to take Christ whatsoever he lose; he that
chooses Christ, shall never have cause to repent his choice. With Mary Luke
10.40.
then let us choose Christ as being the best part. 3. In our love.
3. Him let us prize in our love, as the wife prizeth the husband in her love
above other persons; the rich man his jewel above other substance: let us love
him as 2 Samuel 1.
Jonathan loved David, with a love surpassing the love of women; as Jacob loved
Rahel, with love making us cheerful in serving, patient in suffering for him:
he alone is the friend of Christ Jesus, 4. In our trust.
that loves him above himself and all creatures. 4. Him let us prefer in our
trust, as the builder does the rock above all other foundations, as the
chickens do the wings of the hen above all other places of refuge* to him let
us address our selves, as they who were in distress, 2 Samuel 1.21.
in debt, in discontent, did sometimes address themselves to David: Him let us
make our Captain to fight for us, our Shepherd to defend us, our Rock to
support us, our Shield to cover us: let us wait on him Psa. 62.5
solely, and on no other; on him let us trust fully, with all our heart, with
all our soul; let us rest on whole Christ, on his power to sustain us, on his
wisdom to guide us, on his merit to justify and procure all good things for
us, on his mercy to forgive us, on his love to solace us, on his fullness to
satisfy us: on him let us trust constantly in our prosperity, as being the
strength of all our fullness; in our adversity, as being all-sufficient in the
absence of all helpers: On him let us stay when we are in darkness Isa. 50.10.
and have no light, in sickness and have no health, in heaviness and have no
joy, in desertion and have no friend, in want and have no supply. Man's firm
dependence upon Christ in all conditions, in all changes, argues the truth and
strength of man's confidence. 5. Him let us prefer in our fear above all
commanders, 5. In our fear.
as the Subject his Sovereign above all Beggars, as the Servant his Master
above his fellow servants. As his authority is highest to command, his power
greatest to protect, and his goodness fullest to recompense: so let him have
pre-eminence in our obedience and service. As the Genesis 37.9.
Sun, Moon, and eleven Stars in Joseph's vision, did obeisance unto him: so
let all the faculties of our souls, all the members of our bodies, all our
temporal, natural, moral, and spiritual abilities do obeisance to Christ,
be made subject and serviceable unto him. 6. In our Joy.
6. Him let us prefer in our Joy: As David preferred Jerusalem above Psa. 137
his chiefest joy, making it and the welfare thereof the top, head, and flower
of his joy: so let us make Christ our chiefest joy, the head and crown of our
joy; in him let us rejoice, as the wise men in the Star which guided them,
Mat. 2.10. Genesis 45.28. 1 Samuel 4.5
as old Jacob in the Wagons which carried him to Egypt, where was fullness of
bread in the famine; as the Israelites in the Arc, from whose presence they
promised themselves victory over the Philistines: in him let us rejoice, as the
traveller in the Sun which guides him, as the sick in the Physician which
heales him, as the captive in the ransomer which frees him, as the poor in the
rich which feeds and clothes him. As Christ is the original and spring of all
our comforts; so let him be the supreme object of all our rejoycings: all joy
besides this is but sadness. Bernard says, Illud est verum ac summum gaudium,
quod non de cr^atura, sed de creatore concipitur; quod quum acceperis nemo
tollet a te; cui aliunde comparata omnis jucunditas moeror est, omnis suavitas
dolor est, omne dulce amarum est, omne decorum foedum est, omne pos^re^^o quod
del^^^^i po^^^t, mo^ (...).
That is true and high joy, which is not conceived of the creature, but of the
Creator; which when thou shall receive, no man shall take it from thee;
whereunto compared, all other joy is sorrow, all sweetness grief, all that is
sweet is bitter, every comely thing is filthy, and lastly, whatsoever may
delight is troublesome: all joy in comparison of joy in Christ, is but a cloud
to this Sun, a midnight to this morning, a bramble to this Vine, gall and
vinegar to this precious Nectar: Therefore in all things value Christ, and give
him pre-eminence above all others according to his fullness. Let not the
plainness of his doctrine, the meannesse of his messengers, the simplicity
and want of external pomp in his religion and service, nor the poverty of
many of his followers, cause us to under-value and slight Christ, as it was
sometime disputed among the Romans in their Council, using to deifie great
men, Whether Christ having done many wonderful works, should be received
into the number of Gods. The Historian says, Et tande desinitum est, quod non
deberet recipi inter deos pro eo quod non habe^et cultores: prop^er hoc quod
paupertatem praedicarit and elegit, quam mundus contemnit.
It was at last concluded, that he should not be received among the Gods,
because he had no worshippers, and because he preached poverty which the
world despises. How many stumble, and take offense at Christ, slight and
under-value Christ, for the small number and low estate of his followers, and
for that humility, meekness, spiritual poverty which the Gospel teaches! But
let not us under-value Christ for this, but rather admire the fullness of
Christ, in putting such power into the plain preaching of his Word, and such
efficacy into the labors of his despised Messengers, as thereby to convince
and convert the hearts, and raise the souls of men; and by weak things, poor
things, and things which are not, to confound the things that are: The
weakness of the instrument commends the power of the supreme agent; the more
we look upon the emptiness of the instruments which Christ uses, the more
cause we shall have to admire the fullness which he communicates.

Four things there are among many, Four things in Christ to be highly prized.
in Christ, which we should very highly prize: First, the knowledge of Christ.
The wisdom of Solomon was so great, that the Queen of the South accounted
his men happy, 1. Knowledge of Christ.
that they might daily stand before him to hear his wisdom: As Christ is
greater then Solomon, so is their happiness greater that may st^nd before him
and hear his wisdom. It is Christ that puts a fullness into our knowledge,
as the shining of the Sun in the air, puts a fullness of light into the eye;
therefore Paul made Christ crucified the center and circumference of his
knowledge, determining to know 1 Cor. 2.2.
nothing among them, but Christ crucified: this he made the Ephesians. 3.
breadth and length, depth and height of his knowledge: this was the full
latitude of his knowledge, to know Christ; and this is Phil. 3.8.
excellent knowledge, for the instrument, author, matter, subject, fruits and
effects of it; saving knowledge, Joh. 17.3. Secondly, we should highly prize
the love of CHRIST JESUS; 2. Love of Christ.
it is better then Cant. 1.3.
wine; nothing so solaceth, reviveth, and cherishes the soul, nothing is
sweet, nothing is satisfactory without it. It could not 2 Samuel 14.32.
content Absolon that he was recalled from his exilement, and had his dwelling
at Jerusalem, unless he might also see the Kings face: the presence of all
things is as nothing, unless man see the Kings face, feel the love of Christ;
this is the life of a good man's life, as Solomon says of the light of the
Kings Pro. 16.15.
countenance, In the light of the Kings countenance is life, and his favor is
as a cloud of the latter rain. Christ's love is life quickening, a cloud
watering and abundantly refreshing the souls of all that enjoy him: Therefore
esteem the love of Christ above the love of the creature, as men esteem the
love of the King above the love of the beggar.

Thirdly, we should highly value the communion and ministration of Christ: 3.
The communication and ministration of Christ.
The Sun fills the air with light, the head fills the body with sense
and motion, the School fills the brain with Art and Learning, the golden
Mine fills the storehouse with treasure, the seast fills the hungry with
meat, and the clouds fill the earth with fruit; and all these are esteemed for
their ministration and filling: But Christ has a more excellent ministration,
he fills with better light then the Sun, with better Art and Learning then
the School, with better sense and motion then the head, with better meat then
the feast, with better fruit then the cloud: He fills the hungry with Luke
1.53.
good things, with spiritual and heavenly good things, saving knowledge, lively
faith, fervent love, Christian patience, true humility and meekness, even with
the whole treasury of all spiritual good things, even such good things as 1
Cor. 2.9.
carnal eye has not seen, uncircumcised ear has not heard, nor have entered
into the unregenerate heart of man: these does Christ reveal and communicate
by his Spirit, and in this ministration stands the happiness, glory, and
comfort of man; Christ becoming their fullness, and Ephesians. 1.23.
filling all in all, by being the fullness of their knowledge, of their faith,
of their love, of their peace, of their possession; without whom all knowledge,
faith, love, and whatsoever else, is but an empty thing. Give then pre-eminence
to Christ's ministration, above the ministration of the creature; as to the
ministration of corn above chafe, of gold above dross. Oh prize the gift of
Christ above all the gifts of the world.

4. The sweet and blessed presence of Christ.
Fourthly, we should highly prize the blessed, sweet and gracious presence of
Christ; as a good subject does the presence of his King in his house, above all
other friends; as a wife the presence of her husband above all neighbors. We
must not so esteem the presence of riches, honors, friends, or any other
endowments, as we do the presence of Christ. This Christ has promised to his
children, as their staff and stay, crown and glory, prerogative and comfort:
Mat. 28.20. Isa. 43.2.
Lo (says he) I am with you to the end of the world; with you as a King among
his people, as a Father among his children, as a Shepherd with his flock, as
a Teacher among his Scholars. This was shadowed by the fiery Pillar that was
present with Israel as a guide, which they followed in their several campings,
as a defense between the Camps of Israel and the Egyptians: so is Christ
present with us as a guide to direct us in our journies, as a protector to
defend us from all our enemies. The Pillar was a cloud by day, and a fire by
night to Israel: so is Christ a cooling refreshment to his children in the
scorching day of trouble, and a comfortable Lamp of light to direct them in
the night of this world. In the fire and in the cloud God was seen by Israel:
in Christ God is seen and known as a Father of mercies by his children; and
this presence of Christ with us should we highly esteem, as the Traveller
does the presence of the Sun: This encourages, comfort, strengthens,
satisfies, and should accordingly be highly prized. And thus let us value,
prize, and prefer Christ according to his fullness, that Christ may value us
as Scholars of his School, as Subjects of his Kingdom, as Lovers of his
Truth, as Members of his Body, and daily more and more fill us with his divine
and heavenly fullness.

CHAP. VIII. Persuading to come unto, and get interest in Christ.
Hagar went to the full Well, and filled her empty Bottle; so let us come to
Christ, the true and living fountain, and fill our empty souls with the
fullness of his grace. Fullness is the common desire of all persons; the
ambitious desires fullness of honors, the covetous fullness of riches, the
voluptuous fullness of pleasures: they are very greedy, and can never have Isa.
56.10.
enough of this fullness. Much more should Christians desire the fullness of
Christ, the only true and desirable fullness. As David's Worthies in the day of
David's thirst, brake through the Philistian Army, and drew water out of the
well at Bethel: so let us in the day of our Christ, in the time of our want,
break through all impediments, all armies of trouble and opposition raised
against us, and come to Christ, the Well, whence come the waters of salvation.
To this Christ himself invites us, Mat. 11.28.
Come unto me; Come unto me as the sick unto the Physician to heal you of all
your sinful maladies: Come unto me as the Traveller to the Sun, to fill you
with all divine and heavenly light, to guide you in all your goings: Come unto
me as the thirsty to the living fountain, to supply all your wants, to fill
all your desires: Come unto me as the Sheep to the Shepherd, to lead you
beside the still waters, and to feed you in the green pastures: Come unto me
as the Chicken to the Hen, to hide you under the wings of my protection: Come
unto me as the poor unto the rich, as the Buyer to the Merchants shop, and buy
of me, Non precio sed prece.
not for price, but by prayer, Rev. 3.18
gold tried in the fire, that thou may be rich; and white raiment, that thou
may be clothed; and eye salve, that thou may see: And thus runs the
charge of the Lord by the Prophet, Isa. 45.22.
Look unto me, and be ye saved, all ye ends of the earth: Look unto me
with the eyes of faith, believing in me and my promises; with the eyes of
godly sorrow, mourning for your sins and offenses; with the eyes of love,
embracing me as the husband of your souls; with the eyes of obedience, fearing
and obeying me above all commanders. Thus look unto me, and be ye saved;
saved from sin, that it sway not over you; saved from Satan, that he rule
not within you; saved from affliction, that it shall not swallow you; and saved
from the Law, that it shall not condemn you. Christ ministers all salvation to
them that by a lively faith come unto him: this is the end and fruit of Christ's
coming by his Word and Spirit to the souls of men: My Cant. 2.10.
beloved (says the Spouse) spoke unto me, outwardly by his Word and
Ministers, and inwardly by his Spirit, Arise up, my Love, my fair one, and
come away: Rise up from the death of sin, as sometime the dead rose up from
the grave; from the disease of sin, ignorance, unbelief, impenitencie, as
the sick arise from their disease, and return to health; from the sleep and
slumber, reign and rule of sin, as Peter arose from his sleep, his fetters,
the two Soldiers, and came forth of Herod's prison; from communion and
fellowship with corrupt and carnal men, as Lazarus rose out of his grave from
the fellowship of the dead: Rise up and come away from the world, carnal
acquaintance, and fleshly delights, as the Bride comes away Psalm. 45.10.
from her own people, and her fathers house, unto the Bridegroom; as
sometime Abraham Genesis 12.1.
came away from his own country, and from his kindred, and from his fathers
house, unto a land which the Lord showed him: Arise and come away from all
sinful pleasures, as Samson arose from Delilahs lap, burst his withs asunder,
and came away from her: Rise up and come away from all corrupt and carnal
doctrine, as the prodigal arose from the husks and the swine, and came to his
fathers house, to eat his fathers bread: Rise up and come away even from thy
self, by self-denial, and putting off thy old man, as Lazarus rose up, put
away his grave-clothes, and left them behind him: Thus rise up and come away
to Christ. That man alone comes to Christ Jesus, who rises up from the world,
himself, and his own corrupt affections: And unto him let us come as the lame
man came to Bethesda, that we may be healed; as the Elders of Gilead came to
Jeptha, that we may be preserved, protected, delivered; as the thirsty come to
the full fountain, that we may be filled, and all our wants supplied.

Three things persuading to come to Christ.
And the more effectually to move and persuade you to come to Christ, fasten
your hearts and thoughts seriously upon these three things:

1. Necessity of Christ.
Man's necessity of Christ, Man's misery without Christ: Man is spiritually dead,
and none but Christ can raise him. The life of the soul is hid in Christ, as
the life of the branch in the root. Gehazi 2 King. 4.
with Elishah's staff without Elisha himself, could not restore the woman of
Shunems child to life: the Minister, with the Word of Christ without Christ
concurring and working with him, cannot quicken the soul that is dead in
sin: all the instruments and means of grace leave the soul still
graceless, unless Christ, the author and fountain of grace, join his
blessing to their endeavors: Ioh. 5.5.
The Son quickneth whom he will; he that eats Ioh. 6.53
not the flesh of the Son of man, and drinks his blood, he that comes not
unto, that believes not in Christ crucified, has no life in him; no life of
God, no life of grace here, no life of glory hereafter. The life of man without
faith in Christ, is as no life, but a very death: man is dangerously diseased,
no Balm can heal him, no Physician can cure him. The art and labor of all
Physicians about the diseased woman in the Gospel, were fruitless, Mark. 5.
until she came to Christ Jesus. The Poole at Bethesda cured no man unless
the Angel moved in it: the ordinance of God cures not, unless Christ move in
it, work together with it; he alone is the Sun of righteousness, that has
healing in his wings, curing the wounds which are given by sin and Satan. Man
is possessed by an unclean Spirit, and none but Christ can eject him: the
soul of man is an unclean dwelling, until Christ takes possession within
him; he rebukes the Devil, and causes him to depart whom the Disciples cannot
Mat. 17.19, 20, 21.
cast out. David overthrew Goliath, with whom no Israelite durst enter combat:
Christ overthrowes the Devil, who, without the power of Christ, is invincible;
man of himself can no more overcome him, no more deliver himself from him, 1 Samuel 17.
then the sheep under David's custody, was able to deliver it self from the
Bear and the Lion. Man is blind, in darkness, and the shadow of death, and
no Sun but Christ can enlighten him. Man is naked, and no garment but Christ
can cloth and cover him; all other garments are but rotten rags, and fading
leaves, like Adams Figge-leaves, a poor and base covering. Man is poor, and
no treasure but Christ can enrich him, all is but dung and dross besides
Christ. Man is indebted, and none but Christ can make satisfaction for him;
Mich. 6.
a thousand Rams, and ten thousand rivers of Oil, nay, ten thousand worlds,
if man were Lord and owner of them, were an insufficient price for the least
sin of man: None but Christ, a price infinite and invaluable, is the price of
man's redemption. Man is empty, and none but Christ can fill him; the world is a
feast, the more man feeds upon it, the more his hunger is increased; like the
dropsy man, the more he drinks the more he thirsts: Christ alone
satisfies, he gives Joh. 4.1.
water whereof whosoever drinks, thirsts no more. Not the creature but the Lord
Jesus is man's fullness. Man is distressed, perplexed, tormented, and none but
Christ can quiet him: he casts out the tormenting spirit, he appeaseth the
stormy tempest, he calmeth the violent and surging waves and waters; he leads
him through the sea of affliction, to a Psa. 61.2.
Rock that is higher then man, to an estate and condition secure and safe from
all opposing power: Endless and easelesse are the souls perplexities which
comes not to Christ Jesus: As Bernard Incassum laborat in acquisitione
virtu^um, qui eas alibi quam in Christo quaerit.
sometime said, He labors in vain in the acquisition of virtues, that seeks
them elsewhere then in Christ. Thus man labors in vain that seeks peace,
safety, comfort, any where except in Christ: and what is man that wants Christ,
but a body without a head, a dead and idle, a loathsome lump; a house without a
foundation, which cannot stand; a field without dew, which withers; and a
branch without root, abiding barren, and hastening to the fire. Behold then, O
man, thy necessity of Christ, thy misery without Christ, and give thy soul no
rest until thou art come home to Christ.

Fasten your thoughts upon the vanity of all things without Christ: 2. Vanity
of all things without Christ.
What is worldly fullness to him that comes not to Christ Jesus but vanity
Eccles. 2.11.
and vexation of spirit; a bed of thorns, on which he cannot sleep without
terror; Auru^a (...), p^^^ (...) po^^ (...), aurum ^^^lus ^^^nus, p^^^ ^or
servus. Aug.
a way of snares, (...) which he cannot walk without stum^^ng, ^ruising and
hurting himself; a cup o^ g^ll, of which he cannot drink with any comfort;
like the waters of Marah to Is^ael without the tree, burdens oppressing,
chains fettering, arrows wounding, ^^as tossing, and winds shaking, are all
worldly possessions to them that poss^sse not Christ Jesus. What was Paradise
to Adam when he had deprived h^mselfe of the tree of life, by eating of the
tr^e of forbidden fruit, but as a wilderness of thorns and briars, a place of
extreme torture and disquiet? The worlds choycest Paradise proves at length
full of bitterness to him that has deprived himself of Christ Jesus.
Augustine says, Quid prodest diviti quod habet, si Deum qui omnia dedit non
habet.
What does that profit the rich man which he has, if he has not God which
gave all? What availes the having of the cisterne without the fountain? The
having of all things is as nothing, if man have not Christ with them. Happy is
the man that so looks upon the creatures emptiness, that he is thereby
stirred up to seek Christ and his fullness.

The excellency and the worth of Christ. 3. Dignity of Christ.
As they said of David, He is better, more worthy then all the 2 Samuel 18.^.
thousands of the world: As they said of the Centurion, He is Luke 7.4.
worthy for whom thou shall do this thing: Much more may I say of Christ, He
is worthy that you should come unto him; in him are all the load-stones of
virtue, power, beauty, and whatsoever can be spoken, to move and draw the soul
of man toward him: In him is wisdom surpassing the brightness of the Sun,
even all the Col. ^.3.
treasures of wisdom hidden: In him is power excelling the strength of all
Rocks; he is not only strong, but Psalm. 18.1.
strength it felfe: In him is honor, transcending all the Kings of the earth;
for he is Rev. 19.16.
King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; he is Psa. 104 1, 2.
clothed with honor and majesty, and covered with light as with a garment: In
him is beauty excelling the Cant. 2.2.
Rose of Sharon, and the Lilly of the valley; he is the Cant. 5.10.
fairest of ten thousand, fairer then all the flowers of the field, then all
the precious stones of the earth, then all the lights in the firmament, then
all Saints and Angels in the highest heavens: In him is Ephesians. 3.8.
riches above all the riches of the world, as in the Pearl above the dross.
All worldly wealth is but poverty to the riches which is in Christ: In him are
Psa. 16.11.
pleasures excelling all earthly pleasures, more then ever paradise excelled
the barren wilderness. All pleasures are but sorrows and tortures to the
pleasure which the soul does find in Christ. Surely, all wisdom is folly,
all power weakness, all honor ignominy, all beauty deformity, all riches
poverty, all pleasures anguish, and all fullness emptiness, in comparison of
the wisdom, power, glory, beauty, riches, pleasures, and fullness that is in
Christ Jesus. O therefore come to Christ that you may be enlightened,
strengthened, honored, enriched, protected, solaced, and your souls every way
filled. O come as the Queen of the South came from 1 King. 10.1, 2.
far to Solomon, that you may learn his wisdom. O come as the stones in
the building to the head 1 Pet. 2.5.
corner stone, that he may support you; come as the subjects come the Kings
Court, that he may advance and honor you; come as poor men to a golden Mine,
that he may enrich you; come as Naaman came to 2 King. 5.
Jordan, that he may sanctify and cleanse you: O come as the Prodigal came
to his fathers Luke 15.
house, that Christ may kill the fatted calfe for you, feed you with his
ordinances, with himself, with his graces, and put the robe of his
righteousness upon you: O come as a disconsolate man unto his friend, that
Christ may comfort you with the sweetness of his presence, the sense of his
love, and all the comforts of his Spirit: O come as the chicken to the hen,
that his wings may hide and shadow you. Under the wings of Christ (says Sub
Christi scapulis quatuor nohis beneficia conseruntur, etc.
Bernard) four benefits are bestowed upon us; Here we are hidden and
protected, Here we are refreshed, Here the scorching heat of affliction is
repelled, And here we are fed and nourished. Christ (says Christus omnia, ut
qui omnia propter Christum dimiserit, unum inveniat pro omnibus, and possit
libero clamare, Pars mea Dominus.
Jerome) is all things, that he who for Christ has let go all, may find one
for all, and may freely say, The Lord is my portion. For as Ambrose said, Omnia
habemus in Christo, and omnia in nobis Christus; si a vulnere curari defideras,
medicus est, etc.
We have all in Christ, and Christ is all things in us: if thou desire to be
cured of thy wound, he is a Physician; if thou burn with Fevers, he is a
Fountain; if thou art burdened with iniquity, he is righteousness; if thou
wanttest help, he is strength; if thou fear death, he is life; if t^ou fly
from darkness, he is light; if thou desire heaven, he is the way, if thou
seek food, he is nourishment. Therefore to him let us come as sheep to
their Shepherd, as captives to their Ransomer, as children to their Father.

The manner of coming to Christ. 1. Speedily
To him let us come, first, speedily, without all delay, as Eagles to the
carcass. As the woman of Shunem 2 King. 4.
sadled her Ass, and made haste to the man of God, for the recovery of her
dead child: so let us make haste to Christ for the recovery, life, health,
comfort, and welfare of our poor souls; let us come unto him while he may
be found, and call upon him while he is near at hand. As the Angel hasted,
and thrust Lot out of Sodom, and bid him Genesis 19
haste to Zoar, and escape thither: so let us hasten our souls out of the
Sodom of sin unto Christ; O let us with all speed escape to Christ from the
world and our corruption: Of all undertakings man must use most speed and
diligence to come to Christ Jesus. Secondly, 2. Fully.
to Christ let us come fully, in respect of the term from whence we come,
from the world and all the vanities thereof. As Abraham Genesis 22 5.
left his Ass, and all his servants at the foot of the hill behind him, and
went up to offer his son Isaac to the Lord: so let us leave all the vanities
of the world behind us, and come and offer our selves to Christ, let us come
from all sin. When a captive woman joins herself in wedlock to an
Israelitish Soldier, she must Deuteronomy. 21.12.
change her apparel, shave her head, and pare her nails, and so come to be
joined in wedlock to her husband: he that will come to Christ, must change his
apparel, put off the old man, shave his head, remove the ignorance and error
of his understanding, and pare his nails, reform all his outward ways, and
so come to Christ. To Christ let us come fully in respect of the affection with
which we come, with all our hearts, and with all our souls; with our
understanding to know him, with our wills to choose him, with our imaginations
to think upon him, with our affections to fear, trust, love and rejoice in
him. To Christ let us come fully in respect of the Medium by which we come,
even in the use of all the ordinances of God; and in respect of the term
whereunto we come, even unto whole Christ; unto the wisdom of Christ, to be
guided by it; unto the power of Christ, to depend upon it; unto the
righteousness of Christ, to be justified by it; unto the merit of Christ, to
receive all good things through it; unto the promises of Christ, to believe
them; unto the commandments of Christ, to obey them. He that comes not fully,
comes deceitfully to Christ, and departs unprofitably from Christ: He alone
enjoyes Christ, who comes universally to Christ. Thirdly, 3. Holily.
to Christ let us come holily. The stranger under the Law that came to the
Passover was first Exo. 12.48.
circumcised; He that comes to Christ must circumcise the foreskin of his
heart. There is no acceptable appropinquation to Christ Jesus without true
holiness. 4. Hungrily.
Fourthly, to Christ let us come Isa. 55.1.
hungrily, as a thirsty man to the waters: no man is welcome to Christ, but he
that comes with a holy hunger and thirst. He sends the rich empty away, and
Luke 1.53. 5. Humbly
sills the hungry with good things. Fifthly, to Christ let us come humbly, with
a lively sense and feeling of our wants, in godly sorrow and true repentance,
as the servants of Benhadad came to the King of Israel, with 1 Kings 20.
ropes about their necks; and sackcloth about their loins. Sixthly, 6.
Lovingly.
to Christ let us come lovingly, as the Bride unto the Bridegroom; Strongly,
7. Strongly.
as the waters to the Sea; Joyfully, 8. Joyfully
as the rich man to his treasure; And constantly, 9. Constantly.
coming more and more, daily drawing nearer and nearer unto Christ, to a more
full and perfect participation and fruition of Christ and his fullness.

And to the end we may all come to Christ, and for the better disposing and
fitting of our hearts thus to come to Christ, Four means disposing men to
come to Christ. 1. Sense of emptiness.
we must first be sensible of our emptiness without Christ, feel our souls
as an empty stomach wherein is no meat, as an empty lamp wherein is no light,
as an empty or withered arm wherein is no strength. The people in the famine
being sensible of the emptiness and want of corn at home, came to Joseph,
with whom was all the fullness of Egypt. He alone does truly prize Christ's
fullness, that feels his own emptiness. The sons of Jacob went not out of
their own country down to Egypt for bread, until they found the want
thereof at home: Man never goes out of himself to Christ, till he knows the
vanity and emptiness of his own heart; he that knows this, will hasten his
soul to Christ, as Jacob hasted his sons to Egypt. 2. Consideration of
Satan's Siege.
Secondly, we must see and consider how Satan does besiege and assault us:
How, like a man of war, he sets upon us; how, like a roaring Lion he goes
up and down, seeking to devour us. The Gibeonites seeing themselves besieged
by the Amoritish Princes, sent to Joshua to help them. Paul being sensible of
the buffetings of Satan, addressed himself to God by 2 Cor. 12.7, 8.
fervent and frequent supplication: the soul of man that feels Satan's
buffetings, is even restless, until he comes fully home to Christ Jesus; he
flies to Christ as a sheep to the Shepherd, driven by the Dog, and as a Ps.
42.2.
chased and wounded Heart to the water brooks. Thirdly, 3. Experience of
insufficiency of the creature.
we must be experienced in the insufficiency and inabilitie of the creature
to help us, to satisfy us, to make us happy. Noah knowing that the Genesis 7.
waters would overflow the earth, and that there would be no resting place
thereupon for his foot, betook himself unto the Arc, and entered into it:
Man's experience of the vanity and insufficiency of the creature, feeling that
there is no rest nor stay for his foot thereon, betakes himself to Christ,
looks to him, seeks for interest in him, expects all safety from him.
Fourthly, we must have anguish in our hearts for sin, 4. Anguish for sin.
be out of love with our selves, discontent with the naughtiness of our
hearts. The people that were in debt, 1 Samuel 22.1.
in distress, and in discontent, came to David, and made him their captain:
Man takes no pleasure in Christ, till he is displeased with himself.
Spiritual distress and anguish makes Christ precious: he that knows the
greatness of his souls debt, comes to Christ to make payment; the more
bitterness man does taste in sin, the more sweetness he does find in
Christ: this makes Christ very amiable and precious, very satisfactory and
joyous, and fills the soul with such longing after him, that as Naomi said of
Boaz, The man will not be in rest until he has finished the thing this day;
no more is man in any rest until he has finished this thing, until he has
wrought home his soul to Christ, as a Mariner the ship unto the Haven of all
peace and safety, of all satisfaction and tranquillity.

CHAP. IX. Teaching how to make use of Christ.
There is a price (says Solomon) in the hand of a fool, but he has no heart
to use it: There is a transcendent fullness in Christ, and he is the choycest
of all prices, and is even put into the hands of men; but many have no heart to
make use of him, and therefore he does not profit them. What is the fullness
of the Sun to the blind that does not see by it? the fullness of the
fountain to him that does not drink of it? the fullness of the feast to him
that does not feed upon it? and what is the fullness of Christ to him that
makes no use of Christ? What is a man the better for a lock, if he has not a
key to use it withal? It is not a trade, but a trade well followed; it is not
land, but land well tilled that maintains men, that makes men rich: It is not
Christ, but Christ well used that maintains the soul, that makes the soul
rich. Eccles. 5.18, 19.
Behold (says Solomon) that which I have seen, it is good and comely for one
to eat and drink, and to enjoy the good of all his labor that he takes
under the Sun, all the days of his life which God gives him, for it is his
portion. Every man also to whom God has given riches and wealth, and has
given him power to eat thereof, and to take his portion, and to rejoice in his
labor, this is the gift of God. Christ is a rarer portion then all wealth,
then all meat and drink; it is a rarer gift of God to make use of Christ, and
to enjoy the good of Christ, all the days of his life: this is the portion of
a Christian, of a gracious and sanctified soul indeed. As therefore the
healthy man makes use of his meat, and is strengthened; the sick man makes use
of his physic, and is healed; the Soldier makes use of his weapon, and
overcommeth; the Merchant makes use of his trade, and grows rich by it: Thus
let us make use of Christ that our souls may be healed, strengthened, made
victorious, and spiritually enriched. Some men live by their wits, some by
their lands, and some by their trades: the Christian lives by his Christ. Of
Christ therefore let us make use in our Understandings, to fill us with the
knowledge of Gods will in all wisdom, to receive all our direction from him,
as the traveller makes use of the Sun to guide him. Of him let us make use
in our Meditations, think upon him as the Bride in her thoughts makes use of
the Bridegroom; let the thought of Christ be frequent and precious, and the
meditation of Christ Ps. 104.34.
sweet unto us. Of him let us make use by our Faith, depending upon him as the
house upon the rock, casting our selves, our care and burden upon him; as the
child upon the parent, hiding our selves under the shadow of his wings; as the
chicken under the wings of the hen, resting upon him for a supply in all our
wants, for a deliverance in all distresses, making him in stead of all in the
absence of all helpers, deriving and drawing more and more from his fullness,
as the thirsty draw waters out of the Well by the bucket, and as the branches
draw nourishment from the roots. Of him let us make use by our Love, loving him
as the Father begetting, the Ransomer redeeming, the Physician healing, the
Husband marrying, and Treasure enriching our souls. Of him let us make use in
our Joy, rejoicing in him as the wise men in the Star, with an Mat. 2.10.
exceeding great joy. Of him let us make use in our peace and prosperity,
looking on him as the author of all our happiness, as the Sun that puts a
fullness into all the lights of our comforts, as the Sun puts a fullness into
the stars: without Christ all is empty, as a withered branch without the
root: all is bitter as the waters of Marah without the tree. Of him let us make
use in our hearing, preaching, prayer, conference; him let us hear, him let us
learn, of him let us speak, him let us set forth. Aridus est omnis animae
cibus, fi non oleo isto insunditur: insipidus est si non hoc sale conditur: si
scribas, non sapit mihi, nisi legero ibi Iesum: si disputes, aut conf^ras, non
sapit mihi, n^si sonuerit ibi Jesus.
Bernard says, All the food of the soul is dry, if it be not put into this
oil; it is unsavory if it be not seasoned with this salt: if thou writest, it
does not relish with me, unless I read JESUS there: if thou do dispute or
confer, it does not relish well with me, unless JESUS found there: if we make
not use of Christ Jesus, our use of Gods ordinance is fruitless. Of Christ let
us make use in our distresses, as Noah made use of the Arc in the deluge, to
support us; as the Gibeonites made use of Josua in the siege, to help us, to
deliver us; as Hagar made use of the Well when her bottle was empty, to fill
us. O let not Christ be to us as Iethers sword to him which he drew not, used
not; as wealth to many to whom God gives not power to eat, as a cordial to
him that does not receive it, or a garment to him that does not put it on; but
let us every way make use of Christ: make use of his wisdom to guide us, of
his power to uphold us, of his dominion to awe us, of his majesty to humble us,
of his purity to make us vile in our own eyes, to shame us for our
uncleanness, to work us to holiness; of his justice to drive us from sin,
of his righteousness to cloth us and cover our sins, of his mercy to
pardon us, of his love to comfort us, of his presence to encourage us, of his
fullness to satisfy us, of his Word to feed us, of his Sacraments to confirm
us, of his death to mortify our lusts, of his resurrection to quicken our
souls, of his sufferings to suffer with patience, of his intercession to
settle us in the assurance of the pardon of our sins, and establishment of
the love of God on our souls; of his commandments as of a spur to quicken
us in his service, and as of a bridle to restrain us from what is forbidden;
of his promises as of a rock to sustain us, as of a lodestone to draw us, as
of a light in darkness to comfort us, and as of a spring in the day of drought
to refresh and fill us. Excellent is the use of Christ Jesus to the souls of
all true Christians; it extirpates all cares, dispelleth all fears, evacuates
the mind of distracting thoughts and disturbing passions, sweetens all
estates, mitigates all sorrows, facilitateth all burdens, and exhilerates the
whole man. Very great is the souls happiness which makes a true, full, and
constant use of Christ Jesus.

CHAP. X. Persuading to full and constant acquiescence in Christ.
AS there is all fullness in Christ, so all Christians must work their hearts
to a holy, gracious, full and constant acquiescence in Christ, to stay on
Christ, to quiet and content themselves in and with Christ, never declining
from Christ, never stepping out, nor going aside from Christ to any other
helper; but as the eye does quiet it self in the fullness of the light of the
Sun, and looks for no other light; the builder quiets himself in the strength
of the rock, and looks out for no other foundation to build upon: So let us
quiet our selves in Christ, and look for no other guide, no other supporter,
no other helper, no other comforter, no other Savior. As old Jacob sometime
said of Joseph, It is G^^. 45.^8.
enough, Joseph is yet alive, I will go and see him: so let us say, It is
enough, Christ lives, Christ reigns, Christ has fullness, we will go to
him, stay on him, satiate and delight our souls in him: This the Lord
requires, He Is^y 5^.10.
that walks in darkness and has no light, let him stay upon the Lord, and
trust in the name of his God. Mat. 6.
As the house in the Parable stayed upon the rock when the winds did blow,
and the waves did beat: thus in the winds and waves of all trouble, let us
stay on Christ without wavering; to this the Lord gives many sweet
encouragements, Psalm. 37. Verse 3.
Trust in the Lord with a full, a quiet, a composed and resolved mind, and do
good, live graciously, walk holily, keep close to God, so shall thou dwell in
the land; thou shall not be dismayed with any fears, nor grow impatient with
troubles, nor be overcome with sorrows, nor removed from thy station, but
verily thou shall be fed, thou shall enjoy every necessary good thing with a
settled, quiet and contented mind: Verse 4.
Delight thy self also in Lord, as a child in the father, as a wife in the
husband, as a rich man in his treasury; delight thy self in the commandment
of God as in the light which guides thee, in the promise of God as in the
staff which sustaines thee, in the favor of God as in the warmest Sun that
ever shined upon thee, in the attributes of God as in the branches shadowing,
and streams refreshing thee: Thus delight thy self in the Lord, and he shall
give thee thy hearts desire; he shall fully answer all thy holy and gracious
desires, when thou have thus fully committed thy self unto him, and quieted
thy self with him: verse 5.
Commit thy way also to the Lord, receive all thy direction from him, do all
according to his prescription, leave the issue of all to his disposition, and
he shall bring it to pass, give it such an issue as shall be greatly for thy
comfort: verse 7.
Rest in the Lord and wait patiently for him; though thou suffer many evils,
do not repine, do not limit nor prescribe God, do not step aside from God to
any forbidden helps, suppress the tumults of thy heart, and wait as Noah did
for the abatement of the waters, and coming of the Dove, quiet thy self in
Christ: look upon the authority of Christ, to dispense all as he pleases;
upon the wisdom of Christ, to make a way for thy soul to escape; upon the
power of Christ, to deliver thee; upon the presence of Christ, to minister
encouragement to thee; upon the love of Christ, to sweeten the bitterest estate
unto thy soul; upon the faithfulness of Christ, never to forsake thee; upon
the happiness of cleaving close to Christ, though all the world oppose thee; and
upon the abundant fullness that Christ is to thy soul, when all other things
are taken from thee, and thou shall solace and stay thy self upon Christ's
fullness with a full acquiescence.

From the fullness of the Lord JESUS flows a full fountain of consolation to
the souls of all believers, 7. Consolations flowing from Christ's fullness.
consolation against all external wants: He cannot be poor that has Christ,
in whom is all fullness; when he is spoiled of all, he has an abiding
substance. Christ is the Sun in whom is all light, the Pearl in whom is all
worth, the Tree on whom grows all fruit: The Soul which is espoused to the
heir of all things, has no cause to complain of the want of riches: he that
enjoyes Christ, and distracts himself about worldly abilities, knows not his
own happiness; under-values the portion which God has given him, having a
feast of fat things, a rich jewel, a living spring, a glorious Sun at home,
seeks abroad for husks to feed him, dross to enrich him, a glow-worme to
warm him, and ditch and dirty water to quench the thirst that is within him.
What is the vintage of Abiezer to the gleanings of Ephraim? the onions and
garlic of Egypt to the grapes of Canaan? Is Pharphar like Jordan? Is the
broken cisterne like the fountain? The fullness of the world to the fullness of
Christ is nothing: he that has Christ, has the richest portion, though he
have nothing besides him. Here is consolation against the want of carnal
friends, earthly peace, and worldly comforts: though Saul cannot be merry
without a Fiddler, Ahab without Naboths vineyard, Haman without Mordecays
courtesy, a man that has Christ, has that which makes him merry without all
these. If Plato could tell the Musicians that Philosophers knew how to dine and
sup without them, much more they who enjoy Christ's fullness, know how to solace
themselves in the absence of earthly comforts. Here is consolation against all
opposing powers: in Christ is all fullness; he is a Shepherd able to deliver
his flock from the Bear and the Lion, he is a wall of fire able to defend his
citizens and burn their enemies, he is a husband able to rescue his Spouse,
and destroy them that make war on her, as David rescued his wives, and
destroyed the Amalekites that carried them away captives. Here is consolation
against all soul infirmities; in Christ is all fullness, fullness of mercy to
pity and pardon us, fullness of power to strengthen us, fullness of grace to
heal us, fullness of love to solace us, fullness of peace to quiet us, and the
fulness of all goodness to perfect us. The Lords servants should not be so much
dejected with the thought of their own emptiness and weakness, as revived
and cheared with the meditation of Christ's fullness.

CHAP. XI. Declaring the inseparable union of Christ's two natures in one
person.
THE third thing in these words is an act, dwells; an act of permanencie and
duration, expressing the inseparable union between the two natures of Christ in
one person, the divine dwelling in the humane; Man Ioh. 6.56. 1 Ioh. 4.16
dwells in Christ and God by faith as by an instrument, by love as by a
witness of his society and communion with God and Jesus Christ. God and
Christ dwell in men by grace and heavenly effects, regenerating the hearts of
men, enlivening the souls of men, graciously reigning and ruling within them,
plentifully ministering all spiritual and heavenly gifts unto them: Rev. 7.15.
He that sits on the throne (says Saint John) shall dwell among them; they
shall enjoy his grace and favor here, and his glory hereafter. The Godhead
dwells in the humane nature of Christ by personal and perpetual union of both
natures; and this is the dwelling here spoken of: Whence we see, that

Christ is God and man in one person by an inseparable union. The pillar which
conducted Israel, was a fire and a cloud, yet both but one Pillar: Christ the
great conductor and guide of Gods Israel, is God and likewise man, yet in both
but one person, therefore called Isa. 7.14.
Immanuel, God with us, or, God made flesh; noting the union of his two natures
in one person, and his office of mediation between God and Man, being the
author of salvation both temporal and eternal to the soul and body of man.
The Temple was a type of Christ, stone without, and gold within: Christ was
flesh without, according to his humane nature; full of resplendent glory, and
divine majesty within, in respect of his divine nature. In the Temple the
glory of God appeared, the Temple was filled with it: in the flesh of Christ
the Godhead inhabiteth, most gloriously replenishing it; The John 1.14.
Word (says Saint John) was made flesh, and dwelt among us, and we beheld his
glory, as the glory of the only begotten of the Father, full of grace and
truth. The Word was made flesh, not by bare and naked inhabitation in the
flesh, presence with the flesh, affection to the flesh, or grace and dignity
conferred on the flesh, nor by conversion of the word into flesh, or commixture
of the Word with the flesh; but by the assumption of our flesh into the unity
of his person, the hypostasis or subsistence of the Son, being made the
hypostasis or subsistence of the flesh assumed, the flesh subsisting in the
person of the Word. The Apostle makes mention of the Son thus, speaking to
the Father, Heb. 10.5.
Sacrifice and offering thou would not, but a body have thou fitted me, by
incarnation, by uniting it to my person: and this union is not a union of two
persons in one Christ, but of two natures in one person; the subsistence of the
word is so communicated to the flesh, that the Word and flesh are one person,
the natural properties and operations of both natures remaining distinct and
without confusion: the divine and humane nature are both united, the humane
nature is assumed, the divine nature is the assument; not the person but the
nature of man, not man but the humanity is taken by Christ into the unity of
his person; otherwise he should not be one but two persons, not one but two
Christ's: The Scripture therefore calls him David's Mat. 22.45.
Son, and David's Lord, because he is both God and Man in one person: And
this union is without mutation of the divine Person, without division,
confusion, or separation of the natures; the union is everlastingly permanent.
Of this Christ's appearing to the Fathers of old in the shape of man, were
Praeludiums and Symbols: and this was also typified by the Tabernacle of Moses
in the Desert, that being a type of Christ's assuming our flesh, and dwelling
amongst us as in a Tabernacle. The Tabernacle was a testimony of Gods presence
with his people: Luk 1.18, 78, 79.
God by his Son made flesh, does testify himself to be graciously present
with us. The people came to the Tabernacle to worship, invocate and offer their
Sacrifice unto God: God will not be invocated and adored by man, but in and
through Christ manifested in the flesh of man.

And it was necessary that Christ should be God and Man in one person: 2
Grounds hereof.


In regard of the exaltation of the humane nature of Christ above all
creatures, all Men and Angels: 1. Christ's exaltation.
Saints and Angels are one with God and Christ by gracious qualities, consent
of will and opinion, and mystical conjunction; the humane nature of Christ is
one with his divine person by a more transcendent, eminent, and immediate
conjunction, being assumed into the unity of his person. Joseph was exalted
above his brethren, above all the Nobles in the Court of Pharaoh: Christ, even
according to the flesh, is exalted above all men, yea, above all the Angels,
the choycest Nobles, of him that is the King of kings. From this personal
union, is derived an incomprehensible communication of all divine and heavenly
gifts to the humane nature of Christ, an unction above Ps. 45 7.
all his fellows; like that of Joseph to Benjamin, five times as good, many
degrees more excellent then that which is bestowed on his brethren, whether
Angels or Men, the Spirit being given unto him Ioh. 3.34
above measure, having all heavenly fullness, like the fullness of light in the
Sun, or waters in the Sea. From this union the humane nature obtaines the
honor of adoration; yet not of the flesh as flesh, but of the Godhead in the
flesh, the Godhead and the manhood making but one person in the Son; and he
is said to be set down at the right hand of God, being made so Heb. 1.4.
much better then the Angels as he has by inheritance obtained a more
excellent name then they; the Angels being servants, Christ a Son, both by
eternal generation, and hypostaticall union.

2. Man's salvation.
In regard of man's salvation. Such was man's necessity of Christ's incarnation,
of his assuming man's flesh into the unity of his person, that he could not be
saved but by such a Redeemer as was both God and Man in one person. First, the
Majesty of God, the poverty and indigencie of man, the greatness of the evil
to be removed, and the greatness of the good to be restored, required that
man's Redeemer should be God: Such is the Majesty of God, that none could
interpose himself, but he that is one with the Father; the Angels could not,
they themselves have need of a mediator of Col. 1.16, 17.
union and confirmation; they themselves compared with God, are not Job 15.15.
pure in his sight, and therefore they Isa. 6.2.
cover their faces: how much less can man do it, when not one of them is Rev.
3.10.
righteous: The evil to be taken away, sin and the consequents of sin, the
wrath of God, the power of Satan, death temporal and eternal, are a disease
of that difficulty, that none can cure it, a fire of that heat that none can
endure it, a burden of that weight that none can stand under it, but he that
is omnipotent: for by whose passion can the offense of an infinite Majesty be
expiated, but by his who is also infinite? By whose intercession can the wrath
of God be appeased, but by his who is the best beloved Son of God? By whose
strength can Satan, with all the powers of darkness, be vanquish^d, but by
his who is stronger then all the Devils? Who can overcome death, but he that
has the power of death? The good things to be restored, are, perfect
righteousness, adoption, the image of God, the gifts of the Spirit, life
eternal, and the like: Now who can make man righteous, but he that is
Righteousness it self? Who can make men the sons of God by grace, but he
that is the Son of God by nature? Who can restore us to the image of God, but
he that is the invisible image of God? Who can give us the Spirit, but he
from whom the Spirit of God proceeds? And who can give man eternal life, but
he that is life it self? And thus it behoved man's redeemer to be God.

Secondly, the Justice of God (which as it leaves not sin unpunished, so it
punishes it not but in that nature which has sinned) required that he should
be man: And thus he that knew 2 Cor. 5.21.
no sin, was made sin for us, that we might be made the righteousness of
God in him. And he must be God and Man in one person, that he might be a
middle man between God and Man, and do the things which were to be performed
with Heb. 5.1.
God, and also with men. And thus there was a necessity that the fullness of
the Godhead should dwell in the humane nature of Christ, and that he should
be God and man in one person.

Does Christ dwell in man's flesh? The honor and exaltation of man's nature.
then behold the honor of man, how wondrously Christ has exalted the nature
of man: Man that by his sin has made himself extremely base and
ignominious, is exceedingly honored by Christ Jesus, even above all the
residue of the creatures: for he took not on him the Heb. 2.16.
nature of Angels, but the seed of Abraham. He often used the Angels as his
ministers and instruments, but took them not into the unity of his person:
they have indeed a near and sweet communion with him, but the nature of man
alone has the prerogative and glory of being one with Christ personally.
Ambrose says, Honorem hunc and digni^atem humanae naturae Deus, Dei filius
contribuit ut Deus and homo una persona esset.
God, the Son of God has given this honor and dignity to the humane
nature, that God and man should be one person. Great is the honor that comes
to man by Christ's incarnation; it is only the Lord Jesus that makes man
honorable and glorious: the Sun is the glory of the world, the head is the
glory of the body, the crown is the glory of the King, the flower is the glory
of the garden, Prove. 17 6.
Childrens children (says Solomon) are the crown of old men, and the glory of
children are their fathers: but when all is done, the glory of a Christian is
Christ Jesus; he that comes nearest unto Christ, and is most entirely united
to him, is of all persons the most honorable and glorious. These are a 1 Pet.
2.9.
royal Priesthood, a chosen generation, a peculiar people, called out of
darkness into a marvelous light. Women suppose it a great glory to be taken
into wedlock by rich men and Nobles, Men repute it a high honor to be
received into the favor and fellowship of Princes, Servants have high thoughts
of their being made companions of their Lords and Masters; but true glory, full
and abiding glory comes unto man by his being received of Christ, by his
having union and communion with Christ: he alone is truly honorable and
everlastingly noble, that has Christ graciously dwelling in him; he has the
honor of a John 1.12.
Son of God by regeneration and adoption, the honor of a John 15.15.
friend of God for Gods familiar and full imparting of his mind and secrets to
him, the honor of a Romans 8.37.
Conqueror for the victory which Christ gives him over the Devil, the world,
and his own corruption; the honor of a Ephesians. 5.30.
Spouse for Christ's spiritual wedlock with him, the honor of an Romans 8.17.
heir for his free participation of all the good things of his heavenly
Father, and the honor of a Rev. 1.6.
King for the spiritual dominion which he has over himself and the world.
Were man sensible of the honor that comes by the participation of Christ
Jesus, he would never so strive for worldly honors, nor entertain such
dishonorable thoughts of the ways of Christ and his servants. The state of
that man does ever at last prove most dishonorable and base, that thinks to
enoble himself without Christ. Joseph brought his brethren, and presented them
to Pharaoh King of Egypt; he accepted them, bad them dwell in the Genesis 47.6.
best of the land, and commanded that the men of activity among them should be
rulers over his catell: through Christ we come nigh to the great King of
heaven and earth, he accepts us, he bestows his best blessings upon us, and
makes us spiritual rulers over all worldly vanities, and our own affections.
Very great is the honor that God dispenses unto man through Christ his Son.

Man's care to preserve his honor.
And O how great should the care of man be that is thus honored by Christ, not
to dishonor himself, by wallowing like a swine in the mire and filth of
sin, by bowing down to the world as Gideons Iud. 7.
thousands to the waters, by enthralling himself to the Devil and his own
lusts, as sometimes Dalila cut off Sampsons Iud. 16.
locks, and made him a slave to the Philistines. O man do not dishonor that
nature of thine, which Christ has so honored, do not debase that which
Christ has exalted, do not unite and join thy self in communion with the
Devil, and the dung and dross of the world, Christ having taken man's nature
into the unity of his person, as a pledge of thy future exaltation; do not
bow down thy soul and exalt thy lust, as Solomon sometimes saw Eccl. 10.17.
servants on horseback and Princes walking on foot.

But as Christ has honored thee, Manner how man must preserve his honor. Non
est dig^um ut inde exigas honorem unde refugis laborem
so maintain thy dignity and spiritual glory, by purging thy self from
sin, as a living spring does purge it self from pollution; by contending
mightily against all the oppositions of grace, as a Soldier in the day of
battle; by being industrious in the works of holiness, as he that labors for
great wages: a Christians labor is his honor; by shining as the Sun with
light, by being full as the tree with fruit, by abounding as the sea with
waters. As the nature which Christ has assumed abides unchangeably united to
the person of the Son; so Ioh. 15.7
abide with Christ, in attendance on his ordinances, in faith in his promises,
in love to his truth, and in obedience to his precepts: As the assumed nature
is ascended from the earth to heaven, so raise thy thoughts and affections Col.
3.2.
from the things below to the things above; ascend continually by meditation,
by faith, by love and longing to the things which are spiritual: As the
assumed nature has no subsistence but in the person of the Son, so have thou
no dependence upon any thing but on Christ alone; let him Psalm. 73.15.
be all in all: And as the assumed nature is filled with the fullness of the
Godhead, so labor more and more to be filled with the fullness of all grace
and holiness; so shall thou maintain that honor to which Christ has exalted
thy nature.

CHAP. XII. Showing that man's choycest excellency consists in union with God.
THis shows us wherein the choycest excellency of man consists, even in
being united unto God, in having God dwelling in his heart. Wherein stands the
excellency of Christ as Man, but in having the Godhead dwelling in his flesh,
in being assumed into the unity of the second person? And wherein stands the
excellency, the glory, and the happiness of man, but in being reconciled and
brought nigh to God, in being entered into a sweet and gracious communion with
God? Is it not the excellency of the branches to be united to the Vine? of
the members to be united to the head? of the wife to have communion with the
husband? and of the children to have communion with the parent? And what is the
excellency, the joy and comfort of the soul, but sweet and gracious communion
with God in Christ? Jerusalem, though the joy of the whole earth, pleased not
Absalom unless he might 2 Samuel 14.32.
see the face of his father David: The paradise of the world is but a
wilderness to to the child of God, unless he see the face, enjoy the
comfortable presence of God his Father. Whom does the Psalmist pronounce
blessed? Him that has communion with Princes in their Courts, with Nobles in
their honors, with valiant men in their victories, with rich men in their
wealth, voluptuous men in their pleasures, or him that has communion with his
God in his ordinances, in his spiritual comforts? Psalm. 65.4.
Blessed (says he) is the man whom thou chusest, and causest to approach unto
thee: whom thou chusest, embracing him with thy love, adopting him for thy
son, and making him a member of thy Church, and causest him to approach unto
thee, as a Scholar to thy School, as a friend to thy house, as a child to
thy table, as a bride into the bosom of thy love, to know thy will, to believe
thy truth, to receive thy grace, and to feel thy love, and to be satisfied
with the goodness of thy house, even of thy holy Temple. What is the fruit and
end of all the labors of Gods Ministers, but to work and draw home the souls
of men to God, to the fruition and enjoyment of God, to union and communion
with God? All the labor of Eleazar was to bring home Rebecca unto Isaac, to
espouse her to Isaac: and all the labor of Gods Ministers, his servants, is to
bring men home to Christ, to espouse them to Christ; as Paul says, I 2 Cor.
11.2.
have espoused you to one husband. This is the sum of all, to gather men home
to God and Christ, as Chicken to the Hen, as Sheep unto the Shepherd, as
Children to the Parent, that they may be 2 Cor. 5.19.
reconciled unto God, made one with God, and have the blessed enjoyment of God,
as their highest excellency and chiefest good. And what are the longings of the
souls of holy men who have discerned Gods beauties, who have tasted Gods
loving kindness, but the fruition of God in his ordinances, and in his graces?
Ps. 42.2
My soul (says David) thirsts for God, O when shall I come and appear
before God! And again, My soul Ps. 119.20.
breaks for the longings which it has unto thy judgments at all times. Very
vehement and laborious are the desires of Gods servants after him and his
testimonies; desires which do even consume and wear out the strength and
vigor of their souls; desires of perseverance, longing at all times, in
prosperity and adversity. The soul of a good man is restless until it has
the enjoyment of God and Jesus Christ, nothing else can content and answer it:
Herein stands the excellency, the glory and comfort of it; until it attain
this it is unquiet.

Union and communion with God makes the soul flourish, Benefits of union and
communion with God.
as the branches by union with the vine. They Ps. 92.12
that are planted in the house of the Lord, that draw nigh to God, conscionably
frequent his word, and are ingrafted into Christ, they shall flourish in the
courts of our God, as a watered garden, or a tree planted by the waters side:
this fills the soul with spiritual life, with heavenly sense and motion, as
the members which are united to the head: 1 Ioh. 5.12.
He that has the son has life, power, strength, a blessed fullness of holy
and heavenly life; he spiritually moves, and eats, and walks, and works,
and rejoices like a living man; this makes him strong as the Mat. 7.
house that was united to the rock, no winds nor waves of trouble can beat
him down; this makes him strong as Christ is strong to bear afflictions, and
to run, like a strong man, the race of Gods commandments; this sustaines him
in all worldly desertions; this is in stead of light when he is in darkness,
in stead of Psa. 4.6.
wealth when he is poor, etc. Union and communion with God answers all things.
O be assured then that the top and flower of the souls happiness consists in
union with God, and Christ Jesus: And as the fullness of the Godhead dwells
in the humane nature of Christ bodily, substantially; so labor to feel God in
Christ dwelling in thy soul spiritually; feel him dwelling there by
illumination, as the sun dwells in the air; by ministration, as the vine to
the branches; by powerful and gracious gubernation, as a centurion in the
army, a master in the house, and a king in his courts; by spiritual and holy
inclination, bowing, bending, and framing the heart to do the will of God. As
the pilot at the stern works the ship toward the haven, as the spirit of the
living creatures in Ezekiels vision, being in the wheels, Wheresoever the
Spirit moved Ezekiel. 1.20.
they moved: so feel the Spirit of Christ in thy soul, so possessing,
sanctifying and framing it, that there be a disposition and readiness within
thee to move as God in his word does prescribe, and whatsoever thou losest hold
fast thy communion with God: As Joseph left his cloak and fled from his
mistress to preserve his chastity, so let go thy cloak, all the bodily
coverings of wealth, honor, and whatsoever else; fly from sin and keep thy
communion with thy God, as the choycest excellency of thy soul.

CHAP. XIII. Declaring the perfection and fullness of Christ above the fullness
of all Creatures.
THE fourth thing in these words, is the matter which dwells in Christ; and
that is all fullness: and the fifth is the condition or quality of this
fullness, the fullness of the Godhead. In Saints and Angels dwells a fullness of
divine qualities, in Christ the fullness of divine essence; and herein Christ,
as man, is manifested to be far more excellent then others, to come nearer
to God, and to participate more of the fullness of God, then all creatures. And
hence we learn, that

Christ's perfection and fullness does infinitely surpass the fullness of all
creatures. As the fullness of the sea surpasses the fullness of small vessels;
as Saul was 1 Samuel 10.22.
head and shoulders in stature above the people: so is Christ in heavenly
stature and fullness far above all men and Angels; therefore is he styled the
Ephesians. 1.22.
head of all principality and power, for his co^plete dominion over all
creatures; Rev. 1.5.
the prince of the kings of the earth, to show his power over all kings,
tyrants, and whatsoever enemies; Heb. 1.2
the heir of all things, having interest in, dominion over all creatures, in
heaven and earth; the whole world is his inheritance. Such is Christ's riches
that all the fullness of the world is but poverty, in comparison of him; and
all the strength of the creature but weakness, compared with the power that is
in his arm: For God (says the Apostle) Ephesians. 1.20, 21, 22.
raised him from the dead, and set him at his own right hand in heavenly
places, far above all principality and power and might and dominion, and
every name that is named, not only in this world, but also in that which is to
come: above, the name of kings for his dominion, above the name of rich men for
his wealth, above the name of Conquerours for his victory, above the name of
Saints and Angels for his purity, wisdom, and most exquisite and absolute
perfection.

And this appears by the excellency of Christ's original: 3 Grounds of Christ
above all creatures. 1. Excellency of Christ's original.
As he is the second person in the Trinity, he is begotten of his Father by
an eternal generation, Very God of very God: As man, he is the son of God by
hypostaticall union, his humanity subsisting in the person of the Son. Of
Christ therefore the Apostle says, that he is Heb. 1.3.
the brightness of his Fathers glory, and the express image of his person,
being made so much better than the Angels as he has, by inheritance, obtained
a more excellent name then they. He is the brightness of his Fathers glory,
as the beams are the glory of the Sun; and the express image of his person,
as the print of the seal on the wax is the express image of the seal it
self; and is more excellent then the choycest creatures, being the express
and lively image of his Father, the maker of all by his power, the heir of all
by his birth, the supporter of all by his providence, the revealer of all
mysteries by his wisdom, the purgation of all sins by the sacrifice of
himself, head King and ruler of all by his session at the right hand of God:
and thus he has a more excellent name then the Angels, according to his
divinity by eternal generation of his Father, being the natural Son of
God, consubstantiall with the Father; according to his flesh, by a temporal
birth of the virgin, and operation of the holy Ghost, the flesh being assumed
of the Son into the unity of his person; so that the same Son is both God
and Man, not two Sons but one; and that not by adoption, but by union, not
made a Son, but borne a Son, the flesh being assumed into the unity of the
person of the natural Son: As Christ has being from, and union with the
Father more naturally, intimately, and entirely, then any of the creatures; so
he excells all others. He that is most fully of God by regeneration, and
comes nearest unto God by gracious union and communion, is the most excellent
of many people.

This appears by the proportion between his humiliation and his exaltation:
Proportion between Christ's humiliation and exaltation.
he was abased and humbled below others, he appeared in the Phil. 2.7
form of a servant, he was of no reputation, rejected, reproched, persecuted,
accused, blasphemed, spit upon, put to the shameful death of the Cross, and
his soul sorrowful to the death. And as he was humbled and abased below
others, so it is fit he should be exalted above others; Being Phil. 2.8.9.
found (says the Apostle) in fashion as a man, he humbled himself and became
obedient to the death, even the death of the cross; wherefore God also has
highly exalted him, and given him a name which is above every name. God will
honor such people as men dishonor, for their weldoing: The good man's future
glory shall fully answer his present ignominy. David was set behind the Ewes,
his brethren preferred above him: the Lord takes David from the Ewes, and makes
him king over Israel. Joseph was brought lower then any of his brethren, cast
into prison, fetters put upon him; yet from thence he came to the second place,
next the king in Egypt: Christ's humiliation was deepest, Christ's glory is
highest; let no man for any reproach decline the way of godliness: the basest
cross shall turn to their most glorious crown that suffer for weldoing.

2. Subjection of all under Christ.
This appears by the subjection of all things under him, Ephesians. 1.22.
all things are put under his feet: all things high and low, great and small,
visible and invisible, present and to come, are put under Christ's feet; even
as he is man, men and Angels are put under him as Subjects under their
Sovereigns, as Nobles under their Prince; the Saints and faithful servants of
God are put under him as sheep under their shepherd, as the Bride under the
Bridegroom, as the members under their head; all troubles and afflictions are
put under him, as Mat. 8.8
Soldiers under the Centurion; all Devils are put under him as captives under
their Conqueror: as Joshua trod upon the necks of the kings of Canaan, so
does he trample down and triumph over all the Princes of darkness; all
sins and transgressions are put under him, as the offenses of a land under a
king, Christ having authority to forgive them; as deseases under a physician,
Christ having ability to heal all the distempers of the soul; as the clouds
under the Sun, Christ being able to dispell and blot them out, as the Sun the
clouds; as debts under a rich man, Christ being able to make full satisfaction;
death and hell are put under him, as the Rev. 1.18.
opening and shutting of the house are under him that has the keys of the
house. Absolute, universal, irresistible is Christ's jurisdiction, Mat. 28.18.
having all power both in heaven and earth given him.

Behold in this who are filled with the chiefest and choycest fullness: Who have
choycest fullness.
that he is filled with all the fullness of the Godhead; and this is the
excellency of the soul to be filled with the fullness of the Spirit: of all
fullness, heavenly fullness is the choycest: Christ of all creatures comes
nearest to God, and his fullness is the fullness of the divine essence: Among
men such as are most nigh and most dear to God, their fullness is a fullness
of heavenly gifts and graces. God often fills his enemies with Psalm. 17.14. Job
12.6.
earthly abilities, as Abraham filled the hands of Ismael with the movables,
as men fill swine with husks and Acornes; but his friends he fills with
spiritual gifts, as Abraham gave the inheritance unto Isaac; and Elkana a
worthy portion to Hanna. Spiritual fullness is a portion of the highest price,
of the sweetest and choycest use; and with this fullness we must all strive to
be filled. Be not Ephesians. 5.18.
drunk (says Saint Paul) with wine, wherein is excess, but be ye filled with
the Spirit; with the wisdom of the Spirit, with the holiness of the Spirit,
with the power of the Spirit, and with the joy and peace of the Spirit.
Spiritual and heavenly fullness is proper to the Lords servants; let the
covetous, like the rich man in the parable, fill his barnes with corn; let the
drunkard, like them in the Isay 59.11.
Prophet, fill themselves with strong drink; let the ambitious, like Haman,
fill himself with worldly honors: but let the Christian fill himself with
the graces of the Spirit; for this let us pray, hear, contend, and strive to
be filled Ephesians. 21.3.19.
with the fullness of God, with the highest measure of spiritual perfection,
whereunto we can attain. This fullness is the most excellent, therefore
styled, 1. Excellent.
the fullness of God: God is infinitely more excellent then the earth, and this
fullness far excels all worldly fullness. As Bathsheba said of the
virtuous woman, Many daughters have done excellently, but thou excellest them
all: so may we say of this fullness, how excellently soever other fulnesses
may do in their place and kind, yet this fullness of grace excels them all.
This fullness is the most permanent, 2. Permanent.
this abides as the Sun in the firmament, as the waters of the sea, as the
fire upon the altar, when other fullness fails like the waters of Tema, and
vanishes like a vapor: this is a growing fullness, like the waters coming
out under the Temple, rising higher and higher, shining like the light more and
more to the perfect day. This is an honorable fullness, 3. Honorable.
it is a Crown and a Diadem to him that has it, it makes man an excellent man
indeed. To excel in virtue is man's choycest excellency: It is a sweet and
comfortable, 4. Sweet and satisfactory.
a satisfactory and contenting fullness, a Feast of marrow and fat things, and
of wine refined upon the lees; a river that fills and makes glad the soul:
Oh then above all fullness highly prize, diligently, seek, earnestly hunger
after the fullness of God; care not for the fullness of gold, fullness of
lands, fullness of honor, fullness of carnal contentments, but for the
fullness of God: this will make thee strong against temptations, patient in
afflictions, joyful in sufferings, holy in thought, gracious in speech,
fruitful in action, humble in prosperity, confident in adversity, fervent in
prayer, profitable in hearing, godly in conversation, and graciously assured of
future fullness, of an eternity of all bliss and happiness.

CHAP. XIIII. Setting forth the superlative excellency of Christ above all
creatures.
HERE, as in a glass, we may behold the transcendent and superlative
excellency of Jesus Christ above all the creatures. 2 Samuel 18 3.
David was better then ten thousands of the people: Christ is more excellent
then all the thousands of men and Angels; Ps. 148.13
his name alone is excellent, for his divine original, for his union of two
natures in one person, and for the mighty works which have been wrought by
him. Phil. 2.9.
God has given him a name above every name, for dignity, majesty, authority,
power, and most complete perfection; as the name of kings is above the name of
subjects, the name of an heir above the name of servants, the name of a
centurion above the name of soldiers, the name of ransomer above the name of
redeemed captives; excelling all the creatures, as the tallest cedars the
lowest shrubs, the most glorious Sun the weakest lights, the deepest Sea the
smallest drops, the highest Prince the poorest beggars, and the richest jewel
the most unworthy stone. The Apostle says of the glory of the Law in
comparison of the glory of the Gospel, 2 Cor. 3.10
That which was glorious had no glory, by reason of that which excels: Thus
the glory and excellency of all creatures, is as no glory and excellency, in
respect of the surpassing glory and excellency of Christ Jesus. Full of divine
and heavenly, sweet and soule-ravishing excellency, are the names given in
sacred Scripture unto Christ; as Immanuel, Esaias 7.14.
God with us, in regard of his person, being God and Man in the unity of his
person; and in regard of his office, being with us, by intercession with his
Father for us, by protection against all enemies, by sustentation in all
adversities. Christ's being made one with us, is the fountain of all our
happiness. Sometimes he is styled Jesus, Mat. 1.21.
a Savior, no typical, but a proper, true, spiritual Savior; no mediate,
but an immediate Savior; a Savior by merit, obtaining salvation by his
perfect obedience and satisfaction; a Savior by efficacy, applying all his
benefits by the operation of his Word and Spirit; a Savior in regard of the
terminus a quo, the sins, wrath of God, and condemnation from which he saves
us; and in regard of the terminus ad quem, the perfect righteousness, favor
of God, and life eternal whereunto he brings us. Christ is the complete and
perfect author of salvation to all Gods children. Full of heavenly sweetness
is the name Jesus to all true believers; Mel in ore, melos in aure, jubilus in
cord.
Honey in the mouth, music in the ear, a jubilee in the heart, says Bernard.
Superlatively sweet and excellent is that salvation which Christ brings to all
that unfainedly receive him Sometimes his name is called Wonderful, Isay 9.1.
Counselor, the mighty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace:
Wonderful for the admirable union of two natures in one person, for his
wonderful conception and birth of a Virgin, and Wonderful for the
administration of his kingdom, wonderfully saving his servants, wonderfully
destroying his enemies. Couns^llour, for the wisdom which he reveals, and
counsel which he gives the elect, by the Gospel, making them wise unto
salvation. The mighty God, for the miracles he wrought, the donation of the
Spirit, and regeneration of Gods chosen. The everlasting Father, for the life
of grace and glory which he ministers to all true believers: And the Prince of
Peace, for the peace which he makes between God and his chosen, for the
concord which he works between Gods children, and the heavenly tranquillity
which he puts into the consciences of contrite and brokenhearted sinners. The
names of the Lord Jesus are Characters full of wonders in the eyes of all
believers, and beams ministering the heavenly light of wisdom, and
consolation to all that come unto him. Sometimes he is figuratively styled a
Head, Ephesians. 1.22.
for the excellency, dignity and eminency of his condition above others, as the
head is the most noble, and eminent above all the members, for his mystical
conjunction with true believers, direction, gubernation, protection, which he
ministers to them, and for the communication of all spiritual life, sense,
motion, and every good thing to Gods children. Sometimes he is styled a Rock,
1 Cor. 10.4 1 Pet. 2 5.
and the head stone of the corner, for his conjunction of Jew and Gentile in
one Church, and for his might in sustaining all such as are by a lively faith
built a spiritual house upon him. Sometimes he is called a Lion, the Lion of
the tribe of Juda, Rev. 5.5.
for his principality and eminence, as the Lion is the King of all beasts; for
his vigilancie, as the Lion sleeps with his eyes open: Christ is a keeper that
never sleeps; for his power and efficacy, in plucking us out of the mouth of
the roaring Lion, the Devil; for his custody, keeping us as the Lion his
whelps; for the terror he casts upon the hearts of his enemies, by the
preaching of his word, as the Lion by his voice makes all the beasts to
tremble; and by the raising of his chosen unto life, as the Lion by his cry
awakens his young which sleep. Sometimes he is called the Sun: Mal. 4.2.
the Sun is the Prince of the Stars, Christ is the Prince of the Kings of
the earth; the Sun is the eye of the world, Christ of the Church; the Sun
conferreth light with his beams, Christ conferres the light of knowledge,
faith, and all grace to the soul; the Sun is in the midst of the planets,
Christ is a middle person between God and man; Christ gives the light of glory
to the Saints above, the light of grace to believers here beneath: The Sun
warmes the earth, Christ the heart with his divine love; the Sun makes the
earth fertile, Christ makes the soul fruitful; the Sun casts his light upon
the poor man's cottage as well as on the kings palace, Christ shines as
clearly and comfortably unto the heart of the poorest as of the richest
Christian. Sometimes he is styled a Bridegroom, a husband, 2 Cor. 11.2.
for his dominion over, despensation and betrothment with, and singular
affection to his Spouse the Church; for his protection, nutrition, and
communication of honor to the children of God, for his entire union with, and
acquisition of his Spouse. Sampson and David obtained their Brides by shedding
the blood of their enemies, Christ has obtained his Spouse by shedding his
own blood, and dissolving the works of the Devil, his and their adversary.
Most excellent is the authority, dignity, majesty, power, beauty, wisdom,
love, and chiefest goodness shining forth to the souls of Gods servants in
and through the names of Christ Jesus.

Four excellencies in Christ, on which men are to fasten the eyes of their
faith. 1. Excellency of dominion.
Let us therefore lock and fasten the eyes of our faith, First, upon the
excellency of Christ's dominion: behold him reigning as King of kings, and Lord
of lords, and veil and bow to him. As Pharaoh put all the people of his land,
from the lowest to the highest, under Joseph, because none was excellent as
Joseph: so let us put all the faculties of our souls, and all the members of
our bodies, the whole man under Christ; let all be subject and serviceable unto
Christ, let all be ruled and guided by Christ; Christ has absolute and most
excellent authority over us; and therefore, as all that travel in the day, are
guided by the Sun, as all Israel were guided by the pillar, as all the
members of the body are guided by the head; so let us in all things be guided
by Christ, Mat. 8.8
let us go and come at Christ's command, as the soldiers did at the command of
the Centurion. All man's goings are aberrations, if he be not guided by Christ
Jesus: nothing is well done but that which answers Christ's direction: they that
walk after their own fancies, walk in darkness. It is recorded of the
wheels in Ezekiels vision, Ezekiel. 1.21
that when the living creatures went, the wheels went; and when the living
creatures stood, the wheels stood; when the living creatures were lifted up,
the wheels were lifted up over against them; for the spirit of the living
creatures was in the wheels. Thus let our motion and station be according to
Christ's prescription, having, as the Psalmist says, Psa 40.8.
the law of the Lord in our hearts: And as Christ has excellent dominion, so
let us feel him reigning and ruling within us; by illumination, as the Sun
does rule the day by filling the air with light; by subjugation and putting
under all our unruly lusts, as Joshua ruled in Canaan, by treading upon the
necks of the kings of Canaan, and putting them to death; by direction and
guidance of our souls to move aright in the ways of God, as the pilot does
guide the ship; by love, as the husband does rule the wife; by inhabitation and
possession, as the dweller does rule the house; by gracious and heavenly
influence, as the hand does guide the pen, and the lodestone does turn and
draw the iron toward it: It is the glory of man's heart to become the Throne of
Christ, the honor of man's life to be wholly subject unto Christ, it is a far
greater honor to be Christ's Bonus obediens, domini servus, proximi socius,
mundi dominus, superiora habet ad gaudium, aequalia ad consortium, inferiora ad
s^rvi^ium. Bern.
gracious servant, then the worlds profane commander. He that is most
spiritually subject, is most truly excellent; of all men he has the choycest
dominion, that yields to Christ most ready and free subjection: Every thing
shall serve him, who readily serves the Lord of all things.

2. Excellency of power.
Look upon the excellency of Christ's power, behold him as one to whom power
belongs; power of creating and making all, power of dispensing and
administering all, power of supporting in the greatest weakness, and power of
dissolving the greatest forces; look upon him as on the rock which never
sinketh, as on the captain that ever prevails, as on one whose arm is never
shortened, and build upon him as the wise man built his house upon the rock,
and thy soul shall never sink; hide thy self under the shadow of his wings,
as the chicken under the wings of the hen, and the infernal vultures shall
never make a prey of thee. And as Christ has excellent power, so strive to
feel this power of Christ inwardly in thy heart and soul, 1 Ioh. 3.8. 2 Cor.
10.4, 5. Acts 12.7.
in dissolving the works of Satan, in casting down his kingdom and mighty
holds within thee; as Peter felt the power of the Angel in smiting off his
fetters, and bringing him forth of Herod's prison; as they who were possessed,
felt the power of Christ in casting out the Devil. Labor to feel this power
healing all thy spiritual maladies, as the deseased woman felt the virtue of
Christ curing her sickeness; Mark 5. Genesis 7.17. Dan. 3. Col. 1.11.
sustaining thee in all afflictions, as the Arc sustained Noah in the deluge;
restraining all the fiery darts of Satan, as he restrained the fiery furnace
from hurting the three children; filling thy soul with all spirtuall and
heavenly might, making thee strong in knowledge as the Sun in light, strong in
faith as the tree in roots, strong in love as a fire of much wood in heat,
strong in motion and coming home to God, as a river of much water is strong in
coming home to the Ocean. Man that feels Christ's gracious power and virtue,
is the man that discernes Christ's excellency: Christ is even nothing in man's
apprehension until man has experience of this his powerful and mighty
working. When Israel saw the mighty work of David in overthrowing the great
Goliath, 1 Samuel 18.
then David was much set by. Man's experience of Christ's mighty and gracious
working, makes Christ very precious to him.

3. Excellency of love.
Look upon the excellency of Christ's love, see him loving and embracing the
humble and penitent souls of men, as the bridegroom his sad and sorrowful
bride; see him binding up the broken hearts of men, as the tender and careful
physician the wounds of them that are diseased, with Ladies hands, with
singular rendernesse and compassion; behold him gathering to himself and
bearing in the bosom of his love, and comforting with the promises of his word
the wounded in spirit and afflicted in conscience, as the careful shepherd
gathers and carries the weak Isa 40.11
and feeble sheep; behold him like Jacob in his love serving in the heat and
in the cold for Rachel; Genesis 29.27.
serving in manifold afflictions from his cradle to his cross for our sakes,
to make us a spouse unto himself; see him in his sympathy and fellow feeling
afflicted in all the affliction of his people, Isa. 63.9.
as a head with the affliction of the members, as a nurse with the affliction
of her child; look on him, Phil. 2.7.
and see him in love stripping himself of his glory, dignity and life it self
for us, 1 Samuel 18.
as Jonathan in his love stripped himself of his sword and garment, and gave them
to David: Look upon this excellent love of Christ, and price it more highly
than the thirsty man does wine, Cant. 1.3. Psalm. 4.1. Psa. 63.3.
then the worldly man his Corn and Oil, or the living man his life. Of all
possessions the love of Christ is most precious: nothing sweet like Christ's
loving kindness to the souls of Gods servants: nothing can make man
miserable, or his condition uncomfortable, that has the feeling of Christ's
love within him. John 2.
Christ at the marriage in Cana turned water into wine; the marriage of the
soul with Christ, the having of the love of Christ turns the clouds of sorrow
into a Sun of comforts, the dust of disgrace into a crown of honor, the
tempest of trouble into a calm of peace, and the empty cisterne into a full
fountain. O how sweet, how honorable, how full, how well pleasing does the
love of Christ make their condition, who have the beams of his countenance
shining upon them!

4. Excellency of consolations.
Look upon the excellency of Christ's consolations, which water and refresh the
soul, as the Rivers did the garden of Eden; which revive the heart and make
the inward man to flourish after a long winter of affliction, as the beams of
the Sun do the earth in the spring season; consolations external in the
ministry and doctrine of the Gospel, and internal in the sweet and peaceable
operation of the spirit: Thus you may hear Christ comforting his spouse after
her long troubles, Cant. 2.11
Lo (says he) the winter is past, the rain is over and gone: the troubles
and grievances raised by the malice of the world, fears, terrors, and
sorrows of soul caused by sin, and raised, like a tempest, by the sense of
Gods wrath, are gone, appeased, and put away by the sweet, gracious, and
comfortable coming of Christ unto the soul, as the winter by the returning of
the Sun. The flowers appear: the graces and consolations of the spirit
appear again, adorning and sweetning the soul, and making it look with a
joyful face, as the flowers do the earth. The time of the singing of Birds is
come: the hour of the Saints consolation is come, Christ makes them joyful
with the feeling of his word and spirit, Epes. 5.19.
and they with Psalms and hymns and spiritual songs do sing, and make
melody in their hearts unto the Lord. The Lord Jesus ever ministers sweet
refreshments after long afflictions to the souls of his servants; he gives
them water out of the rock, and honey out of the Lion; he makes their
heaviness matter of rejoicing, and their sufferings an occasion of triumph and
exaltation. Now he comforts them as a haven the Mariner after a long storm,
becoming to them a place of refuge, Isay 4.1. Job 33 24. Ezra. 9.8.
and a covert from the storm and from the rain. Now he solaceth them with the
assurance of the pardon of their sin, as a King the malefactor with a pardon,
after much sorrow, and long supplication. Now he reviveth them with the light
of his countenance, as David, after many days, let Absolon see his face. Now
he cheereth them with his presence, as a Bridegroom the Bride after long
absence: Now he quiets them as he did the stormy waters, Mat. 8.26.
and gave a calm to his Disciples: Now he sends his Spirit with a certificate
of peace to their consciences, Romans 8.16.
as sometime the Dove came to Noah with an Olive branch: Now he lets them see
the end of their fears and sorrow, as Noah after many days, saw the dry land
appear. Christ is very wise and wonder ull in the dispensation of comforts to
his afflicted servants; he ever takes the fittest opportunities both to sweeten
and remove men's miseries: when the overflowing flood of worldly comforts prove
an emty pit, and broken cisterne, then appear Christ's comforts as a living
spring that never fails.

And herein is the excellency of Christ's consolations, that they are, First,
seasonable, as light in darkness; as the Well to Hagar when her Bottle was
empty: Secondly, that they are full consolations, their latitude equal to man's
miseries: Thirdly, that they are strong consolations, overcomming man's
distractions and distresses: And fourthly, everlasting, abiding to the end with
Christ's members: And O how should this excellency of Christ Jesus fill us with
high and excellent thoughts of Christ, with strong and excellent faith in
Christ, with fervent and excellent love to Christ, with humble, hearty, and
excellent subjection under Christ, with full, constant, and most excellent
contentation with Christ, having him in whom is fullness infinitely surpassing
the fullness of all creatures!

CHAP. XV. Opening the blessed and happy condition of them that are partakers
of Christ.
THis declares the singular happiness, all other lights, and contents himself
with this, as having enough in this. It was the happiness of the Merchant in the
parable to have the precious pearl; Mat. 13.44.
he sold all to possess himself of that, assuring himself that having that,
he had enough, he needed no other treasure to be added: Christ is a glorious
Sun, in whom is all light; a precious pearl, in whom is all treasure; he
that has him, needs nothing else to make him happy: He that has all things
without Christ, is poor, base, m^serable; he that has Christ in the absence
of all other things, is rich, full and honorable. As Augustine sometime said
of the knowledge of other things, and ignorance of God, Infoelix qui omnia
novit and te nescit: qui autem te and illa novit, non propter illa beatus, sed
propter te solum.
Unhappy is he that knows all things, and knows not thee; but he that
knows both thee and them is happy; not for them, but for thee alone: So in
this case unhappy is he that possesses all things, and yet has not Christ;
but he that has both Christ and them, is happy; not for them, but for Christ
alone. Hearken, whom does the Spirit of God pronounce happy, Blessed is the
Nation whose God is the Lord, Psa. 33.11
and the people whom he has chosen for his own inheritance: the Nation which
has God for their Lord, in his ordinances, as a teacher instructing them; in
his love, as a father regenerating and embracing them; in his care, as a
Shepherd watching over them; in the operation of his grace, as a Physician
healing them, as a Gardener pruning, dressing, watering them. Here is man's
blessedness to have God in his love, mercy, and saving graces. And again,
Psa. 146.3 4.
Put not your trust in Princes, nor in the son of man, in whom is no help;
his breath goes forth, he returns to his earth, in that very day his
thoughts perish. Happy is the man that has the God of Jacob for his God, whose
hope is in the Lord his God: wherein the Psalmist shows the vanity of all
external excellencies, and the folly of them that trust in them, that magnify
themselves in the presence of them, being things perishing, and suddenly
changing. For as Mimus said of Fortune, It is glassy, Vitrea est, quum spendet
frangitur.
when it shines it breaks: so is the greatest worldly fullness but a glass;
when it shines it breaks, when it flourishes, then it withers: On the other
side, the Psalmist sets forth the singular felicity of them that have the God
of Jacob for their God, who by knowledge, choice, faith, love, obedience and
delight, have him for their God, their guide, their rock, their crown, their
portion: they are happy, they are blessed, they are in a most honorable and
sweet condition.

Happiness of having Christ illustrated i^ five things. 1 A wise guide.
Great is the happiness of man in having Christ: as David said of Goliahs
sword, There is none to that. He that has Christ, has First, a wise guide,
able to direct him, as the fiery Pillar guided Israel, and the Star the Wise
men. Christ has all the treasures of wisdom: he that has most of Christ is
the wisest man in the world: he that has the Sun, has more light then he
that has all other lights, and wants the Sun.

2. A faithful friend.
Secondly, he that has Christ, has a faithful friend, a sure friend, a sweet
friend, Pro. 18.12
an able, an everlasting friend. A friend (says Solomon) is nearer than a
brother: Such a friend is Christ; when father and mother forsake us, Christ
takes us up. Pro. 27.9.
Ointment and perfume rejoice the heart, so does the sweetness of a man's
friend by hearty counsel, says the Wise man: Such a friend is Christ, his
instruction; his presence, his love, are better then ointment and perfume,
filling the soul with all joy in believing. A friend loves at all times: Pro.
17.17
Such a one is Christ; whom he loves once, he loves to the end. Have Christ
for thy friend, and thou needst not be dismayed at all the hatred of the world.

Thirdly, he that has Christ, 3. A sure Rock.
has a sure rock to sustain him, a firm shield to defend him. Christ, like
Noah's Arc, will bear him up in the deepest deluge of affliction; like a firm
Anchor, he will stay the ship of his soul in the stormy tempest of all
troubles; l^ke a wall of fire, Zech. 3.5.
he will defend him, and consume all that rise against him. Great is that man's
safety who has Christ for his keeper: there is more safety with Christ in the
tempest, then without Christ in the calmest waters. Psa. 3. Is^. 32.2.
That soul is invincible which has Christ for his Castle and his Captain.

Fourthly, he that has Christ, 4. Highest honor.
has the highest honor: The woman joined in wedlock with the King, is more
honorable then all the women of the land. H^st. 2.17
Hester obtained more grace and favor in the sight of Ahasuerus, then all the
virgins, and the King set the crown royal upon her head: he that has Christ
obtaines more grace and favor with God, then all the men on earth besides him,
and is as a crown of glory in the hand of the Lord, Isa. 62.3.
and as a royal Diadem in the hand of his God. Joh. 1.12. Rom 8.18 Rev. 1.6.
All that have Christ are sons of God, heirs of heaven, spiritual Kings:
he is most honorable and glorious that comes nighest unto Christ, that
receives most of Christ; it is not natural birth, but new birth; not worldly
abundance, but heavenly fullness, that honors man in Gods presence. Sola apud
Deum libertas est, non servire peccatis; summa apud Deum nobilitas est, clarum
esse virtutibus. Rev. 12.1.
The only freedom with God (says Jerome) is not to serve sin: and with God
to excel in virtue, is the highest nobility. Most honorable and glorious is
the description of the Church represented by a woman clothed with the Sun, a
crown of twelve stars on her head, and the Moon under her feet. That man's
condition is questionless most honorable, that has the Sun of
righteousness clothing him, the star of Gods word guiding him, and all the
things of the earth put under him.

5. The having of all things.
Fifthly, he that has Christ, has all; she that is wedded to the Master of
the house, has all the house. Man by his spiritual wedlock with Christ, has
interest in all the things of this great house of the world. Of such as have
Christ the Apostle says, All things are yours, 1 Cor. 3.22, 23.
whether Paul, or Apollo, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death, or things
present, or things to come; all are yours, and ye are Christ's, and Christ is
Gods: All things are yours; all the creatures here below are yours, as your
servants to do service to you, as all the servants of the house are under the
mistress of the house: the Angels are also yours to minister to you, as the
Nobles of the land are the Queens to attend and wait upon her: All things are
appointed for your good, for your edification, supportation and comfort:
Whether Paul or Apollo, or Cephas, all the Ministers of God from the highest to
the lowest, are yours, as lights to guide you, pastors to feed you with
knowledge and understanding, as shepherds to gather you home to Christ, as
physicians to heal you, as builders to hew and square you, as husbandmen to
manure and dress you, as the friends of the Bridegroom to woo you, to
persuade and betroth you to Christ: All the ordinances of God are yours, as a
school to instruct you, as a Banqueting house to feed you, as an Artillery
house to furnish you with spiritual armor, as a Bethesda to heal you: All
these are for your sakes, for your good; The world is yours, as a house for you
to dwell in, a country for you to live in for a season: All the goods of the
world are yours to use, as the things of the house are the wives to use; they
are all sanctified unto you: All the malice and opposition of the world is
yours, to weane you from the earth, to drive you home to Christ, to exercise
your graces, and sweeten unto you Christ Jesus: The fullness, pomp and glory
of the world is yours, to try your sobriety, humility, vigilancie and
moderation in all things. Not only all things are yours, but all conditions,
whether life or death; life is yours, the time of life is yours to learn and
know God, to get assurance of another life: The prosperity of life is yours to
be thankful to God for it: the troubles of life are yours, to learn to bear
the cross with patience: All the several estates and conditions of life are
yours, in each of them to show your subjection and obedience unto God: Death is
also yours, to put an end to all your miseries, as a Physician to cure all your
diseases, as a haven of peace after all tempests, as a place of rest after all
labors, as the red sea to Israel, drowning all sins, ending all sorrows,
and giving entrance into endless joys; as the red sea drowned Pharaoh and the
Egyptians, and proved a safe passage to the Israelites, and gave them occasion
of great triumph and exultation: Things present and things to come are yours;
present things are yours, present good things are yours, to behold God in them,
to praise God for them, to serve God with them, to do good to others by them:
present afflictions are yours, to try you, to humble you, to purge you, to
sweeten the meditation of Christ and heaven to you: present sins are yours to
make you vile in your own apprehension, to drive you out of your selves, to
let you see the necessary use of Gods ordinances, and the necessity of Christ
Jesus: Things to come are yours, afflictions to come are yours to prepare for
them, sins to come are yours to prevent them, heaven and happiness to come
are yours to sustain and comfort your selves with the thought and belief of
them. All things, of whatsoever kind or nature, are yours, and you are
Christ's: Christ's servants to obey him, Christ's Spouse to love him, Christ's
members receiving all from him, possessing all in him; and Christ is Gods,
subordinate unto God as Man, and Mediator between God and Man. Here are all the
latitudes of a Christians riches, his having of all in Christ Jesus. Let the
proud man, with Nebuchadnezar, bless himself in his stately palace; let the
mighty man, with Gol^ah, boast himself in his tall stature, and strong armor;
let the valiant man, with Senacharib, magnify himself in his victories, and
the covetous bless himself with him in the parable, in having his barnes
full: but let the Christian pronounce himself happy, only happy, truly happy,
fully happy, everlastingly happy in his having of Christ; for Christ Jesus is
man's sole and joyful, constant and most glorious happiness, because in him
dwells all fullness, even the fullness of the Godhead bodily.

The last thing in this verse is the manner how the fullness of the Godhead
dwells in Christ, and that is bodily, in the body or humane nature assumed; in
that the fullness of the Godhead dwells: Omnis plenitudo divinae narae in
corpore ejus inhabitat.
All fullness, says Ierom, of the divine nature dwells in his body; And the
Apostle adds this word bodily, 1. To put a distinction between the dwelling
of the Godhead in the humane nature assumed, and in the Saints; in them the
Godhead dwells by the communication of virtue, but in this the Godhead dwells
personally, by the communication of the person of the Son to the humane nature.
2. This the Apostle adds to show that Christ, according to his humane nature,
is head of the Church, by reason of the personal inhabitation of the Godhead
in the flesh. 3. To declare the full and open manifestation of God in Christ:
God did often manifest himself unto men in shadows, and in powerful and
mighty works, but in Christ he has manifested himself most fully, dwelling
in the flesh assumed personally; so that Christ in our flesh is true God and
true man, and he that has the Son of God, has the Father, he that enjoyes
Christ enjoyes God, because the Godhead dwells in the humane nature personally,
and by this we see, that

Christ dwelling in our flesh is true God. Christ the Son of God dwelling in
our flesh is truly and essentially God, nothing is wanting to Christ that
belongs to God, that appertains to the divinity; whatsoever the father does,
the Son does in our flesh, though not by the power of the flesh, but by his
Godhead dwelling in the flesh; the names of nature and of imposition, the
titles of honor, love, office, and labor, which are given unto Christ, and
the attributes of eternity, of immutability, immortallity, omnipresence,
omnisciency, and omnipotency, ascribed unto Christ, together with the
miraculous and mighty works wrought by Christ, do give an ample, clear and
invincible testimony of Christ's Godhead.

Applic.
Let us therefore look upon the Godhead of Christ in our flesh, and admire his
goodness in coming so near unto us, and strive by faith and love to come to
him, and through him to God; Christ reconciling God and man, as Jacobs ladder
joined heaven and earth together; God dispensing all to men by Christ, and
accepting men through Christ, as the Angels descended and ascended by the
ladder in Jacobs vision. Let us again contemplate Christ as God dwelling in
our flesh, and fear him and obey him above all commanders, exalt him above all
men and Angels, love him above all creatures, stay upon him in all distresses
consecrate our selves to his service, celebrate him as the Author and worker of
all our welfare and happiness, and quiet and content our selves in and with
him, as the fountain of all fullness.

VERSE 10. And ye are complete in him which is the head of all principality
and power.


CHAP. XVI. Ascribing perfection in Christ to such alone as are truly gracious.
IN the precedent verse is the fullness of Christ opened, in this verse is the
fullness of his members proposed. Christ is very free, and full, and gracious
in his ministrations to his servants: As there is a fullness in the Vine so
there is a fullness in the Branches; as there is a fullness in the Sea, so there
is a fullness in the Rivers; as there is a fullness in Christ, so there is a
fullness in his Members; they are complete in him which is the head of all
principality and power.

Scope of the Apostle.
These words contain a third argument, used by the Apostle, to dehort and
dissuade men from having recourse to humane traditions, philosophical
doctrines, vain and needless ceremonies; from seeking perfection or fullness
in such empty lamps, broken cisternes, and barren trees; considering they have
perfection nearer home, and in themselves, being in Christ, members of Christ,
incorporate into Christ, in whom is all fullness, they need not look else
where for perfection, for they are complete in him.

In the words we have two things in the general. 1. The Saints perfection, 2
Parts, 1 Saints perfection. 2. Christ's exaltation
and ye are complete in him. 2. Christ's exaltation, which is the head of all
principality and power. First, of the Saints perfection, and ye are complete in
him: wherein we may take notice 1. Of the subject ye, not all, but ye: Ye
who are effectually called from the death of sin to the life of grace, Ioh.
11.44
as Christ called Lazarus from the death of the grave, to the life of nature:
Ye that are savingly enlightened, Ioh. 9
as the eyes of him that was borne blind were opened: Ye that are spiritually
purged and cleansed from sin, 2 King. 5.
as Naaman was washed from his Leprosy in Jordan: Ye that have put off the
old man, Ephesians. 2.4.
and put on the new, Genesis 41.14, 42. 2 Cor. 5.17.
as Joseph had his prison garments taken off, and vestures of fine linen put
upon him, and a golden chain about his neck: ye from whom all old things are
put away, and to whom all things are become new, ye are complete in him.

Note.
Such alone as are truly holy and gracious, are complete and perfect in Christ
Jesus. Such alone are living branches in this vine, a spiritual Bride to this
husband, endowed with Gods image, interested in Gods promise, separated from
worldly vanities, and the power of uncleanness, clothed with Christ's
righteousness, and filled with Christ's fullness.

the Tree of Life to Adam expelled out of the garden of Eden; Genesis 3.
one to whom they come not, of whose fruit they feed not. Reigning
profaneness deprives the soul of all the benefits and comforts of the Lord
Jesus.

Such alone as are truly gracious, are Dignus plane est morte qui tibi Christ
recuset vivere, and qui tibi non sapit, desipit; and qui curat esse, nisi
propter te, pro nihilo est, and nihil est, propter teipsum: Deus, fecisti
omnia, and qui esse vult sibi and non tibi, nihil esse incipit inter omnia.
O Christ (says Bernard) he is plainly worthy of death who refuses to live
to thee; and he that is not wise for thee, is foolish; and he that cares to
be, unless for thee, goes for nothing, and is nothing. O God (says he) thou
have made all things for thy self, and he that will be for himself, and not
for thee, begins in the midst of all things, to be nothing. Without Christ
man's greatest fullness is nothing else but emptiness: he that seeks himself,
and not Christ, loses both himself and Christ: he that strives without
Christ to be happy, involves himself in the snare, and casts himself into the
gulf of the greatest misery. To live to the Lord Jesus in true holiness, is
the only way to everlasting happiness: He that for Christ can make himself
nothing, shall in Christ find the perfection of all things. Labor then to be
of their number who are truly holy and gracious, that you may be complete and
perfect in Christ Jesus.

Secondly, here is the benefit, complete, full, entire, perfect; complete in
the imputation of Christ's righteousness, in the inchoation of all saving gifts
and graces, in title to all Gods promises, in the acceptance of their persons
and services in and for Christ, Ephesians. 1.6.
Christ being the Beloved in whom they are accepted. And hence we learn, that

There is a spiritual and heavenly perfection and fullness in Gods faithful
servants: Sorts of perfection
a fullness of inchoation, but not of consummation, as there is a fullness of
light begun in the air in the dawning of the day; a fullness of parts, but not
of degrees, as there is a fullness of members in an infant as well as in a man,
in respect of parts, though not in respect of full growth; a fullness of truth
and uprightness, though not of absoluteness: The least dram of gold, and
drop of water, is as truly gold and water, as all the gold in the Kings
Treasure, or all the water in the deep Sea: a fullness in respect of intention,
Phil. 3.12.
though not of acquisition; they set perfection as a mark before them, they
press to it, though they have not yet fully attained: a fullness of duration,
though not of fruition; they do not fail and fall, like Hasael, 2 Samuel 2.23.
by the way, but like good travelers, they go from strength to strength
until they appear before the Lord in Sion, Psa. 84.7.
though they do not yet enjoy the end of their calling: a fullness in respect
of extention, they mortify all lusts, they depart from every evil way, they
allow themselves in no sin, though they cannot wholly abolish any sin; they
have an eye to all Gods precepts, and walk in all Gods ordinances, though they
limpe and halt a little, as Jacob did in his travel, after he had obtained
the blessing. This perfection and fullness of Gods Saints and Servants was
shadowed in the Arc, as it was a type of the Church; the Arc had a crown of
gold about it, Exodus 25.10, 11.
the Church, the faithful servants of the Lord, are crowned with diverse gifts
and graces here, and shall be with the crown of glory hereafter: The Arc had
four proportionable dimensions, the faithful servants of Christ have the
depth of faith, the height of hope, the latitude of charity, and the longitude
of perseverance, abounding (as the Apostle says) in every thing, 2 Cor. 8.7.
in faith, in utterance, in knowledge, in all diligence and love: The
Candlestick in the Sanctuary had seven lamps, Exodus 25.31.37.
and many branches, adorned with bowls, knops and flowers; the Church and
faithful servants of God, are replenished with fullness of divine and heavenly
light, and beautified with the gracious works of the Spirit; Isai. 11.9.
this was prophesied, The earth, the faithful people of God on earth, shall
be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the Sea, abundantly
replenished with all the gifts of God; and this the Lord signified by the mouth
of the Psalmist, Psa. 72.16
saying, There shall be an handful of corn in the earth, on the top of the
mountains, the fruit thereof shall shake like Lebanon and flourish like the
grass of the earth: A prophecy of the plentiful preaching of the Gospel,
abundant communication of divine and saving gifts to men, a large increase of
the number of believers, and sweet consolations arising in the souls of men
upon their freedom from the power of Satan, and their own corruption under
Christ's kingdom. And this perfection and fulness of the servants of God is
expressed sometimes by the beauty of the Lillies of the valley; Cant. 2.2.
Cant. 6.10
sometimes by the brightness of the Sun, the Moon, and the Morning;
sometimes by the glory and rich attire of a Queen clothed with gold of Ophir,
Psalm. 45.9, 13, 14.
and a needle wrought garment; sometimes by a body washed with water, Ezekiel. 16.
and anointed with oil, cl^thed with broidred work, shod with a Badgers
skin, girded about with fine linen, covered with silk, decked with
ornaments, having bracelets upon the hands, and a chain on the neck,
signifying the riches, fullness, splendour, beauty and admirable excellency of
those graces, with which the Lord adorns the souls of his servants, grace and
holiness making Gods children surpassingly beautiful. That soul is most
comely and beautiful, which has the greatest measure of sanctification: This
is likewise symbolized by the waters coming forth under the threshold of the
Temple, rising higher and higher, Ezekiel. 47.5.
until they grew so deep, that a man might swim in them; and for this the
children of God are termed, Cant. 4.2.
a flock of Sheep even shorn, come up from the washing, every one bearing
twins, none barren among them: for this they are styled, a Garden enclosed, a
Spring shut up, a Fountain sealed, an Orchard of Pomegranats with pleasant
fruits, a Tree planted by the waters side, Psa. 92.12
whose leaf does not fade, trees bearing more fruit in their old age. It is
the property of Gods children to grow to more perfection, their corruptions,
like the house of Saul, 2 Samuel 3.1
growing weaker and weaker; and their graces, like the house of David, waxing
stronger and stronger: and the Scripture speaks of them plainly, testifying
that they are full of goodness, Romans 15.14.
as the stars are full of light, and good trees full of good fruit; full of
piety toward God, full of charity toward man, full of knowledge in Gods will,
full of faith in Gods promises, full of godly sorrow for their offenses, full
of humility and meekness for their low opinion of themselves, and readiness to
put their necks under the yoke of Gods precepts: Phil. 1.11.
Full of the fruits of righteousness, as the fields are full of all sorts of
fruit in the day of harvest: Col. 4.12.
Perfect and full in the will of God, in the knowledge and observance of it, as
a good servant is full in knowing and obeying his masters will, as a good
traveller is full in his way knowing it, and going on fully in it, with all his
strength, with all cheerfulness, and with all steadfastness: Yea, Ephesians. 3.19.
filled with all the fullness of God, not with the fullness of his essence, but
of his operations and communications of grace to the souls of men: With the
fullness of his will, Col. 1.9.
being filled with the knowledge of his will in all wisdom and spiritual
understanding: With the fullness of his promises, believing them, and drawing
waters of consolation from them with the bucket of faith, as from so many Wells
of comfort: With the fullness of his love, as the the child with the love of
the parent, feeling the love of God shed abroad in their hearts: With the
fullness of his gifts, as the air is full of the light of the Sun: With the
fullness of his Christ, who fills all things in all men. And thus we see
there is a spiritual and heavenly fullness in the Lords servants. Ephesians. 1.


CHAP. XVII. Laying down four grounds of the Saints perfection.
1. Union with Christ.
IN regard of union with, and incorporation into Christ: They are united unto
Christ as branches to the vine; the vine is of the same nature with the
branches; so is Christ, as man, of the same nature with believers: the branches
have their original from the vine, believers are begotten again by Christ to
a lively hope: the branches are supported, nourished, and filled by the vine;
so are all true believers by Christ. Romans 12.5.
They are united unto Christ, as members to the head; the head communicates
sense and motion to all the members of the body, Christ communicates spiritual
life, sense and motion, a heavenly fullness of all good things to the members
of his mystical body: They are united unto Christ as the bride unto the
bridegroom, Hos. 2.19
they are betrothed unto him for ever; the wife by her wedlock participates of
the name, honor, dignity, and earthly fullness of her husband; the Church, by
spiritual wedlock with Christ, partakes of the name, honor, dignity, and
heavenly fullness of Christ: As man and wife are one matrimonial flesh; 1 Cor.
12.12.
so are Christ and his members one mystical Christ.

In regard of proportion: 2. Proportion between Saints and Christ.
There is a natural proportion and likeness between the head, and the
members, between the parent and the child, between the Sun and the air
enlightened by the Sun; and thus there is a spiritual proportion between
Christ and all such as, like living members, are enlivened by him, like
children are begotten of him, and savingly enlightened by him, as the Sun does
enlighten the air: There is a gracious proportion and answerablenesse between
Christ and all Gods faithful servants, as between the Sun and the Stars
in the firmament, as between the King and the Queen in the Court, as between
the father and the children in the family; they are holy as he is holy, in
proportion, 1 Pet. 1.15. Romans 8.29
in imitation, in quality, but not in adequation, degree, and equality: they
are conformed unto Christ in sanctification and in suffering: Christ has
fullness above measure, they have fullness in measure: In Christ is fullness,
as in the fountain, in them as in the cisterne.

3 Christ's communication to the Saints.
In regard of Communication: The Sun communicates light unto all the Stars,
the Sea waters to all the Rivers; Christ has not received for himself alone,
but for all his members. Joseph had not the fullness of Egypt for himself
alone, but for all the people of the land, to dispense to them according to
their several necessities: God has put all fullness into Christ, and through
Christ he does dispense the same to us. God (says S. Paul) has blessed us
with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ; Ephesians. 1.3.
with knowledge, justification, remission, adoption, sanctification, and all
spiritual riches in Christ. God dispenses all his fullness by Christ Jesus to
his servants: As the Angels came down by Jacobs ladder; so do all the gifts
of God come down to the soul of man by Christ: Of his fullness we do all
receive, Ioh. 1.16. Ioh. 17.8.
grace for grace. The words (says Christ) which thou gave me, I have given
them; the words of precept to direct them, the words of promise to sustain
them, the words of life to quicken them, the words of peace to comfort them;
what thou have revealed and given to me, as Mediator, have I revealed and
communicated unto them, as their teacher and Savior.

In regard of Imputation: 4. Imputation of Christ.
Christ with all his benefits is imputed to believers, their sins are
imputed unto him, and his righteousness is imputed unto them. He that knew no
sin, 2 Cor. 5.11.
was made sin for us, that we might be made the righteousness of God in
him; not our righteousness, but the righteousness of God; not in us, but in
Christ. As Josua the high Priest had his filthy garments taken from him, Zach.
3.
and was clothed with change of raiment: so is our sin, like a filthy
garment, put from us, and we are clothed with Christ's righteousness, as with
a rich and royal robe, and we are to put on Christ to justification; being,
through faith, clothed and covered with Christ his perfect innocence and
holiness of nature and actions, as with a garment to appear holy and
unblameable without spot or wrinkle before God. And we are also said, to put
on Christ to sanctification, Romans 13.
being decked and adorned with the gifts and fruits of his Spirit, as with
jewels and ornaments: Ye are of God (says Saint Paul) elected, 1 Cor. 1.30.
called, regenerated by his Spirit. All things are of God by creation, elect
believers by the grace of adoption and regeneration: Ye are of him in Christ,
elected in Christ before the foundation of the world: In Christ, who is made
unto us of God, wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and redemption: Made
unto us of God, not by creation, but by ordination: Wisdom, the author and
teacher of wisdom, revealing to us the counsel of his Father, touching our
salvation, and making us wise by giving us the spirit of illumination:
Righteousness, our Justifier making us righteous through his righteousness
imputed to us: Sanctification, our Sanctifier, regenerating and renewing us by
the work of his Spirit: Redemption, by his merit and efficacy, freeing us
from the power of Satan, the dominion of our corruption, and death eternal: He
is our Wisdom as a Prophet, our Justification and Sanctification as a Priest,
our Redemption as a King: He is our Righteousness Imputative, by way of
imputation; he is our Wisdom, Sanctification and Redemption, Effective, by
way of inherent and gracious operation. Christ (says Christus factus est nobis
sapientia in praedicatione, justitia in peccatorum absolutione, sanctificatio
in conversatione, redemptio in passione.
Bernard) is made unto us Wisdom in preaching, Righteousness in the
absolution of sin, Sanctification in conversation, and Redemption in his
passion. Christ (says Liberans ab errore, peccatorum dimis^ione, per spiritum
paracletum. Two sorts of men excluded from Christ and the number of his Saints.
Theophilact) makes us wise, freeing us from error; he makes us wise by
forgiveness of sins; he sanctifies us by his Spirit the Comforter. And thus
he ^ parts to us perfect redemption, or d^^^^a^ce from all evils: and thus it
appe^^e^, that there is a spiritual and heavenly perfection and fullness in
all the Lords servants.

This shows how great strangers they are to Christ, how far from the number
of Gods faithful servants, First, who are empty of all saving grace; whose
souls, like the foolish virgins lamps, are empty of all spiritual and
heavenly oil; whose hearts are an empty house, I. Matthew. 25. Romans 7.18. Hos.
10.1.
wherein dwells no divine and saving good; whose lives are (as the Prophet
said of Israel) an empty vine, bringing forth to themselves, to the flesh, but
not to God; empty of the knowledge of God, as the eyes of the blind are of
light, having no wisdom to discern the things which differ, any more then a
blind man can discern of colors; empty of faith, as Jeroboams withered hand
was empty of strength, having no power to believe, to lay hold on Christ, and
the promise of ^^^^nall life; empty of love, as a dead m^n is empty of hea^e.
It is said of David, th^^ he was old and stricken in years, (...) they
c^ver^d him with clothes, but h^ (...) Many such there be so old (...) have
spent so many years in (...) of the world, and in the work^^ (...) that though
they have much (...) warm them, many sermons, ^^ny ^^monitions and
instructions, yet they get no heat, no love does burn within them, their
souls remaining like an empty chimney wherein is no fire; empty they are of
all the fruits of righteousness, as a withered branch is empty of grapes; Such
men have nothing of Christ in them, as the empty cisterne h^th nothing in it of
the fountain; Such men can do nothing to the resisting of Satan, no more than
an empty hand to the withstanding of the enemy in the battle. The unclean
Spirit finding the house empty, Matthew. 12.44, 45.
entered in with seven others worse then himself: Such are unprofitable to
others in their spiritual distresses, like the pits which were empty when the
children of the Nobles came unto them in their thirst: Jer. 14.3.
as an empty lantern that gives no light to him that travels in the dark,
like the fig tree which bare no fruit when Christ came to it in his hunger:
Such men know not how to comfort themselves, how to sustain and stay themselves
in their own distress; they have nothing of God and Christ at home within
themselves, in their own hearts: but as Hagars bottle was empty, had no water
in it, Genesis 21.
neither knew she which way to look for water to refresh her, but sat down
and wept; so are their souls empty, and when trouble comes upon them, they
know not which way to look for comfort; they have no anchor to stay them in the
storm, but are (as the Psalmist says of the Mariners in the tempest) even at
their wits end: Psalm. 107.27.
Such men are a dishonor to the Gospel, a shame to the Christian profession,
as an empty Scholar that has no learning in him, is a disgrace to the School,
or a barren Tree a discredit to the Orchard: To such men it may be spoken, as
once Archidamus spoke unto his son, rashly conflicting with the Athenians,
wanting strength to make his part good against them, Aut vi^^bus a^^e, aut
anim^^s adi^^^.
Either add to thy strength, or take from thy boldness: so must these men
either add to their show more power of godliness in their conversation, or
cease from their profession. For as in war audaciousnesse without strength is
dangerous, so in religion profession without practice is scandalous: and what
is the end of such empty and barren Christians, but as the tree that had leaves
without fruit was cursed, Matthew. 21.19. Joh. 15.
and the withered branches cast into the fire and burned: so the curse and
everlasting burning will be these men's last portion.

2 This likewise shows how far they are from Christ, who in stead of
spiritual and heavenly fullness, have a fullness of sin and uncleanness within
them; some being full of worldly mindedness, of distracting cares and
cogitations, as the sluggards field was full of thorns and briars; Pro. 24.31.
some are full of idolatry and superstition, full of error, heresy, and
corrupt opinions, as Baals house was full of Idolaters from one end to the
other; 2 King. 10.21.
some are full of fraud and deceit, Ier. 5.27. Isa. 22.2.
as a cage is full of birds; some are full of stirs, tumults, and
contentions, as the Sea is full of storms; some are full of hypocrisy, full
of many noisome and filthy lusts, as the Pharisees Sepulchers were whited
without, Matthew. 23.27.
but full of dead men's bones within; some are full of malice, wrath, and
indignation, Iam. 3.
as the serpents are full of deadly poison; some are full of cursing, swearing,
evil speaking, as the woman on the scarlet colored beast was full of the
names of blasphemy, and the golden cup in her hand full of abominations and
filthiness: Rev. 17.3.4.
and what attends this fullness of impiety and profaneness, but fullness of
shame, fullness of woes, fullness of everlasting tortures? Fullness of
vengeance ever waits upon fullness of ungodliness.

CHAP. XVIII. Evidencing the fullness of the Saints by four Characters or
marks, with four motives to labor for fullness.
THis may teach us then duly to examine

1 Fullness of resisting evil.
1 By the fullness of man's resisting and withstanding every temptation, every
opposition, every contradiction of the Devil, the World, and the Flesh, As a
Castle full of armor, full of men, full of fortification, full of all
provision, abides all assaults; a tree full of roots abides and holds out
against all the gusts and blasts of winds. The Arc being pitched within and
without, full of strength, endured all the tossings of the Deluge. The man in
whom this fullness is, in the midst of all oppositions, as Chrysostom said of
Peter, is as a man made all of fire walking in stubble, he overcomes and
consumes all opposition; all difficulties are but whetstones to his fortitude,
all Satan's temptations are but firebrands cast into the water, all the
gainsayings of the world are to him but as the barking of dogs to a traveller,
all the proffers of the world are base and contemptible; the very reproach of
Christ is in his eye greater riches then all the treasure of Egypt: Heb. 11.
the horse neighes at the trumpet, the Leviathan laughs at the spear, the man
that is filled with Christ accounts it all joy to fall into manifold
temptations; Jam. 1.2.
he is ready to go through fire and water, he carries his life in his hand,
he says to father and mother. I know you not; to carnal counselors and
friendly enemies, Get you behind me Satan.

2 By the fullness of answerablenesse to the whole law 2 Fullness of
answerablenesse to the whole law.
and will of God: where is fullness of grace, the whole man is put into a holy
frame, and there is a readiness to obey every precept, as the Centurions
soldiers were ready to every command, to go, and come, to do this, and to do
that; Mat. 8.8.
a readiness to believe every promise, as there is a readiness in the hand to
receive every gift; a readiness to embrace every wholesome admonition, as
there is a readiness in the eye to receive light from every star, a
readiness in the ground to receive rain from every cloud, a readiness with
diligence to follow every good work, 2 Timothy 2.21.
as there is a readiness in the hand of a good Scholar to write after every
letter in the copy.

3 By the fullness of liberty and freedom from the rule and power of every
sin: 3 Fullness of liberty from the rule of sin.
as Josuah put all the Canaanites under, so does fullness of grace put down
every lust, it suffers no sin to reign: as Asa deposed his own mother, 2 Chr.
15.
so does this the mother sin of the soul, the sin that is most dear: If the
eye offend, it plucks it out; Mat. 5.
if the hand offend, it cuts it off: it does not work by halfes as Saul did,
but destroys all as Samuel did: 1. Sam. 15
it restores the whole man to liberty; the understanding to know, as Christ
restored the blind man to sight; the will to embrace Christ, as the man whose
hand was withered, had it made whole to receive any gift; the imagination and
affections to mind and meditate upon, to love and delight in the things which
are above, as Christ healed the woman that had a Spirit or infirmity, making
her able to walk upright: it makes the whole man free to move and come to
Christ, as the Rivers move toward the Sea. This the Psalmist terms an
enlarging of the heart to run the way of Gods commandments: and where the
Spirit of the Lord is, Psa 119.32. 2. Cor. 3.17.
there is liberty, says the Apostle.

4 By the fullness of man's application of himself to Christ. 4. Fullness of
man's application of himself to Christ.
The more fully man receives of Christ, the more fully he does apply himself
to Christ; the more the River receives from the Sea, the more strongly,
speedily, and fully it returns again and empties it self into the Sea. Man's
motion to Christ is according to his gracious receivings from Christ; where
there is fulness of grace, Christ is apprehended as a King for his authority, as
a most precious Pearl for his worth, as a Ransomer for his purchase, which he
has made of us, as a Bridegroom for his love to us, and conjunction with us:
and as the wife which receives the husband gives her self again unto the
husband, thus the soul which receives Christ does give it self again to
Christ. Saint Paul says of the Macedonians, 2 Cor. 8.5.
they gave themselves unto the Lord as to their Counselour to direct them, as
to their Shepherd to feed them, as to their King to honor him, as to their
Lord and Master to serve him, as to their Husband to love him, to rejoice and
delight in him, and bring forth fruit unto him: and this is styled a yielding
up of our selves to God, and, a living unto God; To. 12.1 2. Cor. 5.15.
man's subjection unto God and Christ being ever suitable to the power and
dominion of grace within him.

This should persuade and move all men to labor for spiritual and heavenly
fullness, to abound, as the Corinthians did, Persuasion to this fullness.
in every gift; to abound in knowledge, as good scholars in learning, as the
stars in light: 2 Cor. 8 7 2 Pet. 3.18
to grow in knowledge; In the knowledge of our selves, and be abased: In the
knowledge of the Law of God, and be reformed by it, and conformed to it: In
the knowledge of the majesty, purity, and perfection of God, and be humbled
in the apprehension of it: In the knowledge of the authority and dominion of
God, and fear to offend him: In the knowledge of the power of God, and hide
our selves under him: In the knowledge of the promises of God, and build upon
them: In the knowledge of the bounty of God, and be thankful: In the
knowledge of the love of God, and be cheerful: In the knowledge of the
gracious working of God, and ascend to more spiritual perfection: In the
knowledge of the death of Christ, attaining to a greater measure of
mortification: In the knowledge of the resurrection of Christ, being more and
more quickened by him: In the knowledge of the fullness of Christ, drawing
nearer to him, receiving more and more from him, more and more solacing,
quieting and contenting our souls in and with him. Let us labor for fullness
of Faith, as the tree increases in the fullness of his roots, Col. 2.7.
being rooted and built up in Christ, and stablished in the faith, abounding
therein with thankesgiving. Let us strive to be full of love, as a fire of
much wood is full of heat; and as the bride is full of love, even sick of love
toward the bridegroom: to be full of joy with the light of Gods countenance,
as the favorite is full of joy with the Kings countenance, the light of the
Kings countenance being unto him as life, and his favor as a cloud of the
latter rain. O let us endeavor to be full of the holy Ghost, full of the
fruits of the Spirit, as a good orchard is full of all sorts of fruit. And the
better to provoke our souls to this, let us meditate:

Upon the fullness of that power which does oppose the welfare of our souls:
Four meditations moving to this fulness 1. Fullness of opposing power
There is a fullness of sin, a fullness of Satan, a fullness of worldly
vanities, which without a fullness of grace we can never withstand, subdue and
cast down. When the Spirit of the Lord came mightily upon Sampson, he rent the
Lion: Judge. 14.
when the Spirit of the Lord comes mightily in the fullness of his grace upon
us, then Satan the roaring Lion is put to flight, then his works are
dissolved, then the strong holds of sin are cast down, and the soul
prevails: Therefore the Apostle charge us to be strong in the Lord, and in
the power of h^s might, to put on the whole armor of God, that we may be
able to stand against the wiles of the Devil.

2. Sweet agre^ment be^ween Heart and Word
Upon the sweet agreement which will arise from this fullness between our
he^rts and the word of God: This will make the commandment an easy yoke, a
plain path: this will make the Word sweet and pleasant, as the light unto a
clear eye, wine unto a thirsty palate, or meat to a healthy and hungry
stomach, or the voice of the bridegroom to the bride, when her heart is full
of love toward him.

3. Satisfaction which it ministers I^h. 4.14. Ioh. 7. Mat. 13.44.
Upon the satisfaction and contentment which this fullness of grace will
minister to the soul: It will be as a living spring, as floods of water
within us, quenching our thirst, and taking off all our longings from the
world: it will be to us as the pearl to the Merchant in the Parable, in stead
of all worldly treasure, it will content us in every estate, be in stead of
all to our souls.

Upon the joy arising hence: 4. ^oy ari^i^g (...) it.
Fullness of grace brings fullness of joy, strong joy dispelling all sorrow and
sadness, as the Sun does the clouds; full joy making the understanding
joyful in the knowledge of God, making the will joyful in the choice and
embracement of God, in the sinners free and full intendment of God, and the
glory of God; making the imagination joy^ull in the meditation and thought of
God, making the memory joyful in the remembrance of God and his word, and
works; making all the affections joyful in the trusting, fearing, and loving
of God; making all the members of the body joyful in the performance of their
several offices and services to Godward. This fills with all joy and peace;
with the joy of children for our adoption, with the joy of brides for our
spiritual conjunction, with the joy of friends for our knowledge of Gods
secret and counsel, with the joy of rich men for our treasure and interest in
all things, with the joy of heirs for our claim and title to Gods kingdom,
with the joy of Nobles for our dignity and exaltation, with the joy of
Conquerours for our victory over all opposition, with the joy of free men for
our spiritual prerogatives and freedom, with the joy of Kings for our holy
and gracious dominion, with the inchoation of all joys in this life, and the
consummation and perfection of endless joy hereafter in heaven.

FINIS.
THE DOLEFULNES AND DANGER OF NEGLECTING CHRIST, AND THE OPPORTUNITY OF GRACE.

PROVE. 1.29, 30, 31. For that they hated knowledge, and did not choose the
fear of the Lord.

30 They would none of my counsel: they despised all my reproof.

31 Therefore shall they eat of the fruit of their own way, and be filled with
their own devices.

JER. 51.9. We would have healed Babylon, but she is not healed: forsake her,
and let us go every one into his own country: for her judgment reaches unto
heaven, and is lifted up even unto the skies.

LONDON, Printed by R. Young for John Bartlet at the gilt Cup near Saint
Austins gate, 1640.

THE DANGER OF NEGLECTING CHRIST, etc.
LUKE 19.41, 42. When he was come near, he beheld the City, and wept over it,

42 Saying, If thou had known, even thou, at least in this thy day, the
things which belong unto thy peace! etc.


THe more men do abound in true grace and saving goodness, the more they
grieve at other men's impieties, the more they are affected with other men's
miseries: according to the measure of their grace is their detestation of sin,
their indignation against sin, their sorrow for the dishonor brought to God by
sin, their sense and feeling of their brethrens present affliction, their
apprehension of the future calamities like to fall upon them. Good men mourn
not only for their own corruptions, but also for other men's transgressions;
they sorrow not only for their own troubles, but also for other men's miseries.
When Nehemiah heard how the walls of Jerusalem were broken down, Neh. 1 3, 4
their gates burnt with fire, the people in great afflict^on and reproach, he
sat down and wept. David, a man after Gods own heart, considering the
obstinacy and rebellion of the people, his eyes gushed out with tears. Psalm.
119.136.
And here the Lord Jesus, whose soul, whose work, whose way was as the Sun
wherein is no spot, a Garden in which is no weed, a Tree whereon was neither
superfluous, barren, nor withered branch, nor fading leaf; in whom (as it is
said of Absoloms beauty) was no blemish from the crown of the head unto the
sole of the foot, from the first instant of his conception, to the last moment
of his passion; in whom was a singular, sweet, full, perfect confluence and
concourse of all graces, as of lines in one Center, beams in one Sun, rivers in
one Ocean, This glorious and matchless pattern of all perfection, considering
and beholding the present rebellion, the ensuing desolation of Jerusalem, his
bowels yearned within him, tears came from him, commiseration on the one side,
and indignation on the other side wrought wonderfully with him: for, When he
was come near, he beheld the City, and wept over it,

Saying, If thou had known, even thou, at least in this thy day, the things
which belong unto thy peace! but now they are hid from thine eyes.



The words are a narration of our Saviors affection toward the people of
Jerusalem, wherein we have 1 Our Saviors Commiseration, v. 41. 2 His
Exprobration of them, ver. 42.


In his Commiseration we have the occasion, preparation, or impulsive causes of
it. 1 His appropinquation, He came near: Christ as God is every where, not
Locomotivus, but is free from all motion, mutation: but he comes near by his
creatures, as an Almighty Maker by his works, presenting his Deity and almighty
power; he comes near by his Ministers, as a King by his Ambassadors,
proposing his dominion over us, offering conditions of peace unto us; he
comes near by assuming our flesh, as a Mediator, a Brother, declaring his
mercy and loving kindness; he comes near by his Ordinances, as a King by
enacting laws to his Subjects, as a Nurse drawing forth the breasts to her
children, as a Friend revealing himself to his intimate acquaintance, as a
Lover wooing, a Bridegroom betrothing himself unto us: but here he came near
by his bodily presence, and coming near, his bowels yearned. We are usually
most affected with the miseries of our brethren, when we are present with them.

After his appropinquation, as a second occasion, ensued his inspection, he
beheld: He beholds all things, as God, with the eye of his counfell, in
regard of purpose and preordination; he sees first, ad intra, and accordingly
he works ad extra; he neither begges nor borrowes knowledge from the
creature: He beholds all things with the eye of his general providence, in
regard of gubernation, limitation: He beholds his children with the eye of
special care and tender affection, powerful and gracious disposition of all
to work for the best unto them: He beholds all things with the eye of his
wisdom: all the deep things of God, in regard of revelation; all the deep
things of men, in regard of detection. Here he beheld with the eye of his
body, as man, and wept. The serious view of other men's miseries is very
forcible to move our affections.

The last thing in this verse is the expression of his affection, he wept; as
God, ^ee was free from all passion; as Man, he took upon him our affections
and infirmities, which Divines call Miserabiles, as sorrow, hunger, thirst; but
not those which are Detestabiles, as sin, sickness, etc. Christ, as Man, had
a sympathy of their miserable condition; as the holy One of God, he was much
troubled to see their rebellion; as Mediator, he was grieved to see his labor
to bring them to salvation frustrated, and therefore he wept, and did not
only weep, but upbraid them with their ignorance and ingratitude, speaking,
out of the ardencie of his affection, in a patheticall manner to them, If thou
had known; thou that art the head City of Judah, the habitation of God in
respect of his Temple, a holy City in respect of thy profession, the lamp and
light of the Church in respect of the residence of the Priests and Prophets in
that place, and yet she knew not the things belonging to her peace. Much
common knowledge is often attended with damnable and damning ignorance: they
had been often punished, wasted, embondaged, again restored; Christ came,
preached, proffered salvation, but they knew not Christ as the Son of God,
Isa. 53.2.
as the Prince of peace, to reverence him, but despised him as one that had no
form nor comeliness: they knew him not as the Way, Ioh. 14.6.
the Truth, the Life, by a lively faith to lay hold upon him, as the Prophet
from whom they were to receive instruction; as their husband, in regard of love
and affection; as their Lord and Master, in regard of subjection: And because
they did not so know, acknowledge, receive him, the things belonging to their
peace were hidden from them. Many things might here be noted, but their
unprofitablenesse, ingratitude, rebellion, under so great means afforded them,
being that for which our Savior Christ did chiefly lament and weep over them,
and for which especially he did upbraid them, you may see, that

The estate of that person or people is very doleful, which continues barren
and unprofitable under the plentiful and powerful means of salvation:
whether it be a public nation, a private congregation, or particular person
which thrives not under the means of life, their estate is much to be
bewailed: This is manifest by our Saviors commination, Math. 11.20, 21.
Woe be unto thee Chorazin, woe be unto thee Bethsaida; if the mighty works
which have been done in thee, had been done in Tire and Sydon, they would have
repented long ago in sackcloth and ashes: therefore it shall be easier for
Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of judgment, then for thee. Where God has most
abounded in his goodness, he will be most severe in his punishments, if the
people remain unfruitful: abused mercy is the forerunner of the greatest
misery; the impure conversation of the people, the heavy judgments, ready to
surprise them for their barrenness, disobedience, and prosligate kind of life
under the plentiful means of grace ministered to them, caused the Prophet to
wish, Ier. 9.1.
that his head were tears, and his eyes a fountain, to weep day and night for
the daughter of his people. And for this another Prophet cries out, Woe is me,
Mic. 7.1, 2
for I am as when they have gathered Summer fruit, as the grape gleanings of
the vintage, there is no cluster to eat. The good man is perished out of the
earth, there is none upright among men, etc. And thus the Lord expressed, as in
a type, by a girdle bought, Ier. 23.1.
girt about the Prophets loins, and afterward rotten by the river Euphrates,
and so cast away as good for naught, that Israel might see how God had brought
them out of Egypt, exalted them above all nations, joined them near unto
himself, as a girdle about his loins; but in the multitude of their
prerogatives and privileges, they corrupted themselves, grew obstinate, and
were rejected of the Lord, and the estate of such people is very doleful.

Frustration: they having frustrated the labors of Gods faithful Ministers,
all the work of their Ministry, in regard of any saving good to their souls,
has been as the pouring of water upon the rock, the sowing of seed upon the
sand, the lighting of a candle to the blind. As David said of his labor and
care about Nabal, 1 Samuel 25.21.
In vain have I kept all that this fellow has in the wilderness: So may the
Lord say, In vain have I set my Ministers, as watchmen, upon their walls; in
vain have they, like husbandmen planted, manured, watered the souls of the
people, and there is no fruit. Thus the flower of the Prophets, in the person
of Christ Jesus, complained of old, Is^. 49.4.
I have labored in vain, I have spent my strength for naught.

Secondly, in regard of Inexcusablenesse: Abimilech did in another case to
Saul, 1 Samuel 22.15.
Thy servant knew nothing of all this, less or more. The presence of the
means of grace amongst them, is a great aggravation of their corruption; their
sin without the means, is not simply, but comparatively no sin. Ioh. 15.22 2
Cor. 3.10.
As the glory of the Law, though very glorious, had no glory, as the Apostle
speaks, in this respect, by reason of the glory of the Gospel which
excels; so that which was sin before, though very great sin, yet was no
sin, in comparison of their sin, now joining malice and wilful obstinacy
to their ignorance.

Perversion: They are by accident made the worse by the means of life. As some
diseased eyes are made the more blind through the brightness of the light,
some stomachs are made more sick by good physic: So accidentally, through
the great strength and power of their corruption, the Word is made the savor
of death to death to some. Plutarch relates of the Tigers, Si quis tympanis
circumsonet, in rabiem aguntur, adeo ut seipsas denique discerpant: And thus
many people of a savage disposition, are disquieted, perplexed, enraged, to
hear the sweet and heavenly music which the Word makes.

Desertion: The Lord will leave such a people, as a Physician does the Sick,
Ier. 51.9. Isa. 5.3, 4.
which are incurable; the Husbandman the Field, which after much cost, pain,
care, labor, remains still barren; the Lord will leave such to Satan to
blind and harden them, to deceivers to seduce, to the allurements of the world
to ensnare them, to their own lusts to rule over them, to hell at last to
swallow them.

Fifthly, in regard of Condemnation: Capernaum that was exalted to heaven
temporally, Mat. 11.25.
excelling all the cities of Galilee in greatness, nobleness, worldly
fullness; exalted to heaven spiritually, in regard of Christ's bodily presence,
preaching, miracles which he wrought there, for her ingratitude, obstinacy,
plenitude of all profaneness, is brought down to hell in regard of temporal
devastation, and everlasting destruction.

This, by way of humiliation, 1 Samuel 1.10.
Hanna was much grieved, in great b tternesse of soul, considering the
barrenness of her womb and she prayed and wept sore: let us in like manner,
consider and be thoughly affected with the barrenness of the Kingdom wherein
we are subjects, of the Congregation whereof we are members, of the Families
in which we are fathers, mothers, husbands, wives, sons, daughters,
servants, soiourners, every man the barrenness of his own heart, way, life;
let us be in bitterness of soul, and pray, and weep as sore for this
barrenness of soul, as ever Hanna did for the barrenness of her body. The
Lord has done great things for us, as for Jerusalem, he has separated us to
himself, set us up his tabernacle among us, been a wall of fire round about
us, caused the clouds of heavenly doctrine to pour down their sweet and
comfortable dew upon us; he has given us Pastors according to his own heart,
Jer 3 15.
to feed us with knowledge and understanding, and yet we are unfruitful. As
the men of the City of Jericho said of that, 2 Kin. 2.19.
The situation of the City is pleasant, but the water is naught, and the
ground barren: so may we truly say of our selves, the Lord has seated us in a
pleasant place, in a fruitful land, in a Paradise of all temporal and
spiritual plenty; yea the waters, the ordinances of God, the means of life
are also good, sweet, savoury, completely fitted to minister comfort to the s
ules of the people, but our hearts are for the most p^rt naught, and our lives
are barren of the good fruit should grow upon them. We are 1. Such fallow
gr^und, such strangers to a contrite and broken spirit, that the Word is to
many of us like seed sown on ground not broken: 2. Our hearts are so grown
over thorns and briars of worldly cares, that the seed of the Word is choked
in the greatest number of us: 3. Our souls the weeds, and drowned in the waters
of sensual pleasures, carnal lusts, and vain delights, that the means of
life are not to a few, as seed sown in watery ground, where it prospers not: 4.
Many of us do so please our formal profession, that we are but as women
traveling with a false birth: we do so flatter our selves with the naked
having of Gods Ordinances, with the glorious name of Christians, that we regard
not the nature, life, power, fruit of godliness, but remain universally
barren; our understandings like a lamp without oil, our memories like a piece
of paper wherein nothing is written, our hearts like an Altar on which no fire
burns, our faith like Jeroboams withered arm, our affections like the lame
man's feet who could not walk, the whole man like a garden wherein every tree
is barren, a house whereof every room is empty; the greatest part of us, like
foolish Soldiers, that think it enough to draw forth and flourish their
weapons, never wounding their enemies therewith, suppose we have done as much
as is required, when we attend upon the Ordinance of God, though we never make
any particular and effectual application thereof. Aristotle was wont to tax
the Athenians, Lae^t. li. 5. cap. 1.
quod cum duas res invenissent, frumenta ac leges, frumentis uterentur, legibus
nequaquam: And for this may we be no less justly reproved, that God, having
given us the fruits of the earth, and the law of life and salvation, we use the
former, but neglect the latter. Is it not wonderful to see how industrious the
Husbandman is to improve his ground, of a barren to make a fruitful land? how
the Merchant sets his wits on work to improve his trade? how the married
persons do long to see their children stand like Olive branches round about
their Table? how every person, yea every creature, in his way, after his kind,
does strive to be fruitful? and shall the Christian, the most excellent piece
of the workmanship of God, be contented to remain barren and unprofitable? Do
you not hear how the Husbandman complains, like the men of Jericho, if the
field be barren? how the Merchant droopes and hangs down the head, if his ship
miscarry, his trade fail, and poverty come upon him? Do you not hear how the
Husband, like Isaac, prays for the fruitfulness of the Wife when there is no
conception? how the barren wife cries with an impatient spirit, Give me
children or I die? Genesis 30.1, 2.
And shall not we complain, bow down, and humble our selves for our
barrenness in grace? shall not we study, strive, labor, pray, and cry unto
the Lord our God to open our hearts that are shut up, to enlarge our souls, to
fill us with all goodness? And to induce us hereunto, the consideration of the
concomitants, and fruits of this spiritual barrenness, are of very great
force. For,

1 Barrenness reproacheth: it was a reproach to a mother in Israel to be
barren. 1 Sa. 1.6.
Barrenness disgraceth fields, trees, cattle, reasonable and unreasonable
creatures; and barrenness of grace in like manner disgraceth us in the eyes of
God, in the eyes of Gods children, gives occasion of insultation to the
adversaries of religion, as the bodily barrenness of Hanna gave Peninna
occasion to insult over her: this causes our profession to be traduced, and
the name of God to be blasphemed. To. 2.24.


2 Barrenness is unprofitable: a barren tree ministers no profit, it does but
cumber the ground: Luke 13.8.
barren Christians are unserviceable to God, pester and cumber the Church
wherein they live.

3 Barrenness grieveth the barren wife grieveth the husband, the barren tree
grieveth the keeper of the Orchard, a barren people grieve the faithful and
painful Minister whom the Lord has set as a Shepherd over them: this pained
Paul as a woman in travel, Gal. 4.19. Jer. 20.14.
occasioned Jeremy, through the anguish and trouble of his spirit, to curse the
day of his birth, and wrought so forcibly with Eliah, 1 Kin. 19.4.
that he grew weary of his life, and wished for death rather then life.

4 Barrenness spoileth the soul of much sweet and heavenly peace, boldness,
comfort, and confidence. Does the Master smile or else frown upon the
unprofitable servant? can such a servant come before his Master with
confidence, with assurance of acceptance? does he not hang down the head? is
he not ashamed? is not his confidence removed far from him? When Adam was
naked he ran from the presence of the Lord: Genesis 3.
when the souls of men within are naked of grace, and the lives of men without
are naked of good works, they have no courage, no comfort, no boldness to
present themselves before the Lord.

5 Barrenness provokes: the barren field angreth the Husbandman, the barren
tree mentioned in the Gospel displeased our Savior when he sought fruit and
found none on it. Christ hungered, Mat. 21.18, 19.
desired much to taste of the sweet grapes of faith, repentance, love,
thankfulness, which should have been brought forth by the Jews, a Vine of
his Fathers own planting, once a Vine of many goodly branches, the Patriarchs,
Moses, the Prophets; a Vine laden with many sweet grapes, but now there was
nothing but leaves on it; a glorious profession, a formal performance of
religious duties, much vaunting and boasting that they were the children of
Abraham; but they were barren, they did not the works of Abraham; they had
neither the faith, nor trod the steps of Abraham: And therefore our Savior
cursed the figtree, 1. In testimonium, to show his Deity, his absolute
authority and dominion over all creatures: 2. In declarationem, to show his
anger against the Jewish people: 3. In typum, thereby to show what the end of
that people should be.

6 Barrenness ruinateth: the barren tree is hewed down, the barren ground is
burned, Heb. 6.8.
a barren people the Lord will forsake, remove, and cast out of his sight: this
is fully expressed by our Savior in the Parable of the Householder, Mat. 21.34.
in which the Householder is God, the Vineyard is, generally, the Church;
particularly, the people of the Jews: the hedges are the Mosaicall laws,
likened to a hedge for distinction, for preservation: the people of the Jews
being by them distinguished from other people, and preserved from wasting as a
field by a hedge: the Winepresse was their ministry of the Word, likened to a
Wine Press in regard of preparation fitting them to offer unto God the
pleasant wine of found obedience, and holy and fervent prayers: the Watch tower
was the Kingdom, Priesthood, Temple, likened to a Tower for the ornament,
honor, glory, which it ministered: the husbandmen to whom he let it out were
the Priests and Levites, likened to husbandmen for their labor in, and
watchfulness over the Lords Vineyard; and the Lord is likened to one going into
a far Country, not for the mutation of his presence, but by cessation of
miracles, immediate manifestation of himself among them, leaving his Vineyard
to their charge: the servants sent were the Prophets, whom they beat,
imprisoned, killed, stoned; at last he sent his own Son whom they crucified:
and for their ingratitude and barrenness, the Vineyard has been long let out
to others: This did our Savior threaten; Mat. 23.37, 38.
How often would I have gathered you together, and ye would not! Behold, your
house is left unto you desolate: and for this likewise he threatened the
removing of the Candlestick from the Church of Ephesus: Rev. 2.5.
and for this we have great cause to humble our selves.

But what need (may some say) have we to humble our selves? we have Gods
Ordinances, we have plenty of learned, zealous, godly Preachers; we have
multitudes of Professors, the firmament of our Church is garnished with bright
and shining stars, our garden is decked with many sweet and beautiful
flowers, our orchard is set with variety of pleasant and fruitful trees, our
land enriched with great abundance of all things, much cause of rejoicing, but
what cause of humiliation?

Beloved, Israel had the Arc, rejoiced much in the presence of it, yet fell
before the enemy; 1 Sa. 4.5.
they had the Temple of the Lord, they gloried not a little thereof, yet were
destroyed. Jer. 7.4.


We have many learned, painful, able Ministers, blessed be the great
Shepherd of our souls that sends them, and the Lord daily increase the number
of them; we may say indeed with the Psalmist, The Lord has not dealt so with
every nation: Psalm. 147.20.
Yet this was a prerogative to which Jerusalem was no stranger, all the
Prophets were set as watchmen upon her walls; Isa. 62.6.
the Baptist also (who excelled all the Prophets) the Son of God himself,
and all the Apostles were sent to them: yet after all this, and even then was
Jerusalem destroyed. The more laborers in the vineyard, the nigher is it unto
burning, if it continue unfruitful.

We have plenty of all things, so had Jerusalem a land flowing with milk and
honey. Isa. 47.7.
Babylon sat as a Queen and no widow; and many who open (as says the
Psalmist) their mouths against heaven, Psalm. 73.5.
have more then heart could wish, and yet have been set in slippery places: the
more we have received, the more such ought to be humbled as make not the best
use of it. It is not the presence, but the good use we make of our temporal
fullness, which proves us to be Gods servants.

We have many Professors, men forward in attending Gods ordinances, in the
performance of holy duties: So there were also in the days of our Savior, but
they undertook their profession upon false grounds, for outward things, Ioh
6.26. Ioh. 2.22.
and therefore our Savior would not commit himself unto them. There were many
beasts in the Arc, but not all clean: Four sorts of ground received seed, but
only one good. Profession without practice is odious in Gods presence; such of
all people, are in Gods eye most hateful, to Gods name most dishonuorable, to
Gods religion most scandalous, Tit. 1.16.
as profess that they know God, but in works deny him, being abominable, and
disobedient, and unto every good work reprobate. As we look on what we
have, and are comforted; so let us look on what we want, and be humbled: and
thus consider,

First, how many ignorant, idle, covetous, corrupt, unprofitable, carnal, and
careless Ministers we have, who either do not Gods work at all, or at least
are very careless in the performance of it; leaving their congregations as
candlestickes without a candle, children without a nurse, families without a
stewart, ships without a pilot. Some Foxes there are among the Shepherds, some
Drones among the Bees: thus of old, Some were covetous, looking for their gain
from every quarter; some dawbed with untempered mortar some cried, Isa. 56.11.
Ezekiel. 13.10. Ier. 23.14.
Peace, when there was no peace, some strengthened the hands of the wicked.
Thus of old, and thus now; and thus we have cause of humiliation.

Secondly, how are the painful and 1 Kin. 22.8. 2 Chro. 32.16. Jer. 15, 10.
Are they not for the most part hated, mocked, made as men of contention to the
whole earth? Do not the men of the world handle them as Hanuns servants did
David's men when they shaved off their beards unto the half, 2 Samuel 10.4.
and cut off their garments to the buttockes; loading them with reproaches,
depriving them of their maintenance, filling them with manifold discomforts,
esteeming powerful and plain preaching, with the men of Athens, no better
then babbling. Acts 17.18.


Thirdly, what do we for the most part profit by the labors of Gods
Ministers? Micha the Idolater, that pronounced himself blessed, Jud. 17.13
because he had a Levite to his Priest, though he still kept his Idol? And
thus a great number bless themselves in the naked having of the ministry of
the Word, though they still retain their Idol, their covetousness,
drunkenness, pride, malice; like the women of whom the Apostle speaks, that
were always learning, 2 Timothy 3.7
and never came to the knowledge of the truth. Story relates of Augustus, how
in his solemn feasts he gave gifts, giving to some gold, to others trifles:
So God in his banqueting house, in the use of his ordinances, with which he
feasts and feeds the souls of his servants, gives to some gold, the saving
graces of his Spirit, which are more precious then gold; to others he gives
trifles, common knowledge, historical faith, etc. and with this they rest
content.

Midianitish Army to Gideons three hundred soldiers, as the tares
over-topping the wheat; the people that truly fear God, are to the rest but as
Lot among the Sodomites, Ier. 2.14. Mat. 7.13.
one of a City, two of a Tribe, says the Prophet. Straight is the way, and
narrow is the gate which leads unto life, and few, says Christ (few
comparatively) are they that find it; and among the great number of impenitent
transgressors, there is no one swearer, drunkard, adulterer, idolater, etc.
but his sin becomes the sin of the kingdom, congregation, place, family
where he lives, he being a member thereof; Ios. 7.12.
as the sin of Achan became the sin of the whole Army. And thus it continues
unless we humble our selves for it, seek the pardon, stop the course, and
labor the removal thereof, as the mariners removed Jonah, Jona 1.
that the stormy tempest might be appeased.

Fifthly, what entertainment find such Isa. 59.15.
Does not he that departs from iniquity make himself a prey, as the Sheep
to the Lion, the Dove to the Raven? Has not our Savior foretold us, Luke 6.22
that for this their names shall be cast out as abominable?

Sixthly, what weariness of holy duties, Amos 8.5.
How untoothsome to many persons is the doctrine of the Gospel; it is become
like the Manna to Israel, Number. 11.5.7.
a light bread, they find no relish in it: Gods Ordinances are to many, as
Saul's armor unto David, they cannot walk in them.

Naaman out of Jordan? Nay, may not the Lord say of many of us as he did of
Israel, Isa. 1.5.
They revolt more and more? What effect have the punishments inflicted on other
nations taken in us? Have we feared by the sight of their strokes? Have we
learned to beware by their harms? Are we not still secure? tread we not the
same path? run we not our wonted race? has not the Lord lost his labor in
regard of any reformation on the behalf of the greatest number of people? O
let us think on these things, lay them to our hearts, be affected with them,
Ja. 4.9, 10.
turn our laughter into mourning, humble our selves in the sight of the Lord:
Humble your selves, and mourn inwardly in your souls by grieving, as the
Church did, Lam. 1.
Lament. 1. Humble your selves outwardly, by unfeigned confession of the sins
of your own souls, and the sins of the Church, Dan. 9.
Kingdom, Congregation, Town, Family where you live: Humble your selves
publicly in the Congregation, as Ezra did; Ezra 10.1
Humble your selves privately, let your souls mourn in secret, weep as Christ
over Jerusalem: Weep, O Ministers, over your congregations; weep, O Rulers,
over your people; weep, O Masters of families, over your wives, sons,
daughters, servants, that the Lord may have mercy upon you, pardon your
barrenness, and for the time to come make you more fruitful in all goodness.

This must cause us to strive under the 2 Pet. 3.18
Grow (says the Lord by the Apostle) in grace, and in the knowledge of our
Lord Jesus Christ: Grow in knowledge, as Scholars in learning, Tradesmen in
skilfulnesse in the mysteries of their Trade; grow in all grace, as Willowes by
the water courses; Isa. 44.4.
as children by the milk sucked from their Nurses. 1 Pet. 2.2.
This is one special end of our Saviors incarnation, passion, resurrection,
to purify us to himself, Tit. 2.14
a peculiar people Zealous of good works. This is a prime and singular fruit
of the Ministry: the clouds are appointed for the watering and making of the
earth fruitful, the builders for the perfecting of the house, and the
Ministers for the making of us rich in grace, Ephesians. 4.11, 13.
and perfect to every good work. This is the fervent prayer and ardent desire
of Gods faithful Ministers. As the husbandman desires the field may be
fruitful, and the nurse that the child may grow: So does the spiritual
husbandmen of Gods vineyard, the nurses of Gods children, pray that they may
be fruitful in every good work. Col. 1.10.
This is the proper and gracious operation of the Word in the hearts of the
Lords people, Mat. 13.
and therefore, I beseech you, give all diligence to make your calling and
election sure, and to abound in all goodness; make the inward and the outward
man like the tree bearing twelve sorts of fruit every month, Rev. 22.2.
be ye furnished with all sorts of spiritual fruits, and that at all seasons.

Be fruitful in your Understandings, enriched in all knowledge; 1 Cor. 1.5
know the efficacy of the word of God discovering thy sin, Heb. 4.12.
as a two edged sword dividing between the bone and marrow; know the power of
it awakening thy conscience, Acts 2.37.
as a Trumpet awakeneth the sleepy; know the virtue of it healing the wounds of
thy soul, as a patient knows the virtue of the medicine; as Naaman knew by
experience the virtue of the river Jordan washing him; as he that is cold
knows the heat of the fire warming him: Know the Lord as a servant his master
in regard of reverence and subjection, as a friend in regard of communion, as a
father in regard of affiance and child-like affection.

Be fruitful in your Memories, by treasuring as gold, silver, precious jewels
in a rich storehouse; by carrying home the waters which are drawn out of the
Wells of salvation, as in firm and sure vessels; by engraving upon your hearts
as letters written with a pen of Iron, or the point of a Diamond, that it may
never be blotted out; by ruminating and meditating thereupon day and night,
writing them upon the tables of your h^arts, Pro. 7.2, 3, 4.
keeping them as the apple of your eye, binding them as jewels and precious
stones upon your fingers, in regard of your affection to them, high estimation,
careful preservation, continual remembrance of them, singular delight in
them; let them be to you as sisters and kinswomen for your daily commemoration
of them, familiar communion and acquaintance with them.

waters which flowed out under the Temple, Ezekiel. 47.5. 1 King. 18 44, 45.
as the Cloud which was first no bigger then a man's hand, and at length so
great that it covered the whole heavens; let it grow to a great love, to a
flaming and a burning fire, a fire so strong that no floods be able to quench
it; to a love like Jonathans love to David, a love surpassing the love of women
to their children. O love the Lord all ye his Saints, Ps. 35.23.
says the Psalmist; love him with a child's love, a friends love, a wifes love:
love him with all manner of love; love him purely in regard of the spring
whence your love arises, love him sincerely for the quality, love him
fervently for the measure, love him continually, constantly, for the time, love
him universally for the extent; love him in his Attributes as a God of power
supporting, a God of wisdom guiding, a God of mercy forgiving; love him in
his Creatures as an Almighty Maker, love him in his Word as a King prescribing
laws of obedience, as a friend revealing his counsels, declaring the riches of
his mercies; love him in Christ Jesus as a Father, love him in his children as
the fountain of all grace and sanctification.

Be fruitful in all your sufferings: As Nymphaeus, which, if we give credit
to Pliny, imbribus fit ardentior: let all your sufferings be as Schoolemasters
teaching, fires purging, trumpets awakening, spurs quickening, Zac. 10.9.
winds driving nearer to God; come forth of the furnace of affliction, as gold
out of the fire; be able to say, out of experience, to Satan tempting, to the
world hating, Genesis 50.20.
traducing, persecuting, as Joseph said to his brethren, Ye thought evil
against me, but God meant it unto good, as it is this day.

Be fruitful in your Callings: Ministers every man in his particular Calling:
As every member in the body, the head, eyes, hands, feet, are all profitable in
their places; so should each of us be fruitful in the station wherein the Lord
has set us. Every wheel in the clock has his motion, does his part; every
star in the firmament sends forth his influence, gives his light: so must
every person in that political or ecclesiastical orb where God has set him,
abide and be fruitful. 1 Cor. 7.24.


6 Be fruitful in all your Actions: in Heb. 10.24.
but like Noah's Dove with an olive branch of some comfort; in your meetings,
Consider one another, provoke one another to good works; in your speeches, let
your tongue be as choice silver, Pro. 10.20, 21.
and fruitful pasture, for the purity, sincerity, profitablenesse, and
enrichment of others, feeding, filling the hungry, rejoicing the sorrowful,
strengthening the weak, by your gracious communication as by a spiritual
banquet; in your families, let every man and wife, Luke 1.6.
like Zachary and Elizabeth, walk in all the ordinances of God, and be
blameles; every master, like Abraham, Genesis 18.19.
command his people to keep the way of the Lord; every servant, like Joseph in
Potiphars house, so religious toward God, so observant of his master, so
faithful in his Calling, that all his undertakings may be prosperous; every
son and daughter so attentive to the parents instruction, so full of grace and
godliness, that they may make glad the hearts of their parents, be an ornament
to their families, as the flowers to the garden; every subject so loyal,
faithful, and obsequious to his Sovereign, that he prove both an honor and
strength to the Kingdom; every household, like Philemons house, Philem. verse. 2.
a Church of God, in regard of holy instructions there delivered, religious
duties there observed; in regard of the lively faith and holy life of such as
live in it: thus let us endeavor to be fruitful, thus let us grow in grace.
Hearken, beloved, how Saint Paul persuades you, We beseech you, brethren, 1
These. 4.1.
and exhort you by the Lord Jesus, that as ye have received of us how ye ought
to walk and to please God, so ye would abound more and more: Consider, dear
Christians, how Saint Peter presses it, 2 Pet. 1.5, 6, 7.
Giving all diligence, add to your faith virtue, and to virtue knowledge, to
knowledge temperance, and to temperance patience, and to patience godliness.
And to the end you may be fruitful under the means, you must be,

put iniquity far away from you, Job 11.13. by desertion, detestation,
declination of every occasion leading thereunto. Genesis 43.24.
Joseph's brethren washed their feet, made ready their present when they were to
come before him, and bowed themselves unto the earth, and then Joseph made them
eat and drink, and they were merry with him: thus when we come before our
Joseph, our God, and our Christ, Isa. 1.16.
we must wash and be clean; we must make ready our ear to hear, our heart
to pray, and present our petition before the Lord, and then the Lord Jesus will
sup with us, feast and feed us, and make us merry, Rev. 3.20. Isa. 56.7.
joyful with him in his Ordinances.

that we may have time to spare for good duties. Cleanthes carried water by
night that he might not be hindered from studying the Liberal Sciences by day:
thus should we rather work by night, then be absent from the house of Christ
by day. It is a foul shame that Shops, Tavernes, Market places, nay the house
of Baal, 2 Kin. 10.20, 21.
should be full, and the house of God empty. If you purpose to be fruitful,
you must attend on the Ministers of the Lord, as Lydia did on Paul, Act. 16.14
the lame man at Bethesda; as Suitors and Clients wait day by day, and hour by
hour, at the gates of Princes and Counselors, to have their suits heard
causes favored, petitions granted: thus must we wait daily upon the posts of
the Lords house, and then we shall be blessed. Pro. 8.34.


3 Holy, fervent, and frequent prayer: Hanna was in bitterness of spirit,
prayed, 1 Samuel 1.10.
and her barren womb was opened and made fruitful: thus fervent prayer is an
instrument of great (...) antemnae quo altius malo affiguntur, eo velocius
navim impellunt; and they render the reason, quia virtus movens, quo est
remotior a centro, eo velocior and validior: so in this case the more the mind,
thoughts, and affections of a Christian are raised up, the more strong, speedy,
and cheerful he is in his spiritual motion, the more fruitful in every
religious and holy undertaking: therefore, according to that of the Apostle,
Col. 3.1, 2.
If you be risen with Christ, seek those things which are above, where Christ
sits at the right hand of God; set your affections on things above, and not
on things on the earth.

Thus of what we are to gather from the first branch of this text, our Saviors
Commiseration; next follows his Exprobration of them: wherein we may behold,
1. The reason why our Savior did upbraid them; their ignorance, they knew not:
They had Cognitionem Historicam, but not Mysticam; they had Cognitionem
speculativam, but not affectivam; they had Cognitionem apprehensionis, but not
Approbationis; they had Cognitionem discursivam, but not Experimentalem. Thus
they knew not Christ: in regard of affection, he was as a stranger whom they
loved not; in regard of affiance, as a withered reed on whom they leaned not;
in regard of fear, as a Carpenters son, a poor man whom they reverenced
not; in regard of joy and estimation, he was to their eye as a face in which
is no beauty nor comeliness. Thus were they ignorant.

2. Here is the matter whereof they were ignorant, the things belonging to
their peace, happiness, and everlasting welfare. Peace comes of a word
signifying perfection, and it compriseth, in a large sense, the whole welfare
of soul and body. Peace, in regard of the Subject where it resideth, 1 Thessalonians.
5.3. Romans 14.17. Judge. 4.17
is either carnal or spiritual: in regard of the Object, or parties with whom
we embrace it, it is either civil between man and man, Gal. 5.22.
or Christian between Gods children, Ephesians. 2.14.
or divine and heavenly between God and the soul of man: in regard of the
Adjunct, Psa. 121.6 2 King. 20 19. Romans 12.18. Phil. 4.7.
it is either public of the Church or Commonwealth, or private between our
selves and our neighbors, or secret, between each particular person and his
own conscience. The peace here spoken of, is a spiritual and heavenly peace
between God and their souls, a peace in regard of the fountain, flowing
originally from God the Father; Phil. 4.7. Isa. 53.5.
the cause meriting, Christ's sufferings; the instrument revealing and working
it, Ephesians. 6.15.
the Gospel; the medium by and through which it is revealed, Col. 1.20.
the Son of God the Mediator; the cause efficient, Romans 14.17. Isa. 54.13.
Isa. 57.20.
the holy Spirit; the subject receiving it, the heart sanctified: They knew
that true peace consisted in having perfect communion with God, but that the
preaching of the Gospel was the instrument, and Christ the procuring cause of
it, they knew not: and for this they were upbraided.

Mat. 3.1.
taken from the season, In this thy day. Day generally signifies time,
specially a natural or artificial day: Ios. 11.9.
but usually in Scripture day is three ways taken, First, Psa. 90.9.
there is dies vitae: as the day is short, full of changes, and attended with
the night; so is the life of man of small continuance, subject to many changes,
ever waited on by death. Secondly, there is dies doctrinae: 1 Cor. 3.13.
the day is lightsome, discovers things hidden; such is the nature, and such
is the effect of the word of God. Romans 13.12.
Thirdly, there is dies gratiae: this is the day here mentioned, a time wherein
God offered mercy to them; fitly resembled to the day in regard of Revelation;
without the Gospel it is all night, all darkness: In regard of Adornation, the
Gospel, the means of grace, is the crown, honor, beauty of a place or
people, as the day is the glory of the world: In regard of Consolation, the day
is pleasant; Eccles 11.7.
It is a pleasant thing to the eye to behold the light, so are the means and
times of grace pleasant and comfortable to the souls of the people: In regard
of Distinction; the day distinguishes one thing from another, so under the
means of grace, Jer. 15.19.
the precious are separated from the vile, the chosen from the reprobate: In
regard of speedy preterition; a day is soon gone, so is the means of grace
soon removed, a night of uncomfortable darkness brought upon us, if we make
not use of the means when we have it: which is the

4th and last thing here observable, their the things belonging to their peace
were hidden from their eyes: the punishment of their former ignorance,
contempt, rebellion, barrenness, ingratitude, they were left in their
blindness. From the exclamation and amplification, our Savior upbraiding them
for their ignorance, depriving them of the means of life for their
barrenness, blindness, disobedience under it, we may learn, that

It is very dangerous and fearful for any people or person to neglect the
means and times of grace which God does offer them.

There was a Law in the days of Moses, that when they came to fight against a
City, Deuteronomy. 20.10, 11, 12, 13.
peace must be proclaimed, if they would not accept the peace proffered, and
become tributaries, then they should besiege it; and when the Lord had
delivered it into their hands, they should smite every male thereof with the
edge of the sword: In like sort, the Lord by the ministry of the word, lays
siege to our souls, proffereth conditions of peace; but if we refuse peace
when he offers it, and will not be reconciled, and will not become
tributaries to him, but deny to him the tribute of love above all creatures,
the tribute of obedience before all persons, the tribute of dependence in all
estates and conditions, the tribute of contrition, confession, for all
offenses; the tribute of humiliation at the apprehension of our present
vileness, the tribute of thankfulness for all received mercies; if we refuse
this, the Lord will besiege us with an Army of fearful plagues and
punishments, and at length miserably destroy us; he will have no pity, no
compassion upon us. Hear what the Lord has, to this purpose, spoken by
Solomon, Proverbs 1. verse. 23. Pro. 1.23.
There is Gods invitation strengthened by the consideration of past and present
corrections, and the promise of future kindness, verse. 24, 25. There is their
refusal, obstinacy, rebellion against him, their slighting of Gods counsels,
weariness under his corrections. Verse. 26, 27, 28. There is laid open the
misery of their condition, the wrath of God against them, the bitter fruits of
their rejection of that mercy which God did proffer to them: For this God
threatened to leave the people in their sin, Because I have purged thee, Ezekiel.
24.13.
and thou wast not purged (says the Lord unto Jerusalem) thou shall not be
purged from thy filthiness any more, till I have caused my fury to rest upon
thee. I the Lord have spoken it, it shall come to pass, and I will do it. I
will not go back, neither will I spare, neither will I repent, etc. To this
accords that commination of our Savior against the false Prophetess, and
soule-seducing Jezabel, Rev. 2 21.
I gave her space to repent of her fornication, and she repented not; there is
our Saviors patience, mercy, long-suffering. ve^se 22.
Behold (says Christ) I will cast her into a bed, a bed of affliction, and
them that commit adultery with her into great tribulation, except they repent
of their evil deeds. Heb. 3.16.18.
Some (says the Apostle) when they had heard, provoked, and thereupon the Lord
swear they should not enter into his rest: and the estate of such people is
very dangerous and fearful: For,

Propter incertitudinem.
If a man knock long at a door, and none open, he departs. Our Savior,
Cant. 5. knocked, by his word instructing, inviting; by his rod chastising, by
his Spirit moving, by his mercies, long-suffering alluring; he waited long, in
the dew and in the rain, enduring many sorrows, Cant. 5.2, 3.
troubles, afflictions, in himself and in his Ministers; but because his
Spouse refused the proffers of his love, he withdrew himself, he stopped his
ear, he would not hear in her distress. Secondly, it is uncertain whether
our life will continue: Iam. 4.14.
Our life is but a vapor, and we know not what shall be on the morrow, Nemo
tam divos habet faventes, crastinum ut possit sibi polliceri. Sen. qui
poenitenti veniam spospondit, peccanti diem crastinum non promisit. Greg.
Thirdly, if both means and life continue, and we for the present refuse to
make use of it, it is very uncertain whether God will give his blessing to
make the means effectual. God may leave us under his ordinances, as rocks in
the midst of rivers, Isa. 59.10.
as blind men under the Sun at noone day; he may suffer his word to prove
the savor of death unto death, 2 Cor. 2.14.
make what should have been for our welfare to be an occasion hastening our
ruin.

It is not in our power to repent, Propter impotentiam. 2 Samuel 3.32.
David in his life time complained of the sons of Zervia, that they were too
strong for him: And we may truly complain of Satan and his sons, his cursed
birth within us, (I mean our corruptions) that they be too strong for us: we
may imagine, as Sampson in another case did, that we have power to awaken, rise
up, go forth from the servitude of sin and Satan when we please; but it
will be at last with us, as with Sampson, our strength will fail us, the
Philistines will be upon us, prevail against us; Ezekiel. 36.26, 27.
we may as soon turn the stony rock into soft ground, raise the dead out of
the grave, make the brambles bear figs, as by our own power raise our selves
to a new life, Ephesians. 2.1 Mat. 7.16
turn our stony into a soft and tender heart, bring forth the sweet figs and
pleasant grapes of godly sorrow, true repentance, a lively faith, fervent love,
sincere obedience: This is a work suitable to none but Gods finger. He that
raised the dead, Ioh. 11.44 Isa. 35.5, 6 Exo. 17.6.
that turned the barren wilderness into a fruitful field, that fetched water
out of the stony rock, he alone can change the heart, make us fruitful in
the saving grace of the Spirit. 1 Cor. 3.6
Paul plants and Apollo waters, but the Lord does give the increase: It is God
that opens the heart of Lydia. Act. 16.14
When Paul preaches, and the Lord is a free agent, he communicates his grace
when and where he pleases. Ioh. 3.8.


Propter incrementum
if the means of grace be neglected, the reformation of our ways
procrastinated: A disease neglected grows incurable, an enemy let alone
becomes invincible, and sin gathers much strength by continuance; it blindes
the understanding, dulls the affection, hardens the heart, seares the
conscience, makes incapable of holy counsel, unfit for every godly
undertaking. Difficile est ab usitatis desinere, difficile est a familiaribus
abstrahi. Greg. Can the Ethiopian (says the Prophet) change his skin, Ier.
23.13
or the Leopard his spots? then may ye also do good that are accustomed to
do evil.

This serves for the sharp reproof of such as procrastinate their
repentance, I^a. 55.6.
who seek not the Lord while he may be found, but, like the sluggard, cry,
Pro. 6.10.
A little more sleep, a little more slumber, a little more folding of the
hands upon the bed of sin, till sin, Satan, hell, come like armed men upon
them, and they are found unable to resist them. Thus the old world, all the
time of Noah's preaching, and preparing the Arc, neglected their day, till the
flood came upon them; Mat. 25.1.
the foolish virgins slumbred till the bridegroom came, entered in, and shut
them out, having no oil in their lamps: Some out of the strength of their
love to sin, repose themselves, after many warnings, in her lap, as Sampson
did in Dalilahs lap, till she delivered him into the hands of the Philistines:
Some out of hope to repent hereafter, Acts 24.25. Romans 2.5. Psa. 95.10 Job 21.14
or in hope of better leisure; some out of the hardness of their hearts, some
out of their unbelief, some out of their Atheistical and base conceits of a
religious and godly life, Rev. 3.17.
some out of self-conceit, thoughts of selfe-sufficiencie and present
fullness; Luke 14.18.
some through multiplicitie of worldly business, some by the persuasions of
carnal friends, are hindered from attending the means of grace, from the
reformation of their ways; As the Levite was so long detained by his father in
law, Judge. 19.5
that he lost his Concubine by the way, she came short home: thus many of us
are so feasted by the world, so detained from day to day, that we lose our
souls by the way, we come short of heaven and eternal happiness at last. It
is mavelous to consider, how in all matters of this life we take the time,
make use of the opportunity: If the body be diseased, we go presently to the
Physician, with the woman of Shunem we saddle the horse, 2 King. 4.
and ride in all haste; if fire be kindled in the house, we instantly run
for water to quench it; if a city be besieged, like the men of Gibeon, Ios.
10.6.
we speedily send for strength to remove it; if we be robbed, we forthwith
make hue and cry, that the thief may be apprehended: Husbandmen for the earth,
Mariners for the sea, Merchants for the Mart, and every Smith strikes while the
iron is hot: And is it not a shame that we, whose souls are so dangerously
diseased, an infernal fire burning within us, an army of unclean spirits
laying siege against us, many thieves robbing us of the best among all jewels,
and yet we move not, stir not, strive not for deliverance? We have the best
seed to sow, the richest voyage to make, the chiefest merchandise to buy, and
yet we regard not our day, esteem not the time of our visitation, entertain
not the proffer which God of his free and abundant mercy does make. O beloved,
consider,

First, how just it will be with God not to hear us in our misery, if we
refuse to hear him inviting us in the multitude of his mercy: shall the
master hear the servant requesting, if the servant regard not the master
requiring? Remember the words of a dying man, of a dying King, a holy, a wise
King, a man after Gods own heart, the words of King David to his son
Solomon, 1 Chronicles. 28.9.
Thou my son Solomon, know thou the God of thy father, and serve him, with a
perfect heart, and with a willing mind: for the Lord searches all hearts, and
understands all the imaginations of the thoughts: If thou seek him, he will
be found of thee, but if thou forsake him he will cast thee off for ever.

Secondly, does not our refusal of mercy when it is offered, cut off all hope
of mercy for hereafter? Does not the rejecting of a proffered pardon turn the
Kings favor into anger against the malefactor? Did not this give Christ
occasion to withdraw his mercy from Jerusalem? O Jerusalem, Mat. 23.37, 38.
Jerusalem, thou that killest the Prophets, and stonest them that are sent unto
thee, how often would I have gathered you together, even as a Hen does gather
her Chickens under her wing, and ye would not! Behold your house is left unto
you desolate.

Thirdly, will not our continuance in sin make our repentance (if ever we do
repent) so much the more grievous, full of terror, vexation and anguish? Where
trees have grown long, and the roots are deep, the earth is very much rent
and torn before the tree is plucked up. Does not the traveller who has walked
long and far out of his way, go back with much sorrow, sadness, and grief
of heart?

Fourthly, will God be well pleased that we shall spend all the flower and
strength of our time in Satan's service, and when we are old, and can serve sin
no longer, come crowd and thrust our selves into his service?

Fifthly, do not we hereby lose much spiritual riches, blessed communion and
acquaintance with God, comfortable assurance of joy and glory in the heavens,
that comfort, peace, pleasure, rejoicing, contentment which infinitely
surpasses all the contentment in the world? O therefore let us not any longer
delay our conversion, put off our repentance, neglect the day of our
visitation, let us not be like Jerusalem, strangers to the things belonging to
our peace; but let us think upon the Lords patheticall and manifold
expostulations, asking, Pro. 1.22.
How long, ye simple ones, will ye love simplicity, and scorners delight in
their scorning, and fools hate knowledge? Interrogating also with his people,
Ezekiel. 18.30, 31.
Repent and turn your selves from all your transgressions, make you a new
heart and a new spirit; for why will ye dye, O house of Israel? Call to mind
also, and think seriously upon the Lords free and gracious invitations, Ier.
3.22.
bidding us by the Prophet, Turn, O backsliding children, and I will heal
your backslidings. Zech. 1.3.
And again, Turn ye unto me, Mat. 11.28.
and I will turn to you. And, Come to me all ye that be heavy laden, and I
will refresh you. Think on this, and Remember your Creator in the days of
your youth: Eccles. 12.1.
Remember him as a Maker to depend upon him, as a Father to love him, as a
Master to fear him, as a King to obey him, as a Friend to rejoice in him, as a
Shield to defend you, a Storehouse to minister all fullness to you. And as the
Angel charged Lot, Genesis 19.17. Escape for thy life, look not behind thee,
neither stay in all the plain, escape to the mountains lest thou be
consumed: so let me charge, exhort, entreat, persuade every person that
tenders his own everlasting peace, glory, comfort, to hasten out of the Sodom
of sin, to escape from his uncleanness, not to look back with love or
liking upon any way which God has forbidden, lest his consuming wrath seize
upon him, but shine more and more like the Sun unto the perfect day: Go
forward, like a good traveller; be filled with all goodness, as the sea with
waters, and you shall have a resting place in Sion, drink of the rivers which
shall fill your souls with the choycest pleasures, and be more glorious then
the Sun for ever in the heavens.

FINIS.
THE LORD JESUS THE SOULS LAST REFUGE.

By Alexander Gross, B. of Divinity, at the funeral of Mr. S. H.

PSALM. 73.26. My flesh and my heart fails me, but GOD is the strength of my
heart, and my portion for ever.

PSALM. 141.8. Mine eyes are unto thee, O GOD the LORD, in thee is my trust,
leave not my soul destitute.

PSALM. 142.4, 5. I looked on my right hand, and beheld, but there was no man
that would know me, refuge failed me, no man cared for my soul.

I cried unto the LORD, I said, Thou art my Refuge, and my Portion in the land
of the living.

LONDON, Printed by R. Young for John Bartlet, at the gilt Cup in Paul's
Churchyard. 1640.

THE LORD JESUS the Souls last Refuge.
REV. 22.20. Come Lord Jesus.


THE coming of the Sun is joyous to him that has been long in darkness;
the coming of the Dove with an Olive branch, was comfortable to Noah after he
had been tossed diverse days upon the deluge; the re-appearing of the Star to
the Wise men, made them exceeding joyful: And such is the coming of the Lord
Jesus to the souls of his servants, when they have sat in darkness, and have
had no light; when they have been tossed upon the deluge of many troubles, and
have had no footing for their souls, no haven wherein to repose themselves;
when they have wandered, like travelers, in this earthly wilderness without a
guide; then have their souls longed after Christ Jesus, Mal. 4.2.
that Sun of righteousness, who appears with healing in his wings; Numb.
24 17. Isa. 9.6.
that Star of Jacob, who gives light to them that are in darkness; that
Prince of Peace, who brings the olive branch of peace to souls that are
perpl^xed. Sense of distresses does marvellously sweete^ the Lord Jesus, and
fill the soul with longings after the fruition of his favors. When the
Gibeonites were besieged with the Amoritish Princes, Jos. 10.6.
they sent to Joshua, saying, Slack not thine hand from thy servants, come up
to us quickly, and save us, and help us: when our souls are besieged with an
army of troubles, tossed upon the tempest of manifold afflictions, when no
Captain can fight for us, no anchor can stay us, no friend can comfort us, no
shield and buckler defend us, no Physician heal us; then we long for Christ's
gracious presence, then we make earnest suit for his powerful assistance,
then we say, Come Lord Jesus.

These words are almost the last words of the whole word of God, the last words
(as I have heard) uttered by this deceased party, which gave me occasion at
this time (being the last office we are to perform toward him) to treat of
them, to commend them to your consideration, the better to prepare you all for
your last reckoning, to fit you for the day of your dissolution, to persuade
and move you to labor for such faith, such love, such repentance, such
competencie of all saving graces, that at the hour of your departure out of
this earthly pilgrimage, you may be able, as friends and servants, as the
spouse and bride, as sons and daughters of God and Christ Jesus, to say, Come
Lord Jesus.

The words are a holy and fervent wish and desire, vote, and prayer of John the
Evangelist, in his own, and in the name of all the faithful, for the speedy,
gracious, and glorious coming of the Lord Jesus. John the Evangelist was
Christ's beloved Disciple, Joh. 13.23
one who in the days of his flesh had reposed himself in Christ's bosom, and
here desires Christ's coming. By how much the nearer communion we have now
with Christ by grace and holiness, Note.
by so much the more his second coming is desired by us: Grace and holiness
estates us in the condition of sons and daughters to God the Father; in the
condition of Bride and Spouse to Christ Jesus, entitle us to all Gods promises,
sweeten all Gods testimonies, make all Gods ordinances the savor of life to
life unto us, settle us in the sense of Gods loving kindness, in the assurance
of the forgiveness of all our sins and offenses, and so make the second
coming of Christ most desirous. Want of holiness deprives the souls of men of
all the sweet and heavenly comforts arising from the second coming of Christ
Jesus. The unsanctified man that says, Come Lord Jesus, prays God to hasten
his eternal vengeance: he that without grace prays for Christ's coming,
beggs his own speedy and final destruction. Labor therefore in the days of
your life for holiness, that you may with comfort in the hour of your death
say, Come Lord Jesus. John the Evangelist had seen, in a vision, the Churches
affliction, the adversaries insultation, the future felicity prepared for the
one, and the future calamity provided for the other, and Christ made glorious
in both: and therefore he prays, Come Lord Jesus. No man rightly desires
Christ's coming, Note.
but he that has assurance of the good and benefit of his coming: To them the
day of Christ is as the day of harvest to the husbandman, as the day of
deliverance to the prisoner, as the day of coronation to the King, as the day
of wedlock to the bride; a day of triumph and exaltation, a day of freedom
and consolation, a day of rest and satisfaction; to them the Lord Jesus is all
sweetness, Cant 1.2, 3.
as wine to the palate, and ointment to the nostrill, says Solomon. Mel in
ore, melos in aure, Iubilus in cord.
Honey in the mouth (says Bernard) music in the ear, and a jubilee in the
heart. Get assurance of Christ's coming as a Ransomer to redeem you, as a
Conqueror to subdue all your enemies under you, as a Friend to comfort you, as
a King to honor you, as a Physician to heal you, as a Bridegroom to marry
you; and then shall you with confidence and boldness, with joy and gladness,
with vehement and holy longings, say, Come Lord Jesus.

In the words there is Motus and Movens, 1. a Motion, and 2. a Mover: the
motion, Come; the mover, the Lord Jesus. First of the motion, wherein is the
Modus, the manner of uttering these words, by way of vote, wish and
supplication; and the Genus, or kind of motion, Come. The Evangelist desires
Christ to come: Christ, as God, is every where, and in respect of his essence
does neither go nor come, his divine essence being free from all motion and
mutation: yet, as God, he comes by his Ministers, as a King by his
Ambassadors; by his ordinances, as a Prince by his laws; by his gifts and
graces, as the Sun by his beams and light; by his castigations and
afflictions, as a man of war by his armies; by his favors and blessings, as
a friend by his love tokens: As Man, he came once by incarnation, taking our
flesh upon him, and shall come at last as a glorious and dreadful Judge to
render to every man according to his work: and in this respect principally
does the Evangelist here desire him to come; to come as a Judge to subvert
Antichrist, to subdue the kingdom of sin and Satan, to render to all ungodly
men according to their doing; to come as Redeemer, to bring a full and final
deliverance to all believers, to all contrite and broken hearted sinners from
all evils, and to confer upon them all peace and bliss, all glory and
happiness, this being the desire and prayer of all the faithful, of all that
have received the spirit of adoption: We may hence learn, that

It is the unfeigned desire of Gods faithful servants, to have the full
fruition of Christ Jesus. 2 Samuel 14 32.
Absolon so desired to see the face of David the King and his father, that he
valued it above his life: the Lords servants so desire to see the face of
Christ their King and Redeemer, and to have the full enjoyment of his
comfortable and glorious presence, that nothing is so precious in their
apprehensions, valued and esteemed by them above the dearest earthly
possessions, above the choycest worldly comforts, Can. 1.3. Psa. 4.6, 7. Psa.
63.3.
above wine which makes glad the heart, above the increase of corn and wine,
the joy of the rich; above life the choycest pearl, and dearest treasure in
natures closet. If the dawning of the day be so joyous, how much more pleasant
is the Sun rising? If the first fruits be so acceptable, how much more
abundantly joyful^ is the full vintage? If the glimpse of Gods face be so much
desired, how much more desirable is the fullness of Gods countenance reserved
for us in the heavens? which the Psalmist does illustrate by a similitude taken
from the chased Heart: Psa. 42.1, 2.
As the Heart, the Heart chased, heated, affrighted, and vexed by the hounds and
hunters, does pant after the water brooks, so does my soul pant after thee, O
God: my soul thirsts for God, for the living God: when shall I come and
appear before God? before God in his holy Temple, in the assembly of his
Saints and servants, in the use of his ordinances, in the sense of his loving
kindness, and in the full fruition of his face in the highest heavens. And
this the Apostle expresses by a Metaphor taken from the naked, 2 Cor. 5.2
who have no garment to cover them, no house to hide them: as they with great
diligence seek, and much earnestness long for a covering; so do the
faithful servants of God long for heaven, their house and habitation, and for
the full fruition of Jesus Christ; whose righteousness is their rich and
royal robe, their pure and spotless garment to cover them: In this (says the
Apostle) we groan, ^arnestly desiring to be clothed upon with our house
which is from heaven. As he that is in darkness longs for the light, so the
souls of Gods children in the darkness of this world, do long for Jesus
Christ, and heaven, the Sun of righteousness, and that heavenly City which
God has provided for them, Rev. 21.23.
Where there is no need neither of the Sun nor of the Moon to shine in it,
because the glory of God does lighten it, and the Lamb is the light thereof. As
the Bride does long for the coming of the Bridegroom: so the spiritual Bride
longs for the coming of the heavenly Bridegroom Christ Jesus, being sick
of love, Cant. 5.6, 8.
and full of longings after him. As the mother of Sisera looked out through the
window, and cried through the lattesse, Judge. 5.28
Why is his Chariot so long in coming? why tarry the wheels of his Chariots?
so does the Spouse of Christ here in this life, look forth through the window
of Gods ordinances, and through the lattesse of her faith, and cry, How long,
Lord Jesus, Rev. 6.10.
how long? Thou art my help and my deliverer, make no tarrying, O my God. And
the Apostle for the mitigating of their sorrows, asswaging of their troubles,
quieting of their consciences, and the better staying of their souls,
persuades them to wait, assures them of the speedy coming of Christ, saying,
Psa. 40.17.
Cast not away your confidence, which has great recompense of reward; for ye
have need of patience, that after ye have done the will of God, ye might
receive the promise: For yet a little while, and he that shall come will come,
Heb. 10.35, 36, 37.
and will not tarry. And thus have Gods servants expressed their desires. Phil.
1.23.
I desire (says Saint Paul) to be dissolved, as a prisoner from his fetters,
as a captive from his bondage, and to be with Christ, which is far better.
And, we groan (says he speaking in the name of all the faithful) to be
clothed upon, 2 Cor. 5.4, 8.
that mortality might be swallowed up of immortality. And, we are willing to
be absent from the body, and present with the Lord: And this the Apostle
commended in the Thessalonians, 1 Thessalonians. 1.9, 10.
that they were turned to God from Idols, to serve the living and true God, and
to wait for his Son from heaven, as servants wait for the coming of their
Lord and Master: And this Saint Peter terms, a looking for, 2 Pet. 3.12.
and hastening unto the coming of the day of God: The reason whereof is,

In regard of their remaining sin and the feet, as aches to the bones, as the
sons of Zervia unto David, they were adversaries to him, too strong for him: 2 Samuel, 19.22.
so are their corruptions adversaries to their souls, to their peace, to their
communion with God, to their present and everlasting welfare. Sometimes they are
too strong for them, leading them captive, Romans 7.23
as a tyrant the soldier whom he has taken in the battle, 1 Pet. 2.11. 2 Samuel
3.1
making continual war against them, as the house of Saul did against the
house of David, being as pricks in their eyes, and thorns in their sides;
Judge. 2.2.
as the Canaanites were to Israel, as heavy burdens to their backs, Psa.
38.4.
burdens too heavy for them to bear; as dead members in their body, Romans 7.24
very cumbersome, and occasions of great trouble. And therefore as the noble
man went unto Christ, and besought him, Ioh. 4.47.
that he would come down and heal his son, because he was at the point of
death; so do the faithful servants of God go to Christ, and say, Come Lord
Jesus, that there may be a thorough healing of all their infirmities.

In regard of Satan's subtle, assiduous and Ios. 10.
As the Amoritish Princes besieged Gibeon, so does the prince of darkness
besiege the souls of Gods people. As Pharaoh imposed heavy burdens upon the
children of Israel, set cruel taskmasters over them, and when they were going
forth of Egypt, raised an army, and pursued them: so does Satan lay heavy
burdens upon, great and grievous things to the charge of Gods people, set many
merciless and bloody minded man against them, and raises an army of evil
thoughts within, to distract them, and an army of afflictions without to molest
them, being as a roaring Lion to Gods flock, 1 Pet. 5.8.
as a man of war to the City of their souls, making their passage very
stormy and tempestuous: Luke 11.21.
and therefore as the woman of Canaan came to our Savior, and cried to him,
Mat. 15.22, 25.
saying, Have mercy on me, O Lord, thou Son of David, my daughter is
grievously vexed with a Devil, Lord help me: so do Gods children address
themselves to Christ, and cry, Have mercy upon us, thou Son of David, for
our souls are sore vexed with the Devil, Lord help us: O come Lord Jesus,
and bring us a full and final deliverance from all infernal adversaries.

of ungracious men: their language, their practice, their profaneness, their
troublesomnesse is to Gods children a great grief, a means of very much
disquiet; as the daughters of Heth to Sarah, Genesis 27.46.
made her life a burden, and the presence of disobedient Jonah made the sea
tempestuous, the navigation very perilous to the Mariners. This has filled
them full of complaints; Psa. 120.5
Woe is me (says David) that I sojourne in Mesech, that I dwell in the Tents
of Kedar. Psa. 119.136.
Mine eyes gush out with rivers of tears, because men keep not thy law (says
David.) And Lot was vexed with the filthy conversation of the wicked. 2 Pet.
2.7.
That righteous man (says S. Peter) dwelling among them, in seeing and
hearing, vexed his righteous soul from day to day with their unlawful deeds.
And therefore as he that dwells among thorns, briars and scorpions, Ezekiel. 2.6.
desires to change his dwelling: so do Gods servants say, Come Lord Jesus,
that they may have full freedom from the conversation of sinful men.

In regard of love to Christ: their love 2 Samuel 1.26.
like the love of Jonathan to David, is wonderful: they love him with all
manner of love; with a creatures love, as he is their maker; with a servants
love, as he is their Lord and Master; with a subjects love, as he is their
King and Ruler; with a ransomed man's love, as he is their Redeemer; with a
friends love, as he is their Comforter; with a child's love, as he is their
everlasting Father; with a kinsmans love, as he is their Brother; and with a
Brides love, as he is the Bridegroom of their souls. Can. 2.5.
They are sick of love, and love breeds longing, and longing breeds desire of
fruition. And as love constraines the wife to desire the presence of the
husband: so does love cause the spouse of Christ to long for the presence of
Christ, to say, Tit. 2.13.
Come Lord Jesus, to look for that blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of
the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ.

Absolon, 2 Samuel 15.
in respect of bodily perfection, was without blemish from the crown of the
head unto the sole of the foot: so shall Gods servants, upon the coming of
Christ, be free from all blemish, and glorious in soul and body, Mat. 13.43.
Luke 21.28.
like the Sun in the firmament. This is called the day of their redemption: And
as the captive desires the coming of the ransomer, so do they the coming of
Christ our blessed Redeemer: and therefore they say, Come Lord Jesus, that they
may have the full possession of all joy and glory in heaven.

This opens and unfoldeth the estate and condition of man, Come Lord Jesus,
shows they do not enjoy Christ now in his greatest fullness. Here, Numb. 13
23.
like Israel in the way to Canaan, they have a few grapes, a little taste of
the goodness of the land of heaven; but the full vintage is reserved till
their bodily dissolution, till Christ's second coming. Now they are absent from
the Lord, they behold him as a friend a far off. While we are at home in the
body, 2 Cor. 5.6
we are absent from the Lord, says the Apostle: Absent from the perfection of
Gods Image, from the fullness of the light of Gods countenance, from the
perfect and complete fruition of his presence, and the glory he has provided
for us. 1 Cor. 13.12.
Now we see as through a glass darkly: in the works of God, as in a glass,
we see the general wisdom, power and goodness of God: In the Word and
Sacraments we see, as in a glass, the command and precept, the will and
counsel, the love and mercy of God in Christ Jesus: Hereafter we shall see
face to face; truly without error, conspicuously without darkness, and fully
without the mixture of all imperfections. Now we are as runners in a race, the
price is not yet won: 1 Cor. 9.24.
therefore, so run that ye may obtain, says S. Paul. Now we are as
Soldiers in the battle fighting, the victory is not yet fully gotten: Rev.
2.10.
therefore, be thou faithful (says our Savior) to the death, and I will give
thee a crown of life. We are now travelers, our journey is not yet ended:
Psa. 84.7.
therefore we must go from strength to strength, until we do appear before
the Lord in Sion. Matthew. 24.13.
For, he that continues to the end shall be saved. Now we are as pilgrims
and strangers, we have not yet the possession of our heavenly dwelling; and
therefore as pilgrims and strangers, 1 Pet. 2.11.
let us abstain from fleshly lusts, which war against the soul: we halt
like Jacob in our walking, our goings are not absolutely perfect; Genesis 32.31.35.
our lives like Jacobs flock, are spotty colored, a mixture of grace and vice
is in them; our souls, Genesis 25.24.
like Rebecca's womb, carry in them an Esau and a Jacob, the flesh lusting
against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh; as Esau against Jacob,
and Jacob against Esau. In the Commonwealth of Israel, 2 Samuel 3.1
there was continual war between the house of Saul and David, in the
commonweal of a regenerate soul, there is continual war between God and
Satan, between grace and corruption; and therefore we must labor in the work
of grace, like the house of David, to grow stronger and stronger; and to make
sin, like the house of Saul, grow weaker and weaker, still pressing to more
perfection, and ever saying, with the Evangelist, Come Lord Jesus, as a guide
to direct us, a Physician to heal us, and a man of war to overcome for us.

This should wonderfully endeare unto shall be constrained to cry, Come Lord
Jesus; then, as the woman of Tekoah, in a pretended distress, came to David,
and cried, 2 Samuel 14.4.
Help, O King: so shall we, in the real distress of our souls, be
constrained to cry, Help, O Christ. When we shall see Satan casting all his
fiery darts at us, setting with all his forces, like an armed man, upon us;
bringing all our sins, like a subtle accuser, against us; when we shall
apprehend death, as a Sergeant, arresting, hurrying and drawing us before the
Lords tribunal, and shall see the arms of all earthly helpers broken, the
lamp of all worldly lights put out, and the tongues of all our friends,
according to the flesh, made dumb and silent: then our souls will be put upon
Christ, and there will be no remedy, we must say, Come Lord Jesus. And
therefore this should make Christ very precious in our eyes now; this should
inflame our hearts with singular and fervent love unto him for the present,
getting interest in him above all things, and making him our chiefest and
choycest, our dear and only friend: This should so sweeten unto us the Lord
Jesus, that we should say with Bernard, Jesus dulcis in voce, dulcis in facie,
dulcis in nomine; dulce enim nomen and suave Jesus, consecratum ab aeterno,
annunciatum ab Angelo, prophetatum Solomonis oraculo, qui ait, Oleum effusum
nomen tuum. Psa. 73.25
Jesus is sweet in voice, sweet in face, sweet in name; for the name Jesus is
sweet, being consecrated from eternity, published by the Angel, and prophesied
by the Oracle of Solomon, who says, Thy Name is an ointment powered forth. We
should so select him, so admire him, so adhere unto him, so set our hearts upon
him, that we should say with the Psalmist, Whom have I in heaven but thee? and
there is none upon earth that I desire besides thee: So glorious, so precious,
so infinitely transcendent, let him be in our thoughts, in our judgments, in
our estimation and affections, that we love and affect him, exalt and prefer
him as the King above all commanders, as the Sun above all lights, as the
spring above all cisternes, as the pearl above all treasure, and as the
husband of our souls above all friends; as a Paradise of all pleasures, a
haven of rest from all tempests, and the refuge of our souls in all troubles:
Let our faith be such in him, our hope so settled upon him, our love so strong
toward him, our subjection such under him, that we may be able at all times
and seasons, in all estates and conditions to say, Come Lord Jesus.

Behold in this the honor and profit, the advantage and comfort which a bodily
dissolution brings to the righteous, to all true believers: they desire the
full fruition of Christ, and this brings them home to Christ: Phil. 1.21
to them to dye is gain; gain of liberty from the burden of all corruption,
from all the assaults of Satan, from the servitude of the world, and all
affliction; gain of perfect holiness, in respect of Gods image; gain of
complete victory, in respect of all enemies; gain of most sweet communion, in
respect of their fellow^hip with God, Christ, the glorious Angels, and all the
Saints of God; gain of absolute honor, in respect of their glorious condition
in heaven. As death to the righteous is a tree of many fruitful branches, a
messenger of many comfortable tidings: so the Spirit of God a Sleep: Mat. 9.24.
sleep possesses only the outward members and senses, the soul sleeps not;
so in death the body only dies, the soul is carried into Abraham's bosom.
Luke 16.22. ^ev. 14.13.
Sleep gives rest unto the body, They who dye in the Lord rest from Sometimes
it is called a gathering to our Fathers: Genesis 25.8
by death the righteous are separated from the wicked, gathered as wheat into
Gods garner, and their souls bound up in the bundle of life. 1 Samuel 25 29.
Sometimes it is called a way, the way of all flesh: by the way we come to our
home, Ios. 23.14.
and by death we come to our heavenly home, to God the father and the Lord
Jesus. Sometimes it is called a going forth: 2 Pet. 1.15
and Israel went forth from the bondage of Egypt: so when the body dies, the
soul goes forth, as out of a prison, and enters into the land of the living.
Sometimes it is an end, Mat. 10.22.
because in death there is an end of all sin, of all sorrow, of all labor and
trouble, as in the waters of the red Sea the Israelites Egyptian bondage ended.
a sowing: Ioh. 11.24 1 Cor. 15.44.
the seed which is sown does spring forth again into a blade, the body in the
resurrection shall flourish like the grass; death, like a Physician, cures all
their diseases, like a key opens the prison, and restores them to a blessed
freedom, and brings them to the full fruition of Jesus Christ, the desire of
their souls. And this is the sweetest and fullest gain of a Christian. Lucrum
est evasisse incrementa peccati, Augustine.
lucrum fugisse deteriora, lucrum transire ad meliora. Aug. Lucrum maximum
computat Christianus, Cyprian.
jam saeculi laqueis non teneri, jam nullis peccatis and vitiis carnis obnoxium
fieri, exemptum pressuris angentibus, and venenatis diaboli faucibus liberatum,
ad laetitiam salutis aeternae Christo vocante proficisci. Cypr.

the new heavens, 2 Pet. 3.13. 2 Timothy 4.8
and the new earth, and to love the appearing of the Lord Jesus: and for that
Godly sorrow for sin. Christ's coming is comfortable to such as are truly
sorrowful: he that is weary of his corruptions, does truly long for the
coming of Christ Jesus. Gen, 45.4.5
Joseph spoke to his brethren kindly, and entertained them courteously when he
saw them grieved for the injury offered him. Luke 15.
The prodigals day of humiliation, Isa. 61.1.
was the day wherein his father graciously received him. Christ will be found
a sweet and merciful Jesus to all Mat. 11.28.
truly penitent sinners. Secondly, there must Genesis 35.2.
Jacob went not up to Bethel before he purged his house of Idols: It is in vain
for man to say, Come Lord Jesus, if there be not a conversion of the soul to
Jesus: To such the Prophet speaks, Amos 5.18.19.
Woe to you that desire the day of the Lord: to what end is it for you? the day
of the Lord is darkness, and not light; as if a man did fly from a Lion, and
a Bear met him; or went into a house, and leaned his hand on the wall, and a
Serpent bit him. Shall not the day of the Lord be darkness and not light, even
very dark, and no brightness in it? What the voice of God was to Adam upon
the eating of the forbidden fruit, what the coming of the flood was to the
profane men of the old world, what the waters of the red Sea were to Pharaoh,
what the fire from heaven was to the Captains which came up against Eliah,
what the burning furnace was to them that cast in Shadrach, Meshec, and
Abednego; the same will be the coming of the L. Jesus to all unholy persons. O
therefore away with your sins, every soul of man reform his ways, Job 11.14.
That you may lift up your faces with boldness, that you may with great joy
Thirdly, get it to your hearts the precious pearl of a lively faith; Ephesians. 6.16.
this will quench all Satan's darts, silence all the accus^tions of conscience,
make you look on Christ as on a friend to comfort you, Romans 8.31
an advocate to plead for you, and a redeemer to save you; and like Eliahs
fiery chariot, will carry your souls aloft, and bring you with gladness into
the presence Euge. Well done thou good and faithful servant, Mat. 25.23.
thou have been faithful over a few things, I will make thee ruler over many
things, enter thou into thy masters joy. And let us be excited and stirred up
to work our hearts to this longing for Christ's coming, Rev. 22.2.
there is a Tree bearing twelve sorts of fruit, youth without old age, health
without sickness, fullness without loathing liberty without bondage, beauty
without deformity, impassibility without grief, abundance without want, peace
without trouble, security without fear, knowledge without ignorance, glory
without ignominy, joy without sorrow. Secondly, the security of that estate, no
death, neither of sin nor of misery, Rev. 21.4. Nec culpae, nec miseriae, nec
naturae.
nor of nature. Thirdly, the jucundity of it: a day without clouds, a paradise
without thorns, fullness of joy; true joy without deceit, sincere Psa. 16.
constant joy, a Sun that never sets: of which we may say, as Augustine does, O
gaudium supergaudium, vincens omne gaudium, extra quod non est gaudium! quando
intrabo in te, ut videam Deum meum qui habitat in te?
O joy above joy, overcoming all joy, without which there is no joy! when shall
I enter into thee, that I may see my God who dwells in thee? Here is joy
above us, in the vision of God; joy within us, in the glorification of our
souls and bodies; joy about us, in our communion with Saints and Angels; joy
beneath us, in our evasion and escapall of hell and everlasting darkness. Here
is to the souls of all believers, Gaudium de Christo, joy concerning Christ, as
the author of our welfare; in Christo, in Christ, as he is the head and we
the members; cum Christo, with Christ, as coheires with him of the same
inheritance; post Christum, after Christ, every soul joying according to
proportion; per Christum, by Christ, being reconciled to God by him, and
beholding God with joy through him; propter Christum, for Christ, he being
exalted above all creatures, and having purchased all things. O let these
things sweeten the thought of Christ Jesus to us, inflame our souls with
longing after him, and make us all say, Come Lord Jesus.

Thus from the Motion pass we to the Mover, Lord Jesus. Two titles of the
blessed Son of God; the one a title of authority to command us, the other of
mercy to comfort us. Love and Justice are sweetly knit together in Christ
Jesus: Note.
as Lord, he requires obedience to his precepts; as Jesus, he calls for
faith in his promises. Faith and obedience must never be divided in Gods
servants; he that calls him Lord without obedience, dishonours him; he that
calls him Jesus without faith, receives no benefit by him: He is styled first
Lord, and then Jesus. Note.
If Christ be not our Lord and Master first, he will never be our Savior at
last: He that will not have Christ to be his Lord in his life, shall not have
him for his Jesus at the hour of his death. O therefore serve him, honor him,
obey him as your Lord; believe him, love him, rejoice in him as your Jesus now,
that you may be able upon all occasions to say, Come Lord Jesus: Come Lord
Jesus as a Counselor to guide us, as a Rock to support us, as a Friend to
comfort us, as a Fountain to supply us; Come Lord Jesus in the day of
fullness, and make us thankful; in the day of want, and make us contented; in
the day of our sin, and make us penitent; in the day of affliction, and make
us patient; in the day of temptation, and make us confident; in the day of
sorrow, and make us joyful; in the day of health, and make us mindful of the
day of sickness; in the day of life, and make us watchful against the day of
death; in the day of sickness, and assure us of the blessed issue of our
earthly pilgrimage; in the day of death, and translate our souls into a
glorious life: Even so, come LORD JESUS.

And now touching this spectacle of mortality here before us, what shall I say
unto you? wherein shall I from hence instruct you? but only in two things in
the genenerall, First, by way of premonition: Secondly, by way of
commemoration. By way of premonition, and so you may in this object of death be
admonished, First, of run, He^. 13.14.
a candle quickly gone out, having no continuing City here, but must seek one
that Secondly, of the vanity of all earthly abundance; it is a starting Bow in
the day of battle, a rotten Anchor in the stormy tempest. We see that of
Solomon ver fied by daily experience, Pro. 11.4.
Riches profit not in the day of wrath, but righteousness delivers from
death: the righteousness of Christ imputed, the righteousness of conversation
well ordered gives comfort, and deliverance from the second death, when soul
and body are dissolved. Thirdly, whatsoever Romans 14.4.
For every man stands or falls to his own master; but what we see amiss in
others, let us correct in our selves; by the sight of their spots let us wash
our own garments, be thankful to God who does preserve us: for, no man
stands by his own strength. Let us be watchful over our selves, and desire
God to keep us, lest Satan and our own corruption draw us into the same or
greater evils. The sin of one man would be the sin of every man, did not
God restrain him.

Secondly, by way of commemoration, He that sowes in tears shall reap in joy,
Psa. 126.5.

Secondly, he promised reformation, and

Thirdly, he spoke of a great change which

Fourthly, the rehearsal of Gods mercies, upon condition of true repentance,
seemed much to affect him. As he is cursed that turns the grace of God into
wantonness: so he is blessed who by Gods mercies is lead to true repentance.
And let all this admonish us to labor for timely and true repentance, to vow
amendment and perform it; to feel our hearts truly changed, Gods mercies
powerfully drawing our souls to obedience, by fervent prayer increasing our
communion with God, enriching our souls more and more with all heavenly gifts
and graces, that we may at last with great comfort and much assurance say,
Come Lord Jesus.

FINIS.
SAINT PAUL'S LEGACY.
2 COR. 13.11. Finally, brethren, farewell: Be perfect, be of good comfort, be
of one mind, live in peace; and the God of love and peace shall be with you.


EVery communion amongst men on earth, has his dissolution; be it never so
entire, never so sin, never so delightful, yet at length there comes a
separation: the sweetest fellowship, the society which is most intimate, has
the cords and chains thereof at length dissolved. Communion with God is
everlasting, communion with man is transitory and temporal. The Arc was
transportative, removing from place to place, till it came to Solomon's Temple:
such is man's condition, subject to continual change and motion, till he comes
to heaven, where Gods people shall have an endless and unchangeable communion.

The fellowship between Abimelech and the men of Shechem, was very strong and
intimate: they were Judge. 9.23.
bone of bone, and flesh of flesh, yet at length there came an evil Spirit
between them, and they were divided. Great is the enmity of Satan against
men's sweet and comfortable communion.

Abraham and Lot sweetly conversed and dwelt for diverse days together, yet at
length they parted, Genesis 13.6.
their substance was so great, that they could not dwell together. Much sweet
communion and commerce between Gods people, is often hindered by the fullness
of the world.

Singular was the friendship, pleasant was the fellowship between Jonathan and
David, their love was 2 Samuel 1.26.
wonderful, passing the love of women, yet by an arrow in the battle Jonathan
fell, and their sweet commerce was ended. Death dissolveth all humane
fellowship.

Eliah and Elisha enjoyed many days most blessed and gracious communion
together, yet at length it came to pass, that as they 2 King. 2.11.
went and talked, there appeared a Chariot of fire, and Horses of fire, and
parted them both asu^der. God does often remove the dearest friends and
comforters of his servants, to learn them to depend alone upon Christ Jesus.
God does sometimes take away the Guides and Teachers of his people, to let them
see, that the choycest instruments of man's happiness, are not of everlasting
continuance. Saint Paul had been for diverse days a preacher to the men of
Corinth, preaching to them many powerful and heavenly sermon, delivering to
them many found and wholesome Doctrine, writing also a first and second Epistle:
yet his ministry was not for perpetuity, nor his presence of everlasting
continuance; a time of separation came, and his labors drew to an end, and in
these words he takes hi^ last leave and farewell of them: ^^nally, brethren,
farewell: Be perfect be of good comfort, be of one mind, live i^ peace; and
the God of love and peace shall be with you.

The Apostle Saint Paul had in this whole Epistle sharply rebuked the
Corinthians for opposing his doctrine, for slighting and despising his
admonition; and now, that they might not think he either spoke or wrote out of
hatred or distemper of spirit, many arguments and evidences of his great and
singular love are intermixed; chiefly in this his conclusion, mitigating all
the severitie and bitterness which he seemed to use toward them; concluding
and shutting up all in a holy; sweet, and gracious exoptation, or wish of all
perfection, consolation, peace, concord, and communion with God unto them;
Finally, brethren, farewell: Be perfect, etc.

The Lord who gives Ephesians. 4.10.
some Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pastors and Teachers for
the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying
of the body of Christ: The Lord who Jerem. 3.15.
gives his people Pastors according to his own heart, to feed them with
knowledge and understanding, has, in the course of his gracious providence,
made me for more than fifteen years, an under-overseer of your souls;
wherein, as his weak and frail, feeble and unworthy instrument, I have been
the Lords and your servant, endeavoring (though neither with such diligence and
industry as I should, nor with that blessed and plentiful success which I
desire and wish) to open Gods counsel, to propose and set forth Christ before
your eyes, to make him glorious in your apprehension, to humble your souls, to
convert your hearts, to draw you, by faith and love, to Christ, the complete
and only Author of your everlasting welfare: And now, as Saint Paul said
sometimes to the men of Ephesus, Acts 20.25.
Behold, I know that ye all, among whom I have here stood preaching the
kingdom of God, shall (after this day in all likelihood) behold my face in
this place no more; being now to you as a dying man, whose last breath is going
forth; as a star setting and rising no more in this horizon; as a lamp going
out and shining no more in this your house of sacred meeting: As a man dying,
and loath to dye, I shall, in the ardencie of my love, and great anguish of my
spirit, in the words and wish of S. Paul, take my last leave and valediction:
Finally, brethren, farewell: Be perfect, be of good comfort be of one mind,
live i^ peace; and the God of love and peace be with you.

In which words we may take notice, Finally. Brethren. Farewell. 4. of a vote,
Of exoptation or wishing, Be perfect, be of good comfort, be of one mind live
in peace; and the God of love and peace be with you. Wherein Saint Paul like a
Testator, or Parent, that makes his last Will and Testament, bequeatheth these
five gifts, as five Legacies to the Corinthians his children in Christ, which
are like the Genesis 45.22.
five changes of raiment which Joseph gave to Benjamin, for the spiritual
warmth and ornament which they minister to the souls of Gods children: like
the Judge. 18.7.
five men which brought good tidings to their brethren, encouraging them to
arise and enter into the land, for the comfortable news which they bring to
the souls of men, encouraging them to enter into Gods service, to set their
feet into the ways of peace and holiness: like the 1 Samuel 21.3.
five loaves of bread which David asked of the Priest, for the nourishment,
refection, and strength which they minister to the souls of Gods servants; and
these I shall, being now as a dying man to you, bequeath unto you as a Legacy
of choycest worth to adorn you, of greatest strength to support you, of best
nourishment to feed you, of sweetest peace to solace you. Finally, brethren,
farewell. Be perfect, etc.

The branches growing on this tree, are many; the streams issuing from this
fountain, are diverse: and having but one day to gather the fruit here growing,
to draw the waters hence arising, I shall but briefly touch, and give you a
taste of each of them; and first of the particle of conclusion, Finally,
lastly, Denique, quod superest.
or as touching that which remains, that is, after that I have done mine
office, and have instructed you by the word, threatened you by the judgments,
and entreated you by the mercies of God, and have used all means to move you
to repentance, and to draw you to Christ; Finally, or what remains more to be
done now, but that you do your duty, that you believe, repent, reform, be
perfect, and draw home to Christ with all your soul and might. This is that
which now remains, which is now on your behalf expected: And hence you see,

That the Ministers long and frequent preaching must be attended with much
perfection in the people: After the Ministers long and frequent instruction,
faith, repentance, and true conversion must show it self forth in the people.
When the Minister has done his duty toward men, men must do their duty
toward God. The Exodus 17.6.
rock gushed out water after Moses striking it. After the Priests seven times
compassing the walls of Jericho, and Jos. 6.20.
blowing of their Rams horns, the walls fell unto the ground. After the
Prophets 2 Kings 4.34.
spreading himself upon the woman of Shunems child, the flesh of the child
waxed warm, he neesed and opened his eyes: After the Ministers often smiting
our hearts with the hammer of the word, often sounding of the trumpet of the
Gospel in our ears, and right dividing and applying of the word unto our
hearts, our stony hearts should be softened, and send forth the waters of godly
sorrow; the strong and mighty holds of sin should be cast down, our souls
enlivened, the eyes of our understandings most clearly and savingly opened:
After the shining of the Sun, the air is enlightened; after the distilling of
the dew, and plentiful influence of the heavens, the earth fructifieth; after
the long shining of the light of the Gospel, and frequent distilling and
dropping down of the dew of heavenly doctrine, men's understandings should be
filled with knowledge, as the air with light, and their lives replenished with
all spiritual and heavenly fruit. This the Lord expects, Isa. 5.4.
What could have been done more to my vineyard (says the Lord) that I have not
done in it, in regard of the external means; wherefore I looked that it
should bring forth grapes; that like a vineyard long and well dressed, it
should bring forth good grapes of knowledge, faith, repentance, and the like:
this is the property of Gods children, as good Mat. 13.24.
ground receiving good seed, they bring forth much fruit: as living and healthy
children sucking their mothers breasts, they 1 Pet. 2.2.
grow by the sincere milk of the word of God: This fruit has followed the
labors of Gods Ministers. Saint Peter Acts 2.44.
testi^^^ and exhorted, and his word was glad (...) and about three thousand
souls were (...) to the Church. Saint Paul preached, and as Acts 13.48.
many as were ordained unto life, believed. The Apostle preached at Ephesus,
and Acts 19.20.
many believed, came and confessed, and showed forth their deeds: so mightily
grew the word of God, and prevailed. Exodus 17.11.
Joshua fought, Moses prayed, and Israel prevailed over Amalek. When the
Minister preaches and prays, Gods Israel must prevail over Satan and their
corruption. Peter Ioh. 21.11.
casts the net the second time into the sea, and a multitude of fishes are
taken in it: At the Ministers first and second, frequent and often preaching,
many souls should, by the net of the Gospel, be drawn out of the gulf and
sea of sin and the world: And that,

In regard of the end of the Ministers The Psa. 104.22, 23.
Sun arises (says the Psalmist) the wild beasts gather themselves
together, and lay them down in their dens; man goes forth to his work, and
to his labor until the evening. The Gospel like the Sun arises, and all
the lusts of men, which like so many wild beasts, walk forth and make their
prey upon the souls of men in the right of their ignorance, must now lie
themselves down by humiliation, mortification, and true repentance, and man
must arise from the bed of sin, and go forth out of himself, as out of his
house, to his work and to his labor, Phil. 2.12.
working out his salvation with fear and trembling, never 1 Thessalonians. 1.3.
ceasing from the work of faith, and labor of love, and patience of hope in
our Lord Jesus Christ, until the evening, until the sun of his life be
wholly gone down and set. This the Apostle presses from the end of the
appearing of the Gospel: Romans 13.11.
The night is far spent, the time and state of ignorance and blindness is
far gone; and the light is near at hand, the day of the Gospel breaks
forth, and the light of illumination does appear: Let us therefore cast off
the works of darkness, as men cast off their bed-clothes in the morning, and
let us put on the armor of light, as men put on their day clothes, and so let
us walk; and Tit. 2.11.
the grace of God (says Saint Paul to Titus) has appeared, teaching men to
deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly, righteously, Acts
26.16.
and go^^^^ in this present evil world. And (...) Christ to Paul) have
appeared (...) ^^is purpose, to make thee a Mi^^ster (...) witness both of
these things which thou have seen, and of those things in the which I will
appear unto thee; delivering thee from the people, and from the Gentiles, unto
whom now I send thee, to open their eyes, and to turn them from darkness to
light, and from the power of Satan unto God.

Mat. 21.
householder in the parable that planted a vineyard, but the Lord? What is the
vineyard but the Church? and what are the vines, but the several members of the
Church? Who are the servants but the Ministers whom God sends to dress his
vineyard? and what is the fruit which God there expects, but knowledge, faith,
repentance, the fruit of his Ministers labors in the souls of his servants?
The shepherd looks for increase from the flock which he watches, feeds,
conducteth and defends; the husband looks for children from the wife whom he
espouseth, the fruit of his wedlock; and God, the husband and shepherd of our
souls, looks for fruit from us; over whom, by his Ministers, he watches;
whom by their labors, he feeds, conducteth and defends, and espouseth to
himself. The Teacher expects learning from his scholar; and herein (says
Christ) is my Father glorified, Joh. 15.8.
that ye bear much fruit, so shall ye be my Disciples.

In regard of honoring and glorifying Psa. 128.3.
the wife which is as the vine by the sides of the house, and the children
standing like Olive plants round about the Table, are the glory of the house
and husband: Psalm. 127.5.
happy is he that has his quiver full of them (says the Psalmist) he shall
not be ashamed. The fruitfulness of the people, when the Congregation is full
of spiritual fruit, like a vine growing by the house side, and the several
members thereof fat and flourishing in grace, like Olive plants, then the Word
is glorified, then the Minister is honored; happy is that Messenger of God
that has his quiver, the house of his Ministry, full of them. It is said of
the Gentiles, Acts 13.48.
that they heard, and glorified the Word of God, and as many as were ordained
unto life, believed. They glorified the word of God, by acknowledging the truth
of it, by believing the promises of salvation proposed in it, by submitting
themselves to the power and authority of it, by walking answerably to it. Man's
obedience is the glory of Gods ordinance: the fruitfulness of the hearers, is
the crown of Gods Messengers.

in 1 Thessalonians. 1.5.
word only, but in power also: in power in lightning, in power converting and
changing the heart of man, working and perfecting grace in the inward man; then
the soul of man is filled with joy in the holy Ghost, then the Word is the joy
and rejoicing of the heart: then the Isai. 5.7.19.
fruit of the lip is peace, spiritual, inward, universal, plentiful and
perpetual peace; peace with God, peace with man, peace with the conscience; a
paradise of heavenly comforts, a river of peace, which no humane understanding
can fathom: And therefore it must be the care of men to see that they grow to
much spiritual perfection after the Ministers long and frequent preaching.

This therefore reproves such as after the long and frequent preaching of the
Gospel, continue barren and unfruitful, grounds about 2 King. 2.19.
Jericho, which were not made fertile, but rather barren, by the waters which
did flow upon them; to whom the waters drawn out of the wells of salvation,
are as waters powered upon the rock, which brings forth no fruit; from whom
the sounding of the trumpet of the Gospel, and the constant cry of Gods
watchmen, like the 1 King. 18 26.
call and cry of Baals worshippers from the morning to the evening upon Baal,
has no voice nor answer of faith in Gods promises, of obedience to Gods
precepts, nor of godly sorrow for men's transgressions, ministering matter of
complaint to God, provoking the site of Gods indignation against their souls.
I Isa. 64.2.
have spread out my hands all the day long (says the Lord) unto a rebellious
people, which walks in a way that is not good, after their own thoughts, a
people that provokes me to anger continually (...) face; ministering cause of
great complaint to Gods Messengers, causing them to say with the Prophet Esaias,
Isa. 53.1.
Who has believed our report, and to whom has the arm of the Lord been
revealed? to mourn and wish with Jeremy, O Jer. 9.1.
that my head were waters, and mine eyes a fountain of tears, that I might
weep day and night for the slain of the daughter of my people! O that I had
in the wilderness a lodging of wayfaring men, that I might leave my people,
and go from them; for they are all adulterers, and an assembly of treacherous
men! Great is the grief arising in the souls of Gods Ministers, when men
continue barren under their labors: And when men thrive not, ascend not to
perfection in grace by the care and industry of Gods watchmen, they lose that
Pro. 2.10.
knowledge, the presence whereof is more pleasant then the sun; that 1 Pet. 1.6.
faith, the enioyment whereof is more precious then all gold; that peace, which
is more comfortable and delightful then any paradise, then the garden of Eden
it self; and that communion with God, in comparison whereof the sweetest
communion with men is but an exilement, continuing their souls under the
dominion of sin, which is more loathsome and full of torment then any sickness;
under that bondage of Satan, which is infinitely worse then captivity under any
mortal tyrant, provoking God at length to leave them, and making their last
account, for all the Sermons which they have heard, most dreadful and most
uncomfortable.

Therefore let it be our care, after the Star of his Gospel a long time to
shine amongst you, and has made the dew of his doctrine to drop for diverse
years upon you: he has showed you his statutes and his testimonies, he has
not dealt so with every people, he has not showed such mercy to every
congregation; therefore, as the tree which has much soil cast about him,
brings forth much fruit; as the servant which had five talents, brought much
advantage to his Lord and Master; so strive ye to bring a measure of glory to
God, answerable to the measure of the means he has affoorded you: the Lord
has sown much, and looks to reap much; the harvest must answer the seed; be
therefore filled with all heavenly graces, as the sea with waters; be strong in
faith, as the tree grows deep in the roots; be fervent in love, as a fire
of much wood; abound in all the fruits of the Spirit, like the tree which bare
Rev. 22.2.
twelve sorts of fruit.

The more you abound in grace under the Gospel, the longer the Gospel shall be
continued, the more sweetness shall your souls taste in it, the nearer shall
you draw to God by it, the more effectually shall the pardon of your sin be
sealed up through it, and the more comfortable account shall you render to God
at last, for all the labors of his Ministers, whereof God has made you
partakers; the more comfortably shall I again behold your faces at our last
general appearance; the more blessed account shall I make to Christ, my great
Lord and Master, of this my Ministerial service, and shall the more joyfully
for the present, in the words of the Apostle here, this day take my last leave
of you and say, Finally, brethren, farewell: Be perfect, be of good comfort,
be of one mind, live in peace; and the God of love and peace be with you.

Finally, brethren. Brethren is a title of compellation, the second branch of
this tree: There are brethren by nature, brethren by condition, and brethren by
profession and participation of one Christ; the last of these are the brethren
here mentioned; whom the Apostle here styles brethren, in respect of
Original, having one God for their Father with him; in respect of Relation,
being knit to Christ by one bond of saving faith, and one golden chain of
unfeigned love among themselves, with Saint Paul the Apostle; and in respect of
true and fervent Love, the Apostle loving them as his brethren: and this the
Apostle chiefly intends here, it being his purpose now to manifest his love
unto them. And hence we learn,

That there is in all Gods faithful Ministers, a very fervent and unfeigned
love to their Hearers. A brotherly love, a love like that of Jonathan to David,
2 Samuel 1.26.
a love surpassing the love of women, being dear unto them, as the apple of
their eye, as the signet upon their finger, or the Bride unto the Bridegroom;
therefore are the Ministers styled Husbandmen, Shepherds, Watchmen, Parents,
Nurses: as the Husbandman loves the vineyard which he has planted, the
Shepherd the flock which he keeps, the Watchman the City which he
watches, the Father the children which he begets, or the Nurse the child to
which she draws forth her breast and feeds: so Gods Ministers love their
hearers, the vineyard which they plant, the flock which they keep, the City
over which they watch, the children which they ministerially beget and nurse;
for thus the people are styled by names expressing the Ministers high prizing
of them, great delight in them, and singular love unto them, as, Isa. 8.18.
children, 1 These. 2.19, 20.
hope, joy, crown of rejoicing, glory and joy: the Apostle putting on the
indulgent affection of a father, and in the strength and passion of his love,
so styles them, and speaks thus unto them, What is our hope, or joy, or crown
of rejoicing? Are not even ye in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ at his
coming? for ye are our glory and joy. And Saint Paul speaking of his love to
the Corinthians, calls it a 2 Cor. 7.4.
more abundant love, that is, a high, a strong, a transcendent love, such love
that he says, his 2 Cor. 6.11.
mouth was open to them, and his heart was enlarged: His whole man was open to
them (as a Bridegroomes house is opened to the Bride) to entertain them, to
love them, to rejoice in them, to communicate himself to the utmost unto them,
as the open Sun sends forth his light, and the open cloud does power out
his rain: nay, they were in 2 Cor. 7.3.
his heart to live and dye with them.

And who can doubt of the love of Gods faithful Ministers toward their
hearers, that shall but look,

Upon their labors to save the souls of 2 Timothy 4.2.
instant in season and out of season, taking all opportunities; they sow in the
morning, and withold not their hand in the evening; they have no rest, they
hold not their Isa. 62.11.
peace day nor night, as Naomi said of Boaz, The man will not be Ruth 3. ult.
at rest until he has finished the thing this day: so such is the love of
Gods Ministers, that they are at no rest, until they have finished the work
of grace in their hearers, consummated the marriage between them and Christ.

Upon their sorrows, sadness, sighs, child. Jer. 13.17.
Jeremies soul weeps in secret for his people. Isaiahs bowels sound like a
Isai. 16.11.
harp for Moab. Paul had Romans 9.2.
continual sorrow for the Jews, he was pained as a Gal. 4.19.
woman in travel for the Galatians; and out 2 Cor. 2.4.
of much affliction and anguish of heart he wrote with many tears to the
Corinthians, that they might know the love which he had more abundantly unto
them. You may in the tears and sorrows of Gods Ministers for the peoples
disobedience, read their love as in lively characters: the greatness of the
Ministers grief for the peoples misery, argues the strength of their desire to
make them happy.

2 Cor. 4.9
spectacle to Men and Angels: they suffer loss of goods, loss of peace, loss
of liberty, and loss of life, that they may be Acts 20.24.
faithful in their calling, finish the course of their Ministry, and save the
souls committed to them. The sufferings of faithful Ministers are a clear and
lively evidence of their love to their hearers. Gods Ministers do often
sustain great temporal losses for other men's everlasting gain and advantage.

And whereunto should this love of Gods Ministers move and work our hearts,

2. To humble submission and obedience to their doctrines, seeing they do all
in singular love for the salvation of our souls; these we should follow, as
Israel the fiery pillar; these we should readily put in practice, as Ahimaas 2 Samuel 18.
ran as soon as Ioab gave him a commission. The love of Gods Ministers should
work the hearers to a ready and singular observance of their doctrines.

3. This should breed in us reverence to their persons, as obedient children to
their loving parents, receiving and honoring their doctrines, as the word 1
These. 2.13.
of God, and not of man. Men must make their reverence proportionable to the
love and labor of Gods Messengers; the more they endeavor our salvation, the
more honorably we should think of them.

4. This should make us unwilling to be deprived of them, as children of a
loving nurse, the wife of a kind and careful husband, or the 1 Samuel 4.22.
wife of Phineas of the Arc: it should less grieve us to be deprived of all
earthly abilities, then of Gods faithful Ministers; the gain of the world
cannot recompense the loss of the Gospel: He never clearly discerned, nor
truly tasted Christ in the doctrine of Gods Messengers, that is not exceedingly
grieved at the loss of their labors.

5. This should draw love from us again to them, causing us to have them in 1
These. 5.13.
singular love for their works sake: the more we love them, the more readily
we shall receive their instructions, the more fully shall we subject our
selves to their admonitions, the more beauty shall we see in their doctrines,
the more sweetness shall we taste in their labors, and the more feelingly and
effectually shall the Minister wish and endeavor our peace and everlasting
welfare, speaking peace to us, and praying for all good things at the hands of
God for us, and saying at last with Saint Paul, Finally, brethren, farewell:
Be perfect, be of good comfort, be of one mind, live in peace; and the God of
love and peace be with you.

The third thing in these words, is a word of valediction, Farewell; a word
commonly used in the conclusion and upshot of Epistles; wherein the Apostle
wishes to them all happiness, joy, tranquillity, comfort, even all manner
welfare.

He had been long their Teacher, Watchman, and Monitor, yet at length he bids
them farewell, and takes his leave of them.

The labors of Gods choycest Ministers are not everlasting, but of a short
continuance. Note.
After a while the 1 King. 17.7.
brook Cherith, of which Eliah drank, was dried up, and he was commanded to
go to Zarepha, to look out for another place of supportment: After a while
the Minister, whose doctrine has been as a river to refresh and water us, is
taken from us, the brook of his doctrine is dried up, and we must look out
some other brook whereof to drink, or else our souls must starve and perish.

It should be therefore men's wisdom to keep and continue the faithful
Minister of God with them while they have him, and not delight in change of
Ministers, as men do in change of horses, lest they be deceived at last.
Prove. 27.10.
Thine own friend, and thy fathers friend, says Solomon, forsake not: As
friends, so Ministers, are not like houses and garments, commendable and to be
desired for their newness, but like Wives, for their long continuance and
experience we have of their faithfulness and labors.

And since the continuance of able Ministers is so uncertain, it should be
our care to make our best use of them while we do enjoy them: men buy while
the Mart lasts, men walk while the light shines, men enter while the gate
is open, and every man should strive to furnish his soul, to draw nigh to God,
to enter in to Christ, while God affoords an able Minister to guide and bring
us home to Christ Jesus. But this word, Valete, is commonly expounded by
another word, gaudete, rejoice ye, and then the meaning is this: If so be
that ye follow the counsel which has been given you, believe the doctrine
which has been taught you, and conform your selves to the rules which have
been prescribed to you, then you shall have matter and cause of great joy. And
hence note,

That the full and thorough conforming of our selves to the doctrine of Gods
Messengers, ministers great joy and gladness, though they depart from us. The
Israelites had great joy in that they had followed the fiery pillar, though at
length it left them, because before it left them, it brought them into the land
of Canaan. The Mat. 2.10.
wise men had matter of great joy in the star, though at length it was no
more a light unto them; because before it left them, it brought them unto
Christ. The traveller has great joy in the guide, though at length he cease
to be any more a guide unto him; because before he forsook him, he brought
him unto his home, at least led him far in his way, and showed him how to
walk aright unto his journeyes end. Man that thoroughly conformes himself to
the doctrine of Gods faithful Minister, has matter of great joy within him,
though the Minister of God at length leave him; because before he leaves him,
he has presented and opened Christ unto him, and brought him home to Christ,
by working faith and love in him; brought him into the state of grace, sown a
seed in his heart which shall never dye, kindled a light in his soul which
shall never go out, and set his feet in that way from which he shall never
wander, but walk on until he come unto his blessed and everlasting home. And
this is that which indeed gives cause of joy and gladness to the people, even
their full and effectual conforming themselves to the Ministers doctrine,
their observing his counsel, their obeying his admonition, their feeling the
power of his ministry in working a blessed and gracious change in them. The
Eunuch feeling faith wrought in him by Philips Sermon, and being baptized by
him, having his incorporation into Christ sealed up unto him, it is said, Act.
8.39.
He went on his way rejoicing, though the Spirit of the Lord caught away
Philip, that he saw him no more. It is said of them that believed upon Paul
and Barnabas his preaching, though the people raised persecution against Paul
and Barnabas, and expelled them out of their coasts; yet the Disciples, such as
were converted by their ministry, were Acts 13.48, 32.
filled with joy, and with the holy Ghost. And though the departure of Gods
faithful Ambassadors minister matter of great grief and sorrow to the souls
of true believers, as sometimes the men of Ephesus Acts 20 37, 38.
wept sore, and fell on Paul's neck and kissed him, sorrowing most of all for
the words which he spoke, that they should see his face no more; yet the fruit
of their ministry remaining, and the presence or succession of other able
Ministers to edify, and bring them unto further perfection, affoords them
matter of much and sweet rejoicing: though Paul departed from Jerusalem to
Tarsus, yet the Churches Acts 9.31.
were edified, and, walking in the fear of the Lord, and comfort of the holy
Ghost, were multiplied. Gods hand is not shortened, if one helper fail, he can
raise a second; if all fail, the Lord himself is all-sufficient: he that
truly profits by the Word when the Lord affoords it, shall never be destitute
of all spiritual comfort; whether the ministry fail or be continued, he
has a Day Star of grace risen within him, which shall give him some glimpse
of sweet and heavenly consolation: the soul of him that conformes himself to
the doctrine of Gods faithful Ministers, shall ever meet with some matter of
true joy and gladness.

In regard of the blessed presence of 2 Pet. 1.19.
Day Star of regeneration, which makes them joyful, as the Star did the
wise men: they feel in their hearts that Romans 14.17.
kingdom of God, that work of righteousness and peace which is attended with
joy in the holy Ghost, they discern that presence and operation of faith which
fills them with Romans 15.13.
all joy in believing; and they behold that Spirit of God dwelling in them,
which is the Joh. 14.16.
true Comforter, the author and fountain of all consolation.

Romans 16.20.
trodden under their feet, as Josua Jos. 10.24.
trod upon the necks of the Kings of Canaan; how their corruption is subdued
as 2 Cor. 10.4.
strong holds are cast down by warlike instruments; how the Minister of the
Lord has put the Devil and all his works to flight, as David sometime
overthrew 1 Samuel 17.
Goliath, and made all the Philistian army fly: And as Israel had great Exodus
15.1.
joy to see Pharaoh and his host drowned in the waters of the sea, so have
they matter of great joy to see Satan and all their lusts cast down.

to the doctrine of Gods Messengers, they 1 John 1.6.
have fellowship with God by prayer, as Petitioners with the great master of
Requests: By faith and love, as the Bride with the Bridegroom: By subjection,
as the subjects with their Sovereign: By meditation, as the rich men with
their treasure: By desire, as Pilgrims with their own country. And this is
the joy of all joys to Gods servants, even communion with God their Father,
and with Christ their Husband and Savior.

O then whiles you enjoy Gods Ministers, as Israel had the light shining in
Exodus 10.23.
Goshen, when the Egyptians had no light to shine upon them, but thick
darkness covered them: you shall have faith embracing Christ, filling you with
Christ's fullness, when others are strangers, and have no acquaintance with
Christ Jesus: you shall have the Romans 5.5.
love of God shed abroad into your hearts, which shall rejoice you more then
Cant. 1.3.
wine the thirsty, more then Psa. 4.6.
corn and oil rejoice the rich, or Psalm. 63.3.
life it self the living, though the dearest earthly possession: you shall
have the Col. 3.16.
peace of God, even that peace which passes all understanding, reigning within
you. And whenever the Minister of God departs from you, he shall be able
with confidence to commend you to God, bestow a blessed Legacy upon you, and
with Saint Paul's heart and words, joy and gladness, take his last leave of
you, and say, Finally, brethren, farewell: Be perfect, be of good comfort, be
of one mind, live in peace; and the God of love and peace be with you.

And thus are we come to the fourth branch of this Text, Saint Paul's
Exoptation, or Wish, Be perfect, be of good comfort: He does not wish them
earthly honors, worldly riches, carnal pleasures, but perfection of grace,
spiritual comfort, mutual love; unanimity and concord among themselves, and
sweet and sure communion with God. Note.
Heavenly and saving graces are the best gifts which any man can wish or desire
for others: These are the surest pledge of Gods love; the choycest ornament of
man's soul, the sweetest Ambassadors of peace to man's heart, the treasure of
greatest worth to enrich man, the gift of highest honor to enoble man, the
staff of greatest strength to sustain man, the companion of most pleasant
communion to solace and delight man, and the well spring of most plentiful and
lasting waters to fill and to content man, a star of everlasting brightness,
which will never set, nor leave us; And therefore these Saint Paul wishes to
the Corinthians, these he commends to them, wishes for them; bestows on
them, as the best Legacy he had to give them, the best possession he could
think on to leave behind among them.

And these gifts or Legacies of his, you have heard, are five; the full opening
and handling of which, requires no less then five days discourse; bu^ because
my glass is almost run, and my ministerial breath is now expiring and going
out, I shall l^^^ briefly open them, and leave them to ^our, long and lasting
consideration. The first is a Legacy of perfection, Be ye perfect: fill ye
up that which is wanting, increase, abound, go forward, be good proficien^^
in Christ's School, thriving trees in Gods Orchard, be more and more perfect.
And hence observe, that

It is the duty, and must be the c^^^ of Gods children to strive to more
spiritual perfection. As the house of David grew 2 Samuel 3.1.
stronger and stronger in victory over the house of Saul, and full possession
of the kingdom: so must they grow stronger and stronger in victory over their
corruption, and in the full possession of Christ and his kingdom. It is Gods
charge, 2 Pet. 3.18.
Grow in grace, as rich men in wealth, as trees in height; Ephesians. 5 18.
Be ye filled with the Spirit, as the Sea with waters, and as the air with
light. It is the property and practice of the Lords servants, like good Joh.
15.2.
branches, to grow and bear more fruit; to Ephesians. 4.11.
grow up in Christ which is the head, as the members in the body grow up under
the head; to Phil. 3.11, 12.
follow after, to press toward the mercy, to reach forth to the things which
are before, to apprehend that for which they are apprehended of Christ Jesus.
As they th^^ run in a race are swift, put to it with all their strength, and
cease not: so the runners in the race of godliness are swift, put to it to the
utmost, and cease not until they have fully apprehended Christ: They Isa 40.31.
run on and faint not, they mount up like the Eagles, and come nearer and
nearer unto Christ, as the Eagles fly nearer and nearer, and cease not, until
they come to the carcass: for,

Grace is of a growing and increasing Ezekiel. 47.5.
waters which came forth under the threshold of the Temple: it Prove. 4.18.
shines more and more like the light unto the perfect day.

God where he Phil. 1.6.
begins a good work, He is a King that once beginning to make war against
the Devil, and the lusts of men, goes on, and cease not until he has
obtained a full and perfect conquest. He is a builder, who having once laid the
foundation of grace in the heart of man, gives not over until he has finished
the house, and made the house of man a perfect Temple for his Spirit to dwell
in.

True and saving grace once felt and 1 Pet. 2.2.3.
tasted, and most earnestly de^^^d. As the love of money grows according to
the growth of money: so does the love of grace answer the growth of grace; the
more a man has of it, the more his soul does thirst and long after it, the
more he desires to be filled with it; as the thirst of the dropsie-man
increases by drinking. He that has least grace, puts the lowest price upon
it: no man more sensible of the want of grace, then he that has the greatest
measure of grace; no man more desires the increase of grace, then he that has
the greatest fullness of grace.

Gideons soldiers, whose hearts fainted; be not like the Luke 14.30.
Builder in the Gospel, that began to build, but could not make an end: Do not
with the 2 Pet. 2.22.
Sow return again, and wallow in the mire of sin: return not to your old
lusts and profanesse; But, as Genesis 6.14.22.
Noah, having a pattern from the Lord, began to build, and ceased not until he
had finished his Arc, and was preserved when the deluge came: so you, having
had a pattern of faith and life set before you, and having begun to build
according to it, cease not until the work is finished, that your souls may
be saved when the deluge comes. Be not like the Sun in Jos. 12.13.
Aialon, that stood still; nor like the Sun in Ahaz Dial, that went back:
but like the Sun mentioned by the Psalm. 19.5.
Psalmist, coming forth as a Bridegroom out of his chamber, and rejoice ye
like a mighty man to run his race. Where is your faith in Christ, if, like
withered branches, you fall off from Christ, or sink, like the house builded
on the sand? Where is your love to Christ, if you give him a bill of divorce,
and hold not out with him unto the end? Where is the fruit of your long
attendance upon Gods ordinances? What avails the sowing of all this seed, if
you fall away before the harvest? Where is the Crown you look for, if ye
faint before the conquest?

O then take heed, hold out, let your works be more at last then at first, be
constant in your profession, be fruitful in all well-doing, Be Phil. 1.10.
filled with the fruits of righteousness, which are to the praise and glory of
God in the day of Christ Jesus: So shall the Lord take pleasure in you, so
shall you honor the Gospel, adorn Religion, shame the Adversary, glorify the
Ministry, and fill your own conscience with much peace and quietness, and
give the Minister good and lust occasion to speak to you in a comfortable
language, to bid you, with Saint Paul, to be of good comfort.

The second Legacy which the Apostle here bequeatheth: a Legacy of
Consolation; Be of good comfort. Though many changes come, many troubles
arise, and many afflictions be endured for the Name and Cause of Christ, yet
do not faint, be not disheartened, but be of good comfort, solace and comfort
your selves in the Lord and his Word: And hence learn, that

Gods children ought to be very comfortable, though many changes and
afflictions do attend them. The Lilly is fresh and beautiful, and looks
pleasantly, though growing among the thorns: such must be the affection and
disposition of Gods children, though compast about with the Thorns and Briers
of many troubles. Jam. 1.2.
Account it all joy (says Saint James) to fall into manifold temptations. Romans
5.3.
We glory in tribulations (says Saint Paul) knowing that tribulation works
patience, and patience experience, and experience hope; and hope makes not
ashamed. 1 Pet. 1.8.
And, believing (says Saint Peter) ye rejoice with joy unspeakeable and full
of glory. And Gods children have great cause of comfort,

In regard of the Author of their afflictions: Heb. 12.7.
God as a Father; they are not a rod in an enemies, but in a Fathers hand; they
are all in mercy; they are a serpent which has lost his sting, the venom of
them is gone.

In regard of their end: They are not for 2 Samuel 18.
David sent forth his Army against Absalom, not to destroy him, but to humble
and amend him.

In regard of the comforts mixed with Sampsons Jud. 1 4.
Lion, they have a honey comb within them; There is sweet coming out of the
sour, and meat coming out of the eater.

In regard of the fruit and issue of them: Like the waters of the red Sea,
which drowned not Exodus 14.
Israel, but the enemies which pursued them; no more do these destroy Gods
children, but the corruption which is within them, which hangs like a heavy
weight about them, and like an enemy pursues and follows them.

O then be of good comfort all ye that love the Lord, that embrace his
Christ, that delight in his service, keep your selves from sin, and
whatsoever come; let your hearts be joyful, the Lord shall give you comfort:
God will comfort you as a King his subjects, dispensing all for your good by
his gracious providence; as a Father his Children, by making all provision for
you: Christ shall comfort you as a friend, by his presence, as a Bridegroom by
his love: The Spirit shall comfort you as a witness, by his evidence: The Word
shall comfort you as a Light guiding, as a Feast feeding you: The Minister
shall comfort you as an Interpreter, an Angel of God, one of a thousand,
bringing the tidings of peace to you: The Creature shall comfort y^^ (...)
^^^vant, ministering all his (...) to (...) Servants of God shall comsort y^u,
as ^^mpanions with you. Your Conscience shall comfort you, as a blessed Inmate,
dwelling under the same roof with you; as a chaste and loving wife, that
lodges in your bosom day and night; You shall have comfort, and be of one
mind.

The third Legacy bequeathed by Saint Paul to the Corinthians: a Legacy of
consent and unanimitie in matter of doctrine, religion, study and practice of
all godliness: Teaching ^s, that

^^ere must be unanimitie and consent between Gods children, in matter of
Doctrine and Religion. All that builded Noah's Arc, builded by one pattern: all
Israel traveled to the land of Canaan by the light of one fiery Pillar: all
the passengers in a ship row by one Compass: all that intend to build
themselves a spiritual house to God, must build by one Rule of Gods word: all
that will travel to the Heavenly Canaa^ must make one Word of God the lig^^ ^f
them feet, and the lantern of their (...) to guide them, all that will come to
the ^^^en of e^^^nall peace, must have one testimony of the Lord to direct
them. Let us walk (says the Apostle) by the Phil. 3.16.
same rule, let us mind the same thing: And again, Be Phil. 2.2.
ye of one accord, and of one mind.

We have one spiritual and heavenly King, and must observe one Law; we have
one God, and must worship by one Rule; we have one Shepherd, and must be
commanded by one voice; we have one head, and must follow one direction.

He that dissents from true doctrine, makes his religion an abomination: he
that rends himself from the Church of Christ, in Christ's worship and service
here, will be rent from Christ and the Church for ever hereafter. As we
therefore are members of one body, and Scholars in one School, let us learn
one lesson, follow one guide, that we may know aright, believe aright, walk
aright, and preserve the unity of the Spirit in the bond of Peace; living both
with God, and amongst our selves, in a sweet and blessed peace.

The fourth Legacy which S. Paul here bequeatheth: a Legacy of mutual
unity, peace and concord between themselves; thereby teaching us, that

There must be a mutual, sweet, an entire peace and affection between Gods
people. As there was a concord between the stones in Solomon's Temple, they were
so fitted and disposed, that there was no noise heard in the building thereof:
such a sweet conjunction of affections should there be between the people of
God, that no noise, no clamor, nor cries should be heard among them. Peace is
a jewel which we are charged to seek: Psa. 34.14.
Seek peace, and ensue it (says the Psalmist.) 1 These. 5.14.
Be at peace amongst your selves, and Heb. 13.1.
let brotherly love continue, says the Apostle. This is an honor, crown, and
Col. 3.12.
ornament unto man, as the garment to the body, as the flower to the garden:
This is a necessary 1 Cor. 16.14.
ingredient in all our services, a salt seasoning all our actions: This
sweetens all our possessions, and all our afflictions, as the Exodus 15.25.
tree sweetened the waters of Marah: Without this, the fullness of the world is
uncomfortable; with this, the greatest affliction is made very tolerable: this
qualifies and fits us for Communion with God, as communion with the children
prepares a man for communion with the parent.

Remember then your God is the God of peace, your Jesus the Prince of peace,
your Gospel the Gospel of peace, your calling the calling of peace, your way
the way of peace: And therefore so live in peace, that the God of love and
peace may be with you.

The fifth and last Legacy here bequeathed: Sweet and gracious communion with
God, whom he styles, The God of Love and Peace; because he is the Author and
fountain of love and peace. He desires and promises their communion with
God, as a thing wherein consisted their supreme and choycest good: For,

Sweet and comfortable communion with God, is man's choycest good. Wherein
stands the happiness of a child, but in communion with his father? 2 Samuel
14.32.
Absoloms life was but a burden when he might not see his fathers face.
Wherein stands the comfort of a wife, but in communion with her husband? And
wherein consists the happiness and comfort of the soul of man, but in having
fellowship and communion with God his heavenly Father, and Husband? For this
the souls of Gods people have most vehemently longed, this they have most
highly prized; in the fruition of this, they have pronounced themselves most
blessed; and for this, have Christ's Apostles prayed in the behalf of others,
as for that gift and blessing which of all others is most desirable.

O therefore humble your souls, remove your sins, return to God speedily,
fully, unchangeably; attend his ordinances, believe his promises, walk in the
ways of his commandments, grow up in Christ Jesus; and you shall have that
communion with God which shall encourage you against all fears, comfort you in
the midst of all sorrows, sustain you in all distresses, satisfy you in the
absence of all abilities, and be an abundant recompense for all losses, and an
inchoation of that eternity of communion which you shall have for ever with God
in heaven.

And now, Brethren, the star of my Ministry is here set, and the candle of
my labors is gone out, no more to be lighted (as I conceive) in this place. I
am now no more, no longer a Watchman to admonish you, a Guide to conduct you,
or a Shepherd to feed you: the God that sent me, and set me here amongst
you, has now again called me from you, and placed another over you, to be, I
trust, an instrument of greater good then I have been unto you.

Of my self, Brethren, I can say nothing, but as sometime Gideon said of
himself, Judge. 6.15.
My thousand is the meanest in Manasseh, and I am the least in my fathers
house: So may I say, My talent is (of many) the meanest, and I am the least,
the weakest, and unworthiest of many thousand Ministers in God my Fathers
house: I am but a wooden vessel, the treasure is the Lords; I am but as a
worm, and no man; I am nothing, it is the Lord has done all that little good
which has been done by me in this function; let me therefore, for the time
to come, be reputed as nothing, forgotten like a dead man out of mind, and
like a broken vessel: And if any soul has benefited under my labors, let
all the glory be given to Christ Jesus.

For my self I have somewhat to say, but not much: I have now served you more
than two Apprentiships; wherein, I trust, I have so served you, that I may say,
as Paul did to the men of Ephesus, I am Acts 20.26, 27.
pure from the blood of all amongst you: for I have not shunned to declare unto
you all the counsel of God; all that, I mean, which God has made known to
me; according to my weak and poor abilities, I have disclosed all, I have
kept back nothing from you. In the work of my Ministry I have had no respect
of persons; I never shunned the declaration of any truth, nor spared the
reprehension of any vice for fear of any man's greatness; neither favor nor
fear ever made me false in the discharge of my office. As Elihu sometimes
said, I Job 32.21.
have not accepted any man's person, nor given flattering titles unto any man:
For I knew not to give flattering titles, because in so doing, my Maker would
take me away. I have truly desired the salvation of your souls, and that is
my c^^^fors: I should have done more then I have done, and that is my shame;
more labor has been bestowed then profit yet appears, and that is your
sin and my discomfort. My service has been long amongst you; the longer I
served you, the more I loved you, the more unwilling I was to leave you. I can
truly say to you what Paul did to the Corinthians, You were in my heart to live
and to dye with you, my mouth was open to you, my heart was enlarged; ye were
not straightened in me, but ye were straightened in your own bowels. Had your
hearts (at least according to your present outward expression) been toward me,
as mine was toward you, I am persuaded nothing but death had parted us, as
sometime Ruth said to Naomi; I should have valued your love, your society, the
enjoyment of your presence, above the chiefest and most abundant worldly
abilities: I should have chosen rather to have lived with you in the lowest
outward condition, then elsewhere in the greatest fullness of the world; so
unwilling was I to leave you, that if occasion had required, I would have
relinquished all, rather then any prejudice should have come unto you by my
departure from you. But God has so disposed and framed it, that no impediment
to my departure hence has been offered; it is the hand of God has done it,
whether in judgment unto me, or in mercy unto you, ensuing time will manifest.

Three things there are very memorable, touching Gods goodness in this place
toward me, which I cannot pass in silence.

1. In all this time of my service, I was never hindered one Lords day by
sickness from my Ministerial labors; the Lord that set me over you, gave me
health and strength to do his work among you.

2. I was never suppressed not restrained from the liberty and use of my
ministry by any opposition, though there have been adversaries both politic
and powerful.

3. Though in this place I have had neither certainty nor competencie to
sustain me and my family; yet the Lord has from elsewhere raised means to
uphold me, and to enable me to continue the labors of my Ministry amongst
you: I can truly speak to you in Saint Paul's language to the men of Ephesus,
Acts 20.33, 34.
I have coveted no man's silver, or gold, or apparel; Yea, your selves (do,
at least may) know, how these hands have, after a sort, ministered unto my
necessities, and to them that were with me. (I speak not this to disparage
you, or to under-value the kindness which I have received from you; I am very
mindful, and very sensible of your favors, from the highest to the lowest:
and though I am not complementall, yet be ye assured your courtesy and
kindness shall rest with me, as a strong and inviolable obligation to bind
me to your everlasting service, even to the very utmost of my slender
abilities, to my power, and beyond my power, if ever, and as often as occasion
shall require it, or you manifest your desire of it.) And what shall I say of
these things, or how shall I express my self toward my God for these his
great mercies toward me, but in the words of the Psalmist, Psalm. 31.19.
O how great is thy goodness which thou have laid up for them that fear thee,
which thou have wrought for them that trust in thee, before the sons of men!

And now, Brethren, having no more time nor place, nor calling to instruct and
teach you, to admonish and warn you, O let me, as a lover of your souls, a
helper of your joy, a promoter of your peace, and a well-wisher of your
everlasting welfare; O let me, I say, with burning love in my heart, with
melting sorrow in my soul, with tears of grief in mine eyes, and with the
language of a faithful friend in my tongue, entreat you, persuade and beseech
you to remember what you have heard, to practice what you have learned, and to
bring forth the fruits of the seed which has been here sown. And before I
go, let me bless you as Moses blessed the twelve tribes before he died,
Deuteronomy. 33.6, 7.
Let the men of this place, O Lord, live and not dye, let them live the life of
grace, and not dye the second death: and let not the men thereof be few.
Hear, Lord, the voice of Plympton when they pray, and bring them in peace and
holiness to thine own people: Let their hands be sufficient for them, teach
thou their hands to war, and their fingers to fight, and gird thou them with
strength to battle against sin, Satan, the world, and all the enemies of
their salvation: be thou their helper in all dangers, their strength against
all oppositions.

Let thy Thummim and thy Urim, thy perfections and thy lights be with thy holy
one whom thou shall set over this Congregation: Let him prefer his duty and
function above all natural affection, and have no respect of persons: Let him
teach this people thy Judgments and thy Law by his Doctrine: Let him appease
thy wrath, and procure thy favor and blessing for them by his prayer and
supplication. Bless, Lord, his substance, furnish and fill him with all inward
and outward endowments, and prosper all his godly labors.

Let this people, Lord, as thy beloved, dwell in safety by thee, and cover them
under the wings of thy protection all the day long, and for ever dwell, O Lord,
between their shoulders; stablish and settle with them thine ordinance, make
this place thy habitation, and thy rest for ever.

The Lord bless your Land with the precious things of heaven, with the
influence and moisture from above, and make it fertile; the Lord bless your
souls with all heavenly graces, and make you spiritually fruitful; For the
good will of him that dwelt in the busts. Let the blessing, even all good
things speedily, fully, sweetly and constantly come upon your heads, that all
may see and observe it, and learn how good it is to serve the Lord through the
observation of it.

The Lord make your glory like the Firstling of a Bullock, for your joy and
gladness, for your excellency and amiablenesse in the eyes of all beholders,
and for your growth in all spiritual gifts and graces; and your horns like
the horns of an Unicorne, for your strength and prevailing over all opposing
powers.

The Lord make you to rejoice in your going out, and in your tents: The Lord
bring you to his holy mountain, and make you there to offer the sacrifice of
righteousness. The Lord enlarge you in dissolving all your sins, in
despelling all your sorrows, in removing all your troubles, in filling you
with all temporal and heavenly fullness; and make you like a Lion for your
victory over all your adversaries for your vigilance and watchfulness, and for
your resolution and courage in all godly undertakings.

The Lord satisfy you with his favor, the Lord fill you with his blessing,
and make you acceptable in his eyes, and in the eyes of your brethren.

And let me charge you now, Brethren, before my ministerial breath expire, as
David, a little before his death, charged his son Solomon, 1 Chro. 28.9.
And you, my brethren, know ye the God of your fathers, and serve him with a
perfect heart and with a willing mind: for the Lord searches all hearts, and
understands all the imaginations of the thoughts: If you seek him, he will
be found of you, but if you forsake him, he will cast you off for ever.

Let me now before I leave you, and in the conclusion of my Ministry, pray
for you, as Saint Peter did for the people in the conclusion of his Epistle, 1
Pet. 5.10.
The God of all grace, who has called us into his eternal glory by Christ
Jesus, after that ye have suffered a while, make you perfect, stablish,
strengthen, settle you: And being now to leave you, as sometimes Saint Paul
left Ephesus, let me commend you to God in the words of Saint Paul, Act. 20.32.
And now, Brethren, I commend you to God, and to the word of his grace, which
is able to build you up, and to give you an inheritance among all them which
are sanctified. And as I this day begun, so let me this day for ever conclude,
Finally, brethren, farewell: Be perfect, be of good comfort, be of one mind,
live in peace; and the God of Love and Peace be with you.


