THE HONEST AND PLAIN DEALING FARIER OR A PRESENT REMEDY FOR curing diseases
and hurts in Horses.

Gathered and written as well for the good ^f any that will practice it, as for
my self, there being nothing contained therein but what is of my own
experience and practice.

By THOMAS GRYMES.

LONDON, Printed by Will Loutes for Andrew K^^^be dwelling by St: Margarets
hill in long Southw^cks* 1636.

A GOOD AND necessary Book for curing diseases, and hurtes in Horses: gathered
and written for the good of any that will practice, there being nothing
contained therein, but what is of my own experience and practice, and whereof
I have had good proffe.

And first for diseases in the head of a Horse.
HEADACHE, which sometime comes of collerick humors bred in the brain, or
of some extreme heat, or by some stroke, or such like, the sign of all such
infirmities. The Horse will be heavy, hang down his head, and his eyes will
be swollen dim and waterish.

Remedies for the same.
Squise the juice of ground-Ivie into his nose thriles it is good, or burn the
blades of Garlic and Frankensence in a Chafindish, and hold the horse nose
over it that the smoke may go into the same, this will purge his head
marveilously, and do this so often as ye shall think needful, or let him
blood in the palate of his mouth if the sign be not there, or neesing powder
and pepper brayed together and blown into his nose with a quill is also very
good.

For watering of a Horses eyes,

Which may come to a young Horse by eating over-dry and hard meats.

The remedies.
Let him blood on his temple vain, or on the vain under his eye, or on the
neck which aswageth the humors of the whole body, and if it have continued
long, then wash it with the juice of planteine, but if it come of a stroke,
then make a cake or a ball of pimpernell and swines dung, dry it in an oven
^ill it will be powder, and put of that powder in the horse eye, for ^he hawe,
or as it is commonly ^alled the hoakes, I need not write, very man almost can
cure the same.

For a Peable in a Horse eye.
Take Tuty a Pothecary has it bray it and blow it into he ^horse eye, this
T^ty (...) stone and if you cannot have it, then take white copperous and use
it in the same manner.

For the Lampas.
Sometimes I use to draw out the Lampas with a crochet or crooked Iron made red
hot that it does not bleed after, and then with a lance^ lets it bleed, and to
heal the sore again take a little honey, a little peper, temper them with a
quantity of vinegar, boil them together a little space on the fire, and
therewith anoint the sore three or four days together, or to let him blood
with a fleame or a knifes point on both sides of his mouth, but beware lest ye
cut the vein which comes right down the palate of his mouth, for so he may
bleed to death, and if ye fear he shall bleed too much, give him a little
malte to eat very small ground.

There is a malady in a Horse mouth that will hinder him to eat his meat.
There be little small or round swellings in the mouth and lips of a horse,
which will make him let his meat fall out of his mouth as though he had the
Lampas, clip them away with a pair of Cissers, and rub the places with a
little salt.

A malady in a Horse belly much like the botts, I call it Tronches, ye may know
the evil by these tokens, he will ye down often, and offer to welter or
tumble, he will offer to gnaw and bite at his sides; he will strike ahis belly
with his hinder feet, and his sides will flacke and beat sore, and in a short
time it will pierce through his maw, then he shall be in great danger to die,
but to help him at the first.
Take out the guts of a young Pullet, make your horse head be holden up and
put them into his throat while they be warm, and make him swallow them down;
do thus three mornings together, and let him neither eat nor drink after for
the space of four or five hours.

Or take a peck of Rye, steep it in water a day and a night, then take it
forth and lay it on a dry earthen floor as much as ye can from the wind, and
let it come or burgion there as malt, then dry it in an oven or on a Kilne, and
when it is dry give thereof to your horse two handfulls for his first meal in
a morning and thus do five or six mornings one after another.

Helps for the sinews if they be either pricked or cut asunder.
If a sinew be pricked, take these hot things, meat, oil, swines grace, honey,
of each alike, putting thereto powder of Vares, make a plaster of all
together, and lay it to the sinew, dress it so every day till it be whole, and
if the flesh be piersed or cut, th^^ boil bean meal and barley me^^e in wine,
with a quantity of honey, till it be plaster thick and lay that on the sore.

Another yet for the same, which takes away all aching of sinews bruised or
pricked.
Take crops of walwort mallow leaves, of each two handful, of lily roots a
handful, stamp them well altogether, and boil them on the fire in a quantity
of honey till they be thick like a plaster, and lay to the sore twice on the
day reasonable hot. But if a sinew be cut overtwart, so as it is not likely to
grow together again, then take groundwormes, the greater the better, stamp
them with a little honey, then warm it a little in a pan, and with a cloth bind
it to the cutting every day, or every second day once, till it be whole, and
let not the sinews that are pricked or cut, be wet with any thing but the
medicines, if ye can avoid it.

Of the enchafing of a Horse neck, or other place of him, which may come by
heat of blood after great travel, which by rubbing against a wall, or a tree
will cause scabs rise in his neck, among the hair, sometime on the saddle
place, to help this.
Take unquenched Lime a quantity, such like of beans ashes, or of bean straw,
then take old piss, set it on the fire till it boil, and skime it clean, and
while it is hot, put into it your lime and ashes, mingle them well together,
let them stand so, till the next day, then take the clear into another
vessel, and every day once, wash the malady with a quantity thereof made hot.

When an horse halteth to know whether the harm be in the shoulder, knee, or
in his foot, and to help him.
If the harm be in his foot, he will forbear to tread straight, but even
upon the point of his foot, and he will bear it far from him, and make
semblance as though he would fall often, he will make like signs, and if the
grievance be either in his knee or shoulder, then 'its doubtful to be
incurable, unless it come by a stroke or a fall, ye may use softning
ointments, but they will do no great good. Some will fear them where they
think the disease to be, which is contrary to nature, for that the disease
comes of dryness: But if it happen in the shoulder by reason of some stroke
or fall, or bruising otherwise: then make a bathe for it on this manner
following: Take of Ribwort, some call it ribgrasse, 5. or 6. handful, of
Bay Leaves, Peny-riall, Hysope, Crowfoot, Oke-leaves, and red Fenel, of every
one a handful, boil all these herbs in fair water a good space, and twice in
a day wash the malady with a pint of this water made hot for the space of five
or six days together, and afterward anoint and rub well into it this
subsequent unction, which is made in manner as here is set down, ten handful
of the leaves of Pelitory, Bay Leaves, and oke-leaves, of either five handful,
of Sage-leaves four handful, stamp all these herbs very small, boil them
then a good space, and with a soft fire, in a gallon of butter, and a quart of
neat-oyle: then strain all through a canvas bag or cloth, and keep it then as
ye can conveniently, either in a box, or whatsoever, and if ye have of this
ointment in store, ye need never to use Oil de bay, Nerve-oyle, nor any other
that can be named. And if a horse foot be hurt with a stub, or pricked with a
nail in shooing, then search it well with thy instrument for that purpose,
then put a little tallow, or rather Turpentine in the hole, cover it with his
own dung, and set on a shoo, but so as ye may take it off again at your
pleasure, to dress the foot as need shall require.

And if a horse halt through tenderness of his hoof, or breaking away
thereof, thus he may be helped, and his hoof made to grow again. Take 2.
ounces of Roson, as much of sheep tallow, half an ounce of frankensence, and
half an ounce of virgin wax, half an ounce of swines grease, or more or less
of every one as ye shall think good, melt them altogether and keep it for
thine use, and when thou shall use any thereof heat it, or turpentine and
swines grease boild together is very good for this purpose, the salve must be
rubbed on his foot under and above, especially at the top of his hoof under
the hair these are excellent remedies for this matter.

For Windgales.
Every man knows of what fashion they be, and they are commonly on good
horses legs, rather than on bad ones, and worse to sight then otherwise: but
to cure them ye shall take a quantity of vinegar, a pottle, or as you please,
if so much, then must ye have thereto two pound of armement, half a pound of
galls, and half a pound of moleine leaves, stamp them, or bray them small,
and temper them altogether with the vinegar, put all in an earthen pot, stop it
well and close, and with the same liquor wash the windgales every day five or
six times, for the space of three or four days together; that done, lap his
leg above and beneath the gales, then chafe or rub them with your hand, which
will make them rise full, that ye may see them the better, then strike your
fleame into them as deep as ye dare for piercing the sinews, thrust the matter
well out of them with your finger, and have ready a hot Iron blunt at the
point, and therewith sear the holes which ye make, and every day after wash
them with the liquor aforesaid, and it will soon be whole.

For the Stranglion:
Take the bark of an Elm tree which grows upon some water bank, if you can
get such, take away the outside thereof as Tanners cleanse their bark, chop it
into small pieces, put it then into an earthen pot with well-water, let it stand
so 2. or 3. days, in which time much of the water will be sunk into the
bark, fill up the pot then again with water, there will be two parts of bark,
and the third part water, or rather 3. parts bark and the fourth water: boil
these well together the space of half an hour, which done set it from the
fire and let it cool, then strain it through a cloth and look how much liquor
remains, put thereto so much of swines grease, heat them then a little on the
fire that they may be well blended, and every day power a gille of this same
into his nose-thriles till a gallon of liquor be spent, when ye do it cause
your horse head to be holden up, or take 8. or 10 handfuls of walwort, stamp
it very small, then menge it with butter clean clarified, you must have a
pottle of butter, put all in a vessel or pot, and let it stand so the space of
6 or 7. days, then set it on a soft fire and boil it, putting therein a pint
or a quart of wine, and let it boil the space of a quarter of an hour, then
streeme it through a canvas bagg or cloth, and every day put some of this
licour into his nose-thriles till all be spent. Or make 10. or 12. balls of
May butter and Radish roots well stamped together, and make him swallow 2 or
three of those balls every day, and if ye wet them a little in honey they
shall be the better, cause his head to be holden or tied up, that they may go
down his throat.

Costifenes how it may be engendered and to help its.
It may come with eating overmuch dry meats, or for want of water in
convenient times, or of cold taken after travel. The horse that is so will
forbear his meat, he will thrust out his head and hang it far from him, and
his belly will be stiff and hard. To help him hereof, take the roots of
Walwort or rather the out side or rinds of the roots, and of the rinds of the
middle pith of Elder, of each of these a handful, boil them in three pints of
water till one pint be wasted, then strein it through a cloth, make his head be
bound or holden up, and power the Liquor into him milk warm, then cover him
very warm with clothes, and within an hour or two, he will donge and so
after that, more and more. Or stamp onions and butter together, and make
pellits thereof, so long as a man's finger, put three or four of them in at the
horse fundament, then walk him or ride him forth the space of an hour or two
after, and this will help him without fail. If a horse may not piss well.

Take the root of gladine that bears the yeolow flower, of walwort crops, of
egremony, of chervel of each a handful, boil the^ in water, streine it through
a cloth, give him a quart thereof at once milk warm ride him in the fields a
good trot the space of half an hour, set him up in the stable, cover him
warm, and a while after he will stale, cause him to be rubbed well under the
belly with a wispe, especially about the Share, and within a day after let him
blood on the great vain of his thigh.

For to help the Ring-bone.
Take eysel, armement, and a quantity of verdgrece boil them in a little
swines greece, rub this well, and often, in the disease. Or take an ounce of
vertigrece and an ounce of frankensence a quantity of bores greece, make a
plaster, and lay it on the ring-bone, but if you lance the skin a little it
is better, not deep for fear of hurting sinews.

For the Malanders.
Rub them with honey, take a shive of cheese tossed it well at the fire, and bind
it to the soar as hot as ye think he is able to endure it, Or rub them with a
wispe, or a hard cloth till the blood come, anoint them then with a little
fat bacon, then lay on powder of Brimstone, and hold a hot iron to it so near
as conveniently you can to make it cleave on, that done, have a plaster ready
to tie about the sore compounded of a quantity of garlike, henes donge, the
gall of a swine if ye can get it, and musterd, and new this plaster as ye see
it to be needful.

For craches, or as some call them scratches.
Clip away the hair as near as ye can, then stamp hens donge and goose donge
together, with a quantity of May butter make it hot, and so lap it on the
sore, or mingle lime, honey, and salt together and lay them hot on the disease.

For the Pains, and how to cure them.
Take a sponefull or two of honey a quantity of soote of a chimnie, a handful
of nettles, in winter the roots, stamp them altogether, make plasters
thereof and lay them hot on the sore do so every day, or bind unto it copost
of a man, immediately as he has left it at the stool Or take a sponefull of
utrament powdered 2 yolks of eges, 2 whole leekes or more or less of these as
need requires, stamp the^ altogether with a quantity of swins grese and
honey, and lay them to the malady, and when ye se it begin to heal anoint it
with sheep tallow.

For a disease called chawdpisse which is hot piss a burning or scalding heat
of his water which when he staleth will be red, almost like blood.
To help him, make him drink every day for the space of 4 or 6 days, a
gallon of whey in a dark place and if he be loath to take it, let him be kept
from other water or liquor till he be very desirous of drink. Or take 6
handfulls of pentafilon, some call it five leased grass wash it clean, stamp
it small, put it in a pot with a pottle of well water cover it close and let it
stand so a day and a night, the next day set it on the fire make it boil till
the one half or more be wasted then streine it through a cloth, and either let
him drink this liquor, or power it into him with a horn three or four
mornings, and it will help him.

How to heal a Curb
First clip the hear clean away, then garse the place with a rasour or sharp
knife, but not too deep for fear of cutting the sinews, and cut it even
down the leg then stroke the blood out with your hand or with a small rod,
that don, rub it every day with a little soap and salt or anoint it with honey
wormwood and swines greece mingled, and do this twice on a day.

For the Glanders.
Take 3 or 4 penny worth of oil debaie, as much of popilion, three half penny
worth of oil olive or, more or less of all these as need is, boil them
altogether a while on the fire and therewith anoint the soar. Or take Leckes
and sheep snet boil them together and make means to bind them to the soar
with a cloth.

For a Tanite.
Shave the hair away with a raisour till blood spring out, take then a cock
or other pullet cleave him right by the back not clean thorough into two
pieces, and while he is warm, bind him to the horse leg guts and all, let him
remain so two days and two nights, and when ye take him away, wash the place
with warm water, and when the leg is dry, then lay on it a plaster made of
baco^ and wheat flower and let that lie on two days, or wind his leg with
asmal cord and it will make the vein rise full under his fetlocke. Let him
blood there, strike not your sleame too deep for hurting the sinews, and when
it has bled well bind unto it the white of an egg.

For the Botts.
Take as much black soap as a walnut or as a good crabe a sponefull of the
powder of sencreke, a sponefull of the black ermnies a quantiti of brimstone,
and a little salt, mingle all these in ale and give him to drink, and
thereupon ride him forth a quarter of an hour, and let him not drink after
till night, or nor till next morning if ye give him this medicine late on the
day.

For a horse that is broken winded.
Let him blood in the nose with an awle if the sign be not there, then take a
penny worth of long peper, as much of grains of Mace as much of round peper
as much, mingle all these in a pint of red wine and so much of old ale give him
this to drink four mornings, let him have nooe other drink till mid day then
give him a gallon of water lewe warm, and a handful or two of ground Malte
pu^ therein, wrap his legs those days up to his body, and cover him warm,
and maost his hay with water for these four days.

If a Horse be gawled or hurt on his back with a Saddle.
Wash the soar well with old piss, then strew upon on it brayed rosen, and
when you see it begin to heal, make a plaster with honey, flower and an egg,
and lay that upon it, or the powder of honey and lime burned together, will
cure that or any other sore.

A good remedy for the scab.
Wash the horse with old piss or Lie, then take a quantity of quicke-silver,
Brimstone, spanish, soape, vertigrece, and swines greece, boil altogether, and
rub them all over his body, rub hard and chafe the salve into his skin,

If a horse be hurt or bruised so as he pisseth blood.
Sees Barlie in the Iuse of Comfrey, give him the barlie to eat, and the Iuse
to drink.

For a horse that is surbayte.
Take virgin wax, Rosen, pich, and sheep tallow, boil them and make
plasters, and them about the foot or feet that are surbaite.

To take dead flesh out of a wound or any sore.
Put compost or excrementes of a man into an earthen pot, dry it in a hot oven
till it will powder, lay thereof in the sore, then mingle an eg with salt, and
lay that on the sore with a cloth or flax, and wash it every day with piss,
or boil vertegreece and sheep tallow together, it will do the same, or
honey and lime burnt together, the powder thereof is good, for it will both eat
away the dead flesh, and heal the sore, but at every dressing, you must wash
the wound with piss.

For a splint.
Take a great onion, make it hollow, put into it a quantity of lime
vertigreece, and lavander seeds, then roast it till it be soft, lance the
splint, lay the same to it warm, and and it will cure it.

If a horse yard or cods be hurt with a stroke, so that they swell.
Take two or three handfulls of smallage, or more if you list, stamp it in a
mortar or other things, wring out the Juice into some vessel, get as much red
wine lies if it be possible, else of other wine, mingle them well together, and
there withal wash his yard and cods three or four times a day it is excellent
for that purpose.

Here is an end of Cures, and medicines, I could and might have set down many
more medicines, but these already set down have I found best in use, and they
will not fail.

And here follows party observations: first to make a horse quick on the
spur that is dull.
PEarce his skin a little on either side, and with an auntler raise the skin
from the flesh, and put in either hole a little burnt salt, which will make the
places rankle, keep him so three or four days that he be not riden, then set
a man or Lad on him that may spur him right in those places which are sore, and
when he comes in, wash the places with piss, salt, and nettle roots boiled
together, then anoint the places with a little honey it will heal them, and
make the horse grow, and after this, he will answer the spur better for ever.

To make a white place in a horse head, or any where.
Take a tile-stone burn it, and bray it to powder, then take lilie roots,
daysie roots, and the roots of white bryer, of every one alike much dry them,
and make them into powder, then shave the place you would have white till the
blood be ready to follow, then rub it soar with all the powders blended
together, get two or three mold warpes boil them a great space in water, and
put into it when it has boiled a good while, a quantity of honey and a
quantity of honey sokle flowers if ye can get them, wash it thus 3 or 4.
days, keep the wind from it as much as you can, and it will grow white, and so
continue for ever.

To cause a Horse that he shall not ney.
Where or whenever you would keep your horse from neying tie but a little
woollen list about the midst of his tongue.

For the yeolowes.
First let him blood on the neck then take one half penny worth of long
peper, as much of bays, as much anneseedes, of fenecreke, of grains of
lichorish, of every one, one half penny worth, of safron a penny worth, and if
you take a quantity of goose donge and streine it, and put the juice thereof
in your medicine it will be the better, and two spoonefulls of the roots of
Elen a campana dried and made into powder, or you may take more or less of all
these things, as the disease shall seem to be increased, (or increasing) This
midicine should have been written in the former part of the book, but that I
had forgotten it.

Here is also an excellent salve to cure any wound in a horse or in a man, as
Iverily suppose. et sic fit.
Take of sheeps tallow two pound of rosin three pound, of that rosin which is
like frankincense half a pound, of bees wax half a pound, of turpentine a
quarter of a pound, melt all these together, and when they are melten put
therein an ounce of vertigrece small powdered, but if ye put in your turpentine
while it is hot, new taken from the fire, it is not amiss, stir or mingl^ them
all well with a stick, the power all into a basin or pan w^ or rensed with
water, and when (...) is cold you may take it out in a tak^ or make it into
what fashion y^^ will, it is an excellent salve, for (...) both draws,
cleanses, and heals any wound in a horse, so would (...) do in a man as I
verily suppose.

FINIS.
Imprimatur
Sa: Baker.


