IL PASTOR FIDO: OR The faithful Shepherd.

Translated out of Italian into English.

LONDON Printed for Simon VVaterson. 1602.

To the right worthy and learned Knight, Sir Edward Dymock, Champion to her
Majesty, concerning this translation of Pastor Fido.
I do rejoice learned and worthy Knight,
That by the hand of thy kind Countryman
(This painful and industrious Gentleman)
Thy dear esteemed Guarini comes to light:
Who in thy love I know took great delight
As thou in his* who now in England can
Speak as good English as Italian,
And here enioyes the grace of his own right.
Though I remember he has often imbas'd
Unto us both, the virtues of the North,
Saving, our costs were with no measures graced,
Nor barbarous tongues could any verse bring forth.
I would he saw his own, or knew our store,
Whose spirits can yield as much, and if not more.
Sam. Daniell.
A Sonnet of the Translator, dedicated to that honorable Knight his kinsman,
Sir Edward Dymock.
A silly hand has fashioned up a suit
Of English clothes unto a traveler,
A noble mind though Shepherds weeds he wear,
That might consort his tunes with Tassoes lute,
Learned Guarinies first begotten fruit,
I have assumed the courage to rebeare,
And him an English Denizen made here,
Presenting him unto the sons of Brute.
If I have faild to express his native look,
And be in my translation taxed of blame,
I must appeal to that true censure, book
That says, it is harder to reform a frame,
Then for to build from ground work of ones wit,
A new creation of a noble fit.
TO THE RIGHT WORTHY and learned Knight, Sir Edward Dymock, Champion to her
Majesty.
Sir, this work was committed to me to publish to the world, and by reason of
the nearenesse of kin to the deceased Translator, and the good knowledge of
the great worth of the Italian Author, I knew none fitter to Patronize the same
then your worthiness, to whom I wish all happiness, and a prosperous new
year. London this last of December. 1601.

Your Worships ever to be Simon Waterson.

The persons which speak in it.
Siluio, the son of Montanus. Linco, an old servant of Montanus. Mirtillo, in
love with Amarillis. Ergasto, his companion. Corisca a Nymph, in love with
Mirtillo. Montanus, high Priest. Titirus, a Shepherd. Dametas, an old servant
of Montanus. Satir, an old Lover of Coriscaes. Dorinda, enamoured of Siluio.
Lupino a Goteheard, her servant. Amarillis, daughter of Titirus. Nicander,
chief minister of the Priest. Coridon, a Lover of Coriscaes. Carino, an old
man, the putatiue father of Mirtillo Vranio, an old man his companion. Nuntio.
Tirenio, a blind Prophet.
PASTOR FIDO, OR The faithful Shepherd.
Chorus of Shepherds. Huntsmen. Nymphs. Priests.


The Scene is in Arcadia.

Scene. 1. Act. 1.
Siluio. Linco. GO you that have enclosed the dreadful beast,
And give the sign that is usual to our hunting,
Go swell your eyes and hearts with horns and shoutes,
If there be any swain of Cinthia's troop
In all Arcadia, delighted in her sports,
Whose generous affects are stung with care,
Or glory of these woods: let him come forth
And follow me, where in a circle small
(Though to our valor large) enclosed is
The ougly Bore, monster of nature and these woods.
That vast and fierce (by many harms well known)
Inhabitant of Erimanthus, plague to the fields,
Terror to country clownes. Go then prevent
Not only, but provoke with horns shrill sound,
Blushing Aurora out. Linco we will go
And worship first the Gods: for there it is best
We any work begin.

Lin. Siluio I praise
Thy worshipping the Gods, but yet to trouble them
That are their ministers I do not praise.
The keepers of the temple are a sleep,
They cannot see the day break for the mountains top.

Sil. To thee perhaps, that art not yet awake,
All things do seem a sleep.

Lin. O Siluio,
Did nature on these youthful years of thine
Bestow such beauty to be cast away?
Had I but such a ruddie cheek? so fresh?
Farewell to woods, I Would follow other sports:
I Would wear my days in mirth: all summer tide
In dainty shades, winter by the fire side.

Sil. Thy counsel ( Linco) is like unto thy self.

Lin. At other pleasures would I aim, were I Siluio.

Sil. So would I, were I Linco, but I Siluio am,
Therefore I Siluioes deeds do like, not Lincoes.

Lin. O fool, that seekst so far for hurtful beasts*
And have one lodged so near thy dwelling house.

Sil. Art thou in earnest? or do thou but jest?

Lin. Thou jests, not I.

Sil. And is he then so near?

Lin. As near as it is to thee.

Sil. Where? in what wood?

Lin. Siluio thou art the wood: the ougly beast
That Is harbored there, is this thy beastliness.

Sil. Was It not well gest of me thou did but jest?

Lin. A Nymphe so fair, so delicate! but tush
Why do I call her Nymphe, a Goddess rather.
More fresh, more dainty, then the morning rose.
More soft, more purely white then swanny down.
(For whom there is not a shepherd among us all so brave,
But sighs, and sighs in vain) for thee alone
Reserues her self, ordaind by heaven and men:
And yet thou neither think of sighs or plaints.
O happy boy (though most unworthily)
Thou that mighst her enjoy, still sliest her Siluio,
Still her despisest. Is not then thy heart
Made of a beast, or or of hard Iron rather?

Sil. If to relinquish love be cruelty,
Then is it virtue, and I not repent
That I have banished love my heart: but joy
That thereby I have overcome this love,
A beast more dangerous then the other far.

Lin. How have thou overcome that which thou never prou'd^.

Sil. Not proving it, I have it overcome.

Lin. O if thou had but proved it Siluio once,
If thou but knewst what a high favor it were,
To be beloved, and loving to possess
A loving heart, It'am sure thou then would say,
Sweet lovely life why have thou staid so long?
These woods and beasts leave foolish child, and love.

Sil. Linco, I swear a thousand Nymphs I Will give
For one poor beast that my Melampo kills:
Let them that have a better taste then I
In these delights possess them, I will none.

Lin. Do thou taste ought, since love thou do not taste,
The only cause that the world tastes all?
Believe me boy, the time will one day come
Thou will it taste. For love once in our life
Will show what force he has. Believe me child,
No greater pain can any living prove,
Then in old limbs the lively sting of love.
Yet if in youth love wound, that love may heal:
But come it once in that same frozen age,
Wherefore oftentimes the disabilitie,
More then the wound we plain. O mortal then,
And most intolerable are those pains.
If thou seek pity, ill if thou findst it not,
But if thou findst it ten time worse, do not
Protract it til thy better time be past,
For if love do assail thy hoary hears,
Thy silly flesh a double torment tears.
Of this which when thou would thou can not,
These woods and beasts leave foolish boy and love.

Sil. As though there were no life but that which nursed
These amorous sollies and fond ecstasies.

Lin. Tell me if in this pleasant time now flowers renew,
And the world waxes young again; thou should
In stead of flowery valleys, fragrant fields,
And well clad woods: see but the oak, the ash, the pine,
Without their leauy hears: graslesse the ground*
The meadows want their flowers. Would thou not say
The world does languish? nature did decay?
Now that same horror, that same miracle,
That monstrous novelty thou have thy self.
As love in old men is ridiculous:
So youth without love is unnatural.
Look but about ( Siluio) what the world has
Worthy to be admired. Love only made
The heavens, the earth, the seas themselves do love.
And that same star that the days. break foretells,
Tastes the flames of her thrice puissant son.
And at that hour, because perhaps she leaves
The stolen delights and bosom of her love:
She darteth down abroad her sparkling smiles.
Beasts in the woods do love; and in the seas
The speedy Dolphins and the mighty Whales.
The bird that sweetly sings, and wantonly
Does she, now from the oak unto the ash,
Then from the ash unto the mirtill tree:
Says in her language I in love do burn.
(Would I might hear my Siluio answer her the same!)
The Bull amid the heard does loudly low,
Yet are those lowes but bidding to loves feasts.
The Lion in the wood does bray, and yet
Those brayes are not the voice of rage, but love.
Well to conclude, all things do love but thou,
Thou only Siluio art in heaven, in earth,
In seas, a soul vncaple of love.
Leave, leave these woods, these beasts, and learn to love.

Sil. Was then my youth committed to thy charge?
That in these soft esseminate desires
Of wanton love, thou should it nurse and train?
Remembrest not what thou, and what I am?

Lin. I am a man, and humane me esteem,
With thee a man, or rather should be so,
I speak of humane things. Which if thou skornst
Take heed least in dishumaning thy self,
A beast thou prove not sooner then a God.

Sil. Neither so famous nor so valiant
Had been that monster-tamer, of whose blood
I do derive my self, had he not tamed love.

Lin. See blind child how thou erst: where had thou been
Had not that famous Hercules first loved?
The greatest cause he monsters tamed was love.
Know thou not that fair Omphale to please,
He did not only change his Lions skin
Into a woman's gown; but also turned
His knottie club into a spindell and a rock.
So was he wont from trouble and from toil
To take his ease, and all alone retire
To her fair lap, the haven of happy love.
As rugged Iron with purer metal mixed
Is made more fit (refined) for noble use:
So fierce and untamed strength that in his properrage
Does often break: yet with the sweets of love
Well tempered proves truly generous.
Then if thou do desire to imitate
Great Hercules, and to be worthy of his race,
Though that thou will not leave these sauadge woods
Do: follow them: but do not leave to love,
A Love so lawful as your Amarillis.
That you Dorinda she I you excuse,
For it were unfit your mind on honor set,
Should be made hot in these amorous thefts:
A mighty wrong unto your worthy spouse.

Sil. What say thou Linco? she is not yet my spouse.

Lin. Have thou not solemnly received her faith?
Take heed proud boy, do not provoke the gods.

Sil. The gift of heaven is humane liberty,
May we not force repel, that force receive?

Lin. Nay if thou would but understand! the heavens
Hereto do tie thee that have promised,
So many favors at thy nuptial feast.

Sil. I Am sure that gods have other things to do
Then trouble and molest them with these toys.
Linco, nor this, nor that love pleases me,
I was a huntsman not a lover borne,
Thou that do follow love thy pleasure take.

Exit Sil. Lin. Thou cruel boy descended of the gods,
I scarce believe thou were begot by man,
Which if thou were, thou sooner were begot
With venom of Meger and Ptisifo,
Then Venus pleasure which men so commend.

Exit. Lin. Sce. 2.
Mirtillo. Ergasto. Cruel Amarillis, that with thy bitter name
Most bitterly do teach me to complain.
Whiter then whitest Lillies and more fair,
But deafer and more fierce then th'adder is.
Since with my words I do so much offend,
In silence will I die: but yet these plains
These mountains and these woods, shall cry for me,
Whom I so often have learned to resound
That loved name. For me my plaints shall tell
The plaining fountains and the murmuring winds:
Pity and grief shall speak out of my face,
And in the end though all things else prove dombe,
My very death shall tell my martyrdom.

Er. Love (dear Mirtillo)'s like a fire inclosde,
Which straightly kept, more fiercely flames at last,
Thou should not have so long conceald from me
The fire, since it thou could not hide.
How often have I said Mirtillo burns,
But in a silent flame and so consumes.

Mi. My self I harmed her not to offend
(Courteous Ergasto) and should yet be dombe,
But strict necessity has made me bold.
I hear a voice which through my scared ears
Wounds alas my wretched heart with noise
Of Amarillis nighing nuptial feast,
Who speaks ought else to me he holds his peace.
Nor dare I further search, as well for fear
To give suspicion of my love, as for to find
That which I would not. Well! I know ( Ergasto)
It fits not with my poor and base estate
To hope at all a Nymphe so rarely qualifide,
Of blood and spright truly celestial,
Should prove my wife. O no, I know too well,
The lowliness of my poor humble star,
My desteny's to burn! not to delight
Was I brought forth, but since my cruel fates
Have made me love my death more then my life,
I am content to die, so that my death
Might please her that is the cause thereof;
And that she would but grace my latest gasp
With her fair eyes, and once before she made
Another by her marriage fortunate,
She would but hear me speak. Courteous Ergasto,
If thou love me, help me with this favor,
Aid me herein, if thou take pity of my case.

Er. A poor desire of love; and light reward
Of him that dies: but dangerous enterprise.
Wretched were she, should but her father know
She had bowed down her ears to her lovers words,
Or should she be accused to the priest
Her father in law, for this perhaps she shunnes
To speak with you, that else does love you well,
Although she it conceales; for women though
They be more frail in their desires,
Yet are they craftier in hiding them;
If this be true, how can she show more love
Then thus in shunning you? she hears in vain,
And shunnes with pity that can give no help.
It is sound counsel, soon to cease desiring,
When we cannot attain to our aspiring.

Mi. Oh were this true, could I but this believe,
Thrice happy pain. Thrice fortunate distress.
But tell me sweet Ergusto, tell me true,
Which is the shepherd whom the stars so friend?

Ergust. Know thou not Siluio Montane's only son?
Dianaes priest: that rich and famous shepherd,
That gallant youth? He is the very same.

Mi. Most happy youth, that have in tender years
Found fate so ripe. I do not envy thee,
But plain my self.

Erg. Nor need you envy him
That pity more then envy does deserve.

Mi. Pity! and why?

Erg. Because he loves her not.

Mi. And lives he? has a heart? and is not blind?
Or has she on my wretched heart spent all her flames?
And her fair eyes blown all their loves on me?
Why should they give a lemme so precious
To one that neither knows it, nor regards it?

Erg. For that the heavens the health of Arcady
Do promise at these nuptials. Know you not
How we do still appease our goddess wrath,
Each year with guiltless blood of some poor Nymphe?
A mortal and a miserable tribute.

Mi. It Is news to me, that am a new inhabitant,
As't pleases love and my poor desteny:
That did before inhabit sauadge woods,
But what I pray you was that grievous fault
That kindled rage in a celestial breast?

Erg. I will report the doleful tragedy
From the beginning of our misery,
That able are pity and plaints to draw
From these hard rocks, much more from humane breasts.
In that same golden age when holy priesthood, and
The temples charge was not prohibited
To youth. A noble swain Amyntas called,
Priest at that time, loved Lucrina bright:
A beauteous Nymphe, exceeding fair: but therewithal
Exceeding false, and light. Long time she loved him,
Orat the least, she seemed so, with fained face
Nursing his pure affections with false hopes.
Whilst she no other suitors had. But see
The unconstant wretch! no sooner was she wooed
By a rude shepherd, but at first assault,
At his first sighe, she yielded up her love:
Before Amyntas dreamed of Jealousy.
At last Amyntas was forlorn, despide,
So that the wicked woman would nor see, nor hear
Him speak, now if the wretch did sigh,
Be thou the judge that know his pain by proof.

Mi. Aye me, this grief all other griefs exceeds.

Er. After he had his heart recovered
From his complaints, he to his goddess turns,
And praying saves: Great Cinthia if I have
At any time kindled with guiltless hands
The holy flames, revenge thou then for me
This broken faith of my unconstant Nimphe.
Diana hears the prayers of her priest,
And straight out-breathing rage, she takes her bow
And shootes shafts of mennitable death
Into the bowels of Arcadia.
People of every sex, of every age,
Soon perished, no succor could be found,
It Was bootlesse art to search for remedies,
For often on the patient the physician died.
One only remedy did rest, which was
Strait to the nearest Oracle they went,
From whom they had an answer very clear,
But above measure deadly horrible.
Which was, our Cinthia was displeasd, and to
Appease herire, either Lucrina or some else for her,
Must by Amyntas hands be sacrifiz'd.
Who when she had long time in vain complained,
And looked for help from her new friend in vain,
Was to the sacred Altars led with solemn pomp,
A woeful sacrifice. Where at those seete
Which had pursued her long time in vain
At her betrayed Lovers feet she bends
Her rtembling knees, attending cruel death.
Amyntas stretches out the holy sword,
Seeming to breath from his inflamed lips,
Rage and revenge; turning to her his face,
Speaks with a sigh, the messenger of death:
Lucrina for thy further pains, behold
What Lover thou have left, and what pursude
Judge by this blow. And with that very word
Strikes the blade into his woeful breast,
Falling a sacrifice upon the sacrifice.
At such a strange and cruel spectacle,
The Nymphe amazed stand twixt life and death,
Scarce yet assured whether she wounded were
With grief, or with the sword. At last, as soon
As she recovered had, her spright, and speech,
She plaining says. O faithful valiant love!
O too late known! that by thy death have given
Me life and death at once. If to were a fault
To leave thee so? behold I Will mend it now,
Eternally uniting both our souls,
And therewithal she takes the sword, all warm,
With the blood of her too late loved friend,
And strikes it through her heart, falling upon
Amyntas, that was scarcely dead as yet,
And felt perchance that fall. Such was their end,
To such a wretched end did too much love,
And too much treachery conduct them both.

Mi. O wretched Shepherd, and yet fortunate,
That had so large and famous scope, to show
Thy troth, and waken lively pity of thy death
Within another breast. But what did follow?
Was Cinthia pleased, found they a remedy?

Er. Somewhat it slak't, but yet not quite put out:
For after that a year was finished,
Her rage began a fresh, so that of force
They driven were, unto the Oracle:
To ask new counsel, but brought back again
An answer much more woeful then the first.
Which was, to sacrifice them: and each after year,
A maid, or woman, to our angry power,
Even till the third and past the fourth degree:
So should ones blood for many satisfy.
Besides, she did upon the unhappy sex,
Impose a wretched and a cruel law.
And (if you mark their nature) in obseruable.
A law recorded with vermilian blood:
What ever maid or woman broken had
Their faith in love, and were contaminate,
If they should find none that would die for them*
They were condemned without remission.
To these our grievous great calamities,
The fathers hoped to find a happy end,
By this desired marriage day. For afterward
Having demanded of the Oracle
What end the heavens prescribed had our ill,
Answer was given in such like words as these:
No end there is to that which you offends,
Till two of heavens issue love unite;
And for the ancient fault of that false wight,
A faithful Shepherds pity make amends.
Now is there not in all Arcadia
Other bows left, of that celestial root:
Save Amarillis, and this Siluio,
The one of Pans seed, the other of Hercules.
Nor to our mischief yet has never hapt,
That male and female met at any time
Till now. Therefore good reason Montane has
To hope, though all things sort not to the Oracle,
Yet here is a good foundation laid: the rest
High fates have in their bosoms bred,
And will bring forth at this great marriage day.

Mi. O poor Mirtillo! wretched man!
So many cruel enemies? such wars?
To work my death cannot great Love suffice?
But that the Fates, their arms will exercise.

Er. This cruel love ( Mirtillo) feeds himself
With tears, and grief, but's never satisfide.
I promise thee to set my wits a work,
That the fair Nymphe shall hear thee speak. Lets go?
These burning sighs do not as they do seem,
Bring any cooling to th'inflamed heart:
But rather are huge and impetuous winds,
That blow the fire, and make it greater prove,
With swelling whirlwindes of tempestuous love,
Which unto wretched lovers always bears
Thick clouds of grief, and showers of dreary tears.

Scene. 3.
Corisca. WHo ever saw or heard a stranger, and
A fonder passion of this foolish love?
Both love, and hate, in one self heart combined,
With such a wondrous mixture: as I know not how,
Or which of them has got the deeper root.
If I Mirtilloes beauty do behold:
His gracious countenance, good behauior,
Actions, customs, words and manly looks:
Love me assailes, with such a puissant fire,
That I burn altogether. And it seems
Other affections are quite vanquished with this.
But when I think upon th'obstinate love
He to another bears; and that for her
He does despise ( I will be bold to say)
My famous beauty of a thousand soft:
I hate him so, I so abhor the man,
That t's impossible me thinks at all,
One spark of love for him should touch my heart.
Thus with my self sometime I say: Oh if I could
Enjoy my sweet Mirtillo! were he mine,
And had not others interest in him,
Oh more then any other happy Corisca.
And then in me vpflames such great good will,
And such a gentle love to him; that I resolve
Straight to discover all my heart to him,
To follow him, and humbly sue to him:
Nay more, even to fall down and worship him.
On the other side, I all reclaimed say,
A niceproud fool? one that disdaineth me?
One that can love another and despise my self?
One that can look on me and not adore me?
One that can so defend him from my look,
That he dies not for love. And I that should
See him (as I have many more ere this)
An humble suppliant before my feet,
Am humble suppliant at his feet my self.
Then such a rage at him possesses me,
That I disdain my thoughts should think on him,
Mine eyes should look on him. His very name
And all my love, I worse then death do hate.
Then would I have him the wofulst wight alive:
And with these hands then could I kill the wretch.
Thus hate, and love, spite, and desire make war.
I that have been till now tormenting flame,
To thousand hearts: must languish now my self,
And in my ill, know others wretchedness.
I that so many years in cities, streets, courts,
Have been invincible to worthy friends,
Mocking their many hopes, their great desires:
Now conquered am, with silly rusticke love,
Of a base shepherds brat. Oh above all
Wretched Corisca now. What shall I do
To mitigate this amorous furious rage?
Whilst other women have a heap of loves,
I have no other but Mirtillo only.
Am I not stoutly furnished? Oh thousand times,
Ill-counsell'd fool! that now reduced art
Into the poverty of one sole love:
Corisca was never such a fool before.
What Is faith? what is constancy? but fables feigned
By jealous men: and names of vanity,
Simple women to deceive. Faith in a woman's heart,
(If faith in any woman's heart there be:)
Can neither virtue nor yet goodness be.
But hard necessity of love, a wretched law
Of beauty weak that pleases only one,
Because she is not gracious in the eyes of more.
A beauteous Nymphe, sought too by multitudes
Of worthy lovers, if she be content
With only one, and all the rest despise,
Either she is no woman, or if so she be,
She is a fool. What Is beauty worth unseen?
Or seen, unsought? or sought too but of one?
The more our lovers be, the greater men,
The surer pledge have we in this vild world.
That we are creatures glorious and rare,
The goodly splendour of a beauteous Nymphe,
Is to have many friends. So in good Towns
Wise men ever do. It is a fault,
A foolish trick, all to refuse for one.
What one cannot, many can well perform:
Some serve, some give, some fit for other use.
So in the City lovely Ladies do,
Where I by wit, and by example too,
Of a great Lady learnd the Art of love.
Corisca would she say. Let thy
Lovers and thy garments be alike.
Have many, use, wear but one, and change often.
Too much conuersing breeds noisomeness,
And noisomeness despite, which turns to hate:
We cannot worser do, then fill our friends,
Let them go hungry rather from thee still.
So did I always, always loving store,
One for my hand, an other for mine eye:
The best I ever for my bosom kept,
None for my heart, as near as ere I could.
And now I know not how Mirtillo comes
Me to torment, now must I figh, and worse
Sigh for my self, deceiving no man else.
Now must I rob my limbs of their repose,
Mine eyes of sleep, and watch the break of day:
Now do I wander through these shadowed woods,
Seeking the footsteps of my hated love.
What must Corisca do? shall I entreat him?
No: my hate not gives me leave. I Will give him over,
Nor will my love consent. What shall I do?
Prayers and subtilties I will attempt:
I will bewray my love, but not as mine,
If this prevail not, then I Will make disdain
Find out a memorable huge revenge.
Mirtillo if thou can not like my love,
Then shall thou try my hate. And Amarillis,
Thou shall repent thou er'e my rival were.
Well, to your costs you both shall quickly prove,
What rage in her can do that thus does love.

Sce. 4.
Titirus. Montanus. Damaetas. SO help me Gods, I know I now do speak
To one that understands more then I do.
These Oracles are still more doubtful then
We take them, for their words are like to knives,
Which taken by the hafts, are fit for use,
But by the edges held, they may do harm.
That Amarillis as you argue, is
By the high heavenly Destenies elected for
Arcadiaes universal health: who ought
More to desire, or to esteem the same
Then I that am her father^ but when I regard
That which the Oracle foretold, ill do the signs
Agree with our great hopes: since love should then
Unite, how falls it out he slies from her?
How can hate and despite bring forth loves fruit?
Ill could he contradict had heavens ordained it.
But since he does contrary it, it is clear,
Heavens do not will: for if so they would
That Amarillis should be Siluioes wise,
A Lover, not a Huntsman, him they would have made.

Mon. Do you not see he is a child as yet?
He has attained scarcely to eighteen years,
All in good time he may yet taste of love.

Tit. Taste of a beast, heel neueuer woman like.

Mon. Many things alter in a young man's heart.

Tit. But always love is natural to youth.

Mon. It is unnatural where years do want.

Ti. Love always slowres in our green time of age.

Mon. It does but flowere, it is quite without all fruit.

Ti. With timely flowers love ever brings forth fruit.
Hither I came not for to jest ( Montane)
Nor to contend with you. But I the father am
Of a dear only child, and (if it be lawful so to say)
A worthy child, and by your leave of many sought.

Mon. Titirus, if the Destenies have not ordained
This marriage, yet the faith they gave on earth,
Binds them vntoo't, which if they violate,
They violate their vow to Cinthia,
Who is enraged against us, how much thou know.
But for as much as I discover can,
The secret counsels of the eternal powers:
This knot was knit by the and of Desteny.
All to good end will sort, be of good cheer.
I Will tell you now a dream I had last night.
I saw a thing which makes my ancient hope
Revive within my heart, more then before.

Tit. Dreams in the end prove dreams, but what saw you?

Mon. Do you remember that same woeful night,
When swelling Ladon oue^flowd his banks,
So that the fishes swam where birds did breed,
And in moment did the ravenous flood,
Take men and beasts by heaps and herds away.
(Oh sad remembrance) in that very night
I lost my child, more dear then was my heart:
Mine only child, in cradle warmly laid.
Living, and dead, dearly beloved of me.
The Torrent took him hence ere we could prove
To give him succor, being buried quite,
In terror, sleep, and darkness of the night:
Nor could we ever find the cradle where he lay,
By which I guess some whirlpit swallowd both.

Tit. Who can guess otherwise? and I remember now,
You told me of this your mishap before:
A memorable misaduenture sure,
And you may say, you have two sons begot,
One to the woods, the other to the waves.

Mon. Perhaps the pitious heavens will restore
My first sons loss, in him that lives yet;
Still must we hope, now listen to my tale.
The time when light and darkness strove together,
This one for night, that other for the day,
Having watched all the night before, with thought
To bring this marriage to a happy end,
At last, with length of weariness, mine eyes
A pleasing slumber closde, when I this vision saw,
Me thought I sat on famous Alfeus bank,
Under a leauy plane tree with a bayted hook,
Tempting the fishes in the stream, in midst
Whereof, there rose me thought an aged man:
His head and beard dropping down silver tears,
Who gently raught to me with both his hands
A naked child, saying, behold thy soon,
Take heed thou killst him not. And with that word
He diued down again. When straight the skies
Waxt black with clouds, threatening a dismal shower,
And I afraid, the child took in mine arms,
Crying, ah heavens, and will you in an instant then,
Both give and take away my child again?
When on the sudden all the sky waxt clear:
And in the River sell a thousand bows,
And thousand arrows, broken all to shiuers.
The body of the plane tree trembled there,
And out of it there came a subtle voice
Which said, Arcadia shall be fair again.
So is the Image of this gentle dream
Fixed in my heart, that still me thinks I see it:
But above all, the courteous aged man.
For this when you me met, I coming was
Unto the temple for to sacrifize,
To give my dreams presage prosperous success.

Tit. Our dreams are rather representments vain
Of Idle hopes, then any things to come:
Only days thoughts made fables for the night.

Mon. The mind does not sleep ever with the flesh,
But is more watchful then, because the eyes
Do not lead it a wandering where they go.

Tit. Well, of cur children what the heavens disposed have,
Is quite unknown to us, but sure it is,
Yours against the law of nature feels not love.
And mine has but the bond of his faith given
For her reward. I cannot say she loves,
But well I wot she has made many love:
And it is unlike, she tastes not that she makes
So many taste. Me thinks she is altered much
From that she was: for full of sport and mirth,
She Is wont to be. But it is a grievous thing,
To keep a woman married and unmarried thus.
For like a Rose that in some garden grows,
How dainty it is against the Sun does rise,
Persuming with sweet odours round about,
Bidding the humming bees to honey feast:
But if you then neglect to gather it,
And suffer Titan in his middayes course
To scorch her sides, and burn her dainty seat,
Then ere Sunset, discolored she falls,
And nothing worth upon the shadowed hedge.
Even so a maid whom mothers care does keep,
Shu^^ing her heart from amorous desires.
But if the piercing looks of hungry lovers eyes
Come but to view her, if she hear him sigh,
Her heart soon ope's, her breast soon takes in love:
Which if for shame she hide, or fear contain,
The silent wretch in deep desire consumes.
So fades beauty if that fire endure,
And leesing time, good fortune's lost be sure.

Mon. Be of good cheer, let not these humane fears,
Confound thy spright, let us put our trust ^'th' Gods,
And pray to them (it is meet) for good success.
Our children are their offspring, and be sure
They will not see them lost that others keep.
Go'w, let us to the Temple jointly go,
And sacrifize you a he Goat to Pan,
I a young Bull, to mighty Hercules.
He that the heard makes thrive, can therewithal
Make him thrive, that with the profits of his heard
Hallowes the Altars. Faithful Dametas,
Go thou and fetch a young and lovely Bu'l,
As anie's in the heard, and bring it by the mountains way,
I at the Temple will attend for thee.

Tit. A he Goat bring Dametas from my heard.

Exeunt Mon. and Titt. Da. Both one and other I will well perform.
I pray the Gods ( Montane) thy dream do sort
Unto as good an end as thou do hope.
I know remembrance of thy son thou lost,
Inspires thee with a happy prophecy.

Sce. 5.
Satir alone. LIke frost to grass, like drought to gentle flowers,
Like lightning unto corn, like worms to seeds,
Like nets to dear, like lime to silly birds,
So to mankind is love a cruel foe.
He that love lik'ned unto fire, knew well
His pe^fidous and wicked kind. For look
But on this fire, how fine a thing it is.
But touch it, and it is then a cruel thing.
The world has not a monster more to dread.
It ravens worse then beasts, and strikes more deep
Then edged steel, and like the wind it slies:
And where it planteth his imperious feet,
Each force does yield, all power gives place.
Even so this love, if we it but behold,
In two fair eyes, and in a golden Tresse,
Oh how it pleases! oh how then it seems
To breathe out joy, and promise largely peace!
But if you it approach, and tempt it once,
So that it creep and gather force in you,
Hircane no Tigres, Liby no Lions has,
Nor poisonous worms, with teeth or stings so fierce,
That can surpass, or equal loves disease,
More dreadful then is hell, then death it self,
Sweet pitties foe, the minister of rage:
And to conclude, love void of any love.
Why speak I thus of love? why blame him thus?
Is he the cause that the whole world in love,
Or rather loue-dissembling, sins so?
Oh woman's treachery! that is the cause
That has begotten love this infamy.
How ever love be in his nature good,
With them his goodness suddenly he leeseth.
They never suffer him to touch their hearts,
But in their faces only build his bower.
Their care, their pomp, and all their whole delight.
Is in the bark of a bepainted face.
It Is not in them now faith with faith to grace,
And to contend in love with him that loves,
Into two breasts dividing but one will:
Now all their labor is, with burnished gold
To die their hair, and tie it up in curles,
Therein to snare unwary lovers in.
O what a stinking thing it is, to see them take
A Pencill up, and paint their bloudlesse cheeks:
Hiding the faults of nature and of time,
Making the pale to blush, the wrinkled plain,
The black seem white, faults mending with far worse.
Then with a pair of pincers do they pull
Their eyebrows till they smart again.
But this is nothing, though it be too much,
For all their customs are alike to these.
What is it that they use, which is not counterfeit?
Open they their mouths? they lie: move they their eyes?
They counterfeit their looks: If so they sigh,
Their sighs dissembled are. In sum, each act,
Each look, each gesture, is a very lie.
Nor is this yet the worst. It Is their delight,
Them to deceive even most, that trust them most;
And love them least, that are most worthy love.
True faith to hate, worser then death it self:
These be the tricks that make love so perverse.
Then is the fault faithless Corisca thine?
Or rather mine, that have believed thee so?
How many troubles have I for thy sake sustaind?
I now repent, nay more I am ashamed.
Lovers believe me, women once adored,
Are worser then the griefly powers of hell.
Strait by their valor vaunt they that they are
The same you by your folly fashion them.
Let go these base^ sighs, prayers and plaints,
Fit weapons for women and children only.
Once did I think that prayers, plaints, and sighs,
Might in a woman's heart have stirred up
The flames of love, but rush I was deceived.
Then if thou would thy mistress conquer, leave
These silly toys, and close thou up all love.
Do that which love and nature teaches thee,
For modesty is but the outward virtue of
A woman's face. Wherefore to handle her with modesty,
Is a mere fault, she though she use it, loves it not.
A tender-harted Lover shall thou not
Corisca ever find me more, but like a man
I will assail and pierce thee through and through.
Twice have I taken thee, and twice again
Thou have escaped (I know not how) my hands:
But if thou come the third time in my reach,
I Will fetter thee for running then away.
T'hart wont to pass these woods, I like a hound
Will hunt thee out. Oh what a sweet revenge
I mean to take: I mean to make thee prove
What it is unjustly to betray thy Love.
Exit.
Chorus. Oh high and puissant law writ, rather borne
Within loves mighty breast,
Whose ever swet and lovely loving force,
Toward that good which we unseen suborne,
Our hearts does pull and wills does wrest,
And even natures self to it does force;
Not only our frail corpce
Whose sense scarce sees is borne and dies again,
As daily hours wax and waine.
But even inward causes, hidden seeds
That moves and gouernes our eternal deeds.
If great with child the world do wondrous frame
So many beauties still:
And if within as far as Sun does see
To The mighty Moon and stars Titanian fame
A living spright does fill,
With his male ^alew this same vast degree*
If thence man's of spring be.
The plants have life, and beasts both good and bad,
Whether the earth be clad,
With flowers, or nipt have her ill-feathered wing,
It still comes from thine euersting spring.
Nor this alone but that which hopes of fire
Sheds into mortal wights:
From whence stars gentle now strait fierce are found
Clad in good fortunes or mishaps attire,
From whence lifts frailest lights
The hour of birth have, or of death the bound.
That which makes rise or else pull^ down
In their disturbd affects all humane will,
And giving seems, or taking still.
Fortune, to whom the world would this were given,
All from thy sovereign bounty is deriuen,
Oh word ineuitably true and sure
If it thy meaning is
Arcadia shall after so many woes
Find out new rest and peace, new life procure.
If the foretold on bliss
Which the great Oracle did erst expose
Of the fair fatal marriage rose
Proceed from thee and in thy heavenly mind
Her fixed place does find.
If that same voice do not dissemble still,
Who hinders then the working of thy will?
See loves and pitties foe, awayward swain,
A proud and cruel youth,
That comes from heaven, and yet with heaven contends.
See then another Lover, (faithful in vain)
Battring a hearts chaste truth,
Who with his flames perhaps thy will offends,
The less that he attends,
Pity to's pl^ints: reward to his desert
More straungely flames in faith his heart.
Fatal this beauty is to him that it high prizeth,
Being destenied to him that it despizeth.
Thus in it self alas divided stands
This heavenly power,
And thus one fate another iustles still,
Yet neither conquered is, neither commands.
False humane hopes that tower
And plant a siege to th'Elementall hill,
Rebellious unto heavens will:
Arming poor thoughts like giant fools again,
Lovers and no Lovers vine.
Who would have thought love and disdain blind things,
Should mount above the sovereign starry wings.
But thou that standst above both stars and fate,
And with thy wit divine
Great mouer of the skies do them restrain,
Behold: we thee beseech our doubtful state
With desteny combine.
And fathers loving zeal, love and disdain,
Mix flame and frozen vain.
Let them that shund to love, now learn to love,
Let not that other moan.
Ah let not others blindest folly thus
Thy gently promisde pity take from us.
But who does know? perhaps this same that seems
An unavoidable mischievous estate,
May prove right fortunate.
How fond a thing it is for mortal sight
To search into the Eternal suns high light.

An end of the first Act.
Act. 2. Scene. 1.
Ergasto. Mirtillo. HOw I have searched along the rivers side,
About the meadows, fountains, and the hills,
To find thee out: which now I have, the gods be praised.

Mir. Ah that thy news Ergasto may deserve
This haste. But bringst thou life or death?

Er. This though I had I would not give it thee.
That do I hope to give thee, though I have it not
As yet. But fie, thou must not suffer grief
To overthrow thy senses thus. Live man and hope.
But to the purpose of my coming now,
Ormino has a sister, know her not?
A tall big wench, a merry-countnaun'st Nymphe
With yealow hair, somewhat high-colored.

Mir. What is her name?

Er. Corisca.

Mir I know her well,
And heretofore have spoke with her.

Er. Then know that she (and see withal your luck)
Is now become ( I know not by what privilege)
Companion to your beauteous Amarillis.
I have discovered all your love to her,
And this which you desire, and readily
She me has given her faith to bring't about.

Mir. O happy Mirtillo if this same prove true:
But said she nothing of the means whereby?

Er. Nothing as yet, nor would she that conclude
Until she knew the manner of your love.
How it began, and what has hapt therein,
That she might easilier spy into the heart
Of your beloved Nymphe, and better know
How to dispose by prayers or by fraud
Of her request. For this I came to you,
And make me now acquainted from the head,
With all the history of your dear Love.

Mir. So will I do, but yet Ergasto know
This memory (a bitter hopeless thing)
Is like a firebrand tossed in the wind,
By which how much the fire increases still,
So much the brand with blazing flame consumes
O piercing shaft made by some power divine!
The which the more we seek to draw it out,
The faster hold it takes, the deeper root.
Well can I tell you, that these Lovers hopes
Are full of vanities and falsehoods still,
Loves fruit is bitter, though the root be sweet.
In that sweet time when days advantage get
Above the nights, then when the year begins:
This dainty pilgrim, beauties bright new sun,
Came with her countenance like another spring,
T'illumin^te my then thrice happy soil
Of Pisa, and Eglidis fair. Brought by her mother
To see the sacrifices and the sports
That celebrated in those solemn days
Were unto love. Where while she meant to make
Her eyesight blessed with that same spectacle,
She blessed the spectacle with her fair eyes,
Being loves greatest miracle beneath the skies.
No sooner had I scene that face, but straight
I burnt, defending not the foremost look,
Which though mine eyes into my breast directed
Such an imperious beauty, as me thought did say,
Mirtillo yield thy heart for it is mine.

Er. Oh in our breasts what mighty power has love?
There Is none can tell, save they the same which prove

Mir. See how industrious love can work even in
The simplest breasts. A sister which I had
I made acquainted with my thoughts, who was
By chance companion to my cruel Nymphe.
The time she staid in Pisa and Elide,
She faithful counsel, and good aid me gave,
She dressed me finely in one of her gowns,
Circling my temples with a periwig,
Which gracefully she trimmed up with flowers.
A quiver and a bow hung at my side,
She taught me furthermore to feign my voice
And looks, for in my face as then there grew no hair.
This done, she me conducted where the Nimphe
Was wont to sport her self, and where we found
A noble troop of maidens of Megara,
By blood or love allied to my goddess.
Among them she stood like to a princely Rose,
Among a heap of humble Violets.
We had not long been there before vprose
One of the maidens of Megara, and thus bespake.
Why stand we idly still in such a time,
When plames and famous trophies are so rise?
Have not we arms counterfeit fights to make
As well as men? Sisters be ruled by me:
Let Us prove among our selves our arms in jest,
That when we come to earnest them with men,
We may them better use. Let Us kiss, and strive
Who can kiss sweetliest among our selves:
And let this garland be the victors gain.
All at the proposition laughed: and all
Unto it strait agreed. Straightway began
A fight confused, no signal we attended.
Which by her seen that first ordaind the sport,
She says again. Let Us make her worthy judge
That has the fairest mouth. All soon agreed,
And Amarillis chose. Who sweetly bowing down,
Her beauteous eyes in modest blushing stand,
Did show they were as fair within as they were without.
Or that her face her, rich-clad mouth enuyed,
And would be clothed in pompous purple too,
As who should say, I am as fair as it.

Er. In good time did you change into a Nymphe,
A happy token of good luck to come.

Mir. Now did the beauteous judge sit in her plate,
According as the Megarence prescribed.
Each went by lot to make due proof of her
Rare mouth, that heavenly paragon of sweetness.
That blessed mouth that may be likened to
A perfumed Indian shell of oriental pearl,
Opening the dainty treasure, mixed with honey sweet
And purple blush. I cannot (my Ergasto) tell
Th'inexplicable sweetness which I felt
Out of that kiss. But look what Cypres caves
Or hiues of Hybla have, are nothing all
Compared with that which then I tasted there.

Er. Oh happy theft sweet kiss.

Mir. Yea sweet,
But yet not gracious, for it wanted still
The better part: love gave it, but love not
Returned it back.

Er. But then how did you
When it was your lot to kiss?

Mir. Unto those lips
My soul did wholly fly, and all my life
So shut therein, as in a little space
It waxed nothing but a kiss. And all
My other limbs stood strenghlesse trembling still,
When I approached to her lightning looks,
Knowing my deed was theft and deceit,
I feared the majesty of her fair face,
But she assures me with a pleasing smile:
And puts me forward more, love sitting like
A Be upon two fresh and dainty Roses close.
Kissing, I tasted there the honey sweet,
But having kissed, I felt the lovely Be
Strike through my heart with his sharp piercing sting.
And being wounded thus, half desperate,
I thought to have bitten those manslaught'ring lips,
But that her odoriferous breath like air divine,
Wak'ned my modesty and still my rage.

Er. This modesty molesteth Lovers still.

Mir. Now were the lotts fulfild, and every one
With heedfull minds the sentence did attend:
When Amarillis judging mine the best,
With her own hands she crowns my tresses, with
The gentle garland kept for victory.
But never was shadelesse meadow drier parcht,
Under the balefull fury of the heavenly dog,
Then was my heart in sunshine of that sweet,
Never so vanquished as in victory.
Yet had I power to take the garland off,
And reach it her, saying to you belongs
Alone the same. It Is due to you, that made
Mine good, by virtue of your mouth.
She gently took't and crowned her self therewith.
And with an other that she ware crowned mine.
T's this I wear thus dried as you see,
It will I carry to my grave with me.
In dear remembrance of that happy day.
But more for sign of my dead hopes decay.

Er. Thou pity more then envy do deserve,
That were another Tantalus in loves delights,
That of a sport a torment true did make.
Thou pai'st too dear for thy stolen delicates.
But did she ere perceive thy policies?

Mir. That know I not ( Ergasto) yet thus much I know,
That in the time she made Elidis blessed
With her sweet countenance, she liberal was
Of pleasing looks to me. But thereof did
My cruel fates rob me so sodeinly,
That I perceived it not till they were gone.
When I drawn by the power of her beauteous look
Leaving my home came hither, where thou know
My father had this poor habitacle.
But now the day that with so fair a spring began,
Come to his western bound, thunders and lighte^s out,
Ah then I saw these were true signs of death.
Now had (alas) my tender father felt,
My not-foreseene departure, and overcome
With grief, fell sick nigh hand to death,
Whereby I was constrained to return.
Ah that return proved the fathers health,
But deadly sickness to the son: for in short time
I languished and pined quite away.
Which held me from the time the sun had left
The bull, until his entry into Capricorn.
And so had still, had not my pitious father sought
For counsel to the Oracle, which said,
Only Arcadia could restore my health.
So I returned to see her that can heal
My bodies grief (O Oracles false lie)
But makes my soul sick everlastingly.

Er. Strange tale thou telst ( Mirtillo) though it be true.
The only health to one that is desperate,
Is to despair of health. And now it is time
I go communicate with our Corisca.
Go to the fountain you, there stay for me,
I Will make what haste I can.

Mir. Go happily,
The heavens ( Ergasto) quith thy courtesy.

Sce. 2.
Dorindo. Lupino. Siluio. O Fortunate delight, and care of my
Fair spightfull Siluio. Ah that I were
As dear unto thy cruel master as thou art.
(Happy Metampo) he with that white hand,
That nippes my heart, thee softly stroking feeds.
With thee all day and all the night he is,
Whilst I that love him so, sigh still in vain.
And that which greeues me worst, he gives thee still
Kisses so sweet, that had I one of them,
I should go blessed away, I cannot choose
But kiss Melampo. Now if th'appie stars
Of love, sent thee to me bcause thou should
Find out his steps. Go'w whither me great love.
Thee nature teaches. But I hear a horn
Sound in these woods.

Sil Vo ho ho, Melampo ho,

Do. If my desire deceive me not, that is the voice
O my beloved Siluio, that call, his dog,
He has our labor saved.

Sil. Vohoho, Melampo ho.

Do. Doubtless t's he: happy Dorinda. heavens
Have sent him whom thou soughtst, it is best I put
The dog aside, so may I win his love.
Lupino. (Lu.) What Is your will?

Do. Go hide thy self
In that same thick, and take the dog with thee.

Lu. I go.

Do. And stir not till I call.

Lu. No more I will.

Do. Go soon.

Lu. And call you soon, least hunger make
The dog believe I am a shoulder of mutton, and so fall too.

Do. Go get you hence hen-hearted wretch.

Sil. O wretched me, whither shall I go
To follow thee my dear, my faithful dog?
The dales, the mountains, I have sought with care,
All weary now I am. Cursed be the beast
Thou did pursue. But see a Nymphe, perhaps
She can tell news of him. Out upon her,
It Is she that is still so troublesome to me.
I must dissemble. Fair and gracious Nymphe,
Did you my good Melampo see to day?

Do. I fair good Siluio? can you call me fair?
That am not fair a whit unto your eyes.

Sil. Or fair or soul, did you not see my dog?
Answer to this, or I am quickly gone.

Do. Still thou art froward unto her that thee adores,
Who would believe that in that smooth aspect
Were harbored such rugged thoughts. Thou through
These savage woods and rocky hills pursu'st
A beast that flies thee, and consum'st thy self
In tracing out thy greyhounds steps: and me
Thou shunst and do disdain that loves thee so.
Ah leave these does that run so fast away,
Take hold of me thy preordained pray.

Sil. Nymphe, I Melampo came to seek, not to loose time,
Farewell.

Do. Do not so shun me cruel Siluio,
I Will tell thee news of thy Melampo man.

Sil. Thouiests Dorinda. (Do.) Siluio, I protest
By that dear love that me thy handmaid makes,
I know where thy Melampo is that courst the do.

Sil. How did he leese her?

Do. Both dog and do are in my power.

Sil. Both in your power?

Do. Why does it grieve you then
That I them hold that do adore you so?

Sil. Dear Dorinda, quickly give me him.

Do. See wau'ring child, am I not fortunate?
When a beast and a dog can make me dear to thee.

Sil. Good reason too, but yet her I Will deceive.

Do. What will you give me?

Sil. Two gilded apples
Which my mother gave me yesterday.

Do. I want no apples, and perhaps I could
Thee better-tasted give; did thou not thus
Disdain my gifts.

Sil. What would thou have, a kid,
A lamb? Ah but my father gives me no such leave.

Do. Nor kids, nor lambs do I desire, it is thy love
My Siluio which I seek.

Sil. Will thou naught but my love?

Do. Naught else.

Sil. I give it thee. Now my dear Nymph
Give me my dog and do.

Do. Ah that thou knewst
That treasures worth whereof thou seemst so liberal,
Or that thy heart did answer to thy tongue.

Sil. Hear me fair Nymphe, thou ever telst me of
A certain love, I know not what it is.
Thou do desire I should thee love, and so I do.
As far forth as I can, or understand,
Thou callst me cruel, and I know not cruelty.

Do. Wretched Dorinda, how have thou plast thy hopes
In beauty, feeling never a spark of love?
Thou lovely boy art such a fire to me,
And yet burns not thy self. Thee under humane shape
O^ dainty mother, did the Cyprian dame
Bring forth, thou have his arrows and his fire.
Well know my breast both burnt and wounded too,
Get but hi^ wings unto thy shoulders, and
New Cupia shall thou be, were not thy hear^
Is made of rocky frozen Isy shelfe,
Thou wantedst naught of love, but love it self.

Sil. Tell me, what kind of thing is this same love?

Do. If in thy face I look (oh lovely boy)
Then is this love a paradize of joy.
But if I turn and view my spirit well,
Then it is a flame of deep infernal hell.

Sil. Nymphe, no more words, give me my dog and do.

Do. Nay give me first, the love you promised.

Sil. Have I not given it? what a stir is here,
Her to cnntent: take it, do what thou will,
Who does forbid thee? what would thou have more?

Do. Thou sow'st thy seed in sand wretched Dorinda.

Sil. What would you have? why do you linger thus?

Do. As soon as you have got what you desire,
(Perfidious Siluio) you are gone from me.

Sil. No trust me Nymph.

(Do.) Give me a pledge.

(Sil.) What pledge?

Do. I dare not tell.

(Sil.) And why?

(Do.) I am ashamed.

Sil. Are you ashamed to speak, and not ashamed
It to receive?

(Do.) If you will promise me
To give it, I will tell.

(Sil.) I promise you.

Do. ( Siluio my dear) do you not understand me yet?
I should have understood you but with half of this.

Sil. Thou art more subtle much then I.

Do. I am more earnest, and less cruel much then thou.

Sil. To say the troath, I am no Prophet I,
You must speak if you will have me understand.

Do. O wretch one of those which thy mother gave to thee.

Sil. A blow on the ear?

(Do.) A bloe on th'ear to one yt loves

Sil. Sometime she makes much of me with one of the^.

Do. Does she not kiss you then?

(Sil.) Nor she nor any else
Does kiss me. But perhaps youl'd have a kiss.
You answer not, your blushing you accuses,
I am content, but give me first my dog.

Do. Y'haue promised me?

(Sil.) It Is true, I have promised thee.

Do. And will you stay?

(Sil.) Tush what a stir is here? I will.

Do. Come forth Lupino, Lupino do not hear?

Lu. Who calls? I come, I come, it was not I,
It was the dog that slept.

(Do.) behold thy dog
More courteous then thy self.

(Sil.) O happy me.

Do. He in these arms that thou despisest so,
Did put himself.

(Sil.) O my most dear Melampo.

Do. Esteeming dear my kisses and my sighs.

Sil. I Will kiss thee thousand times poor curre.
Have thou no harm in running poor Melampo?

Do. O happy dog might I change lots with thee:
Am I not brought unto an excellent pass,
That of a dog I must be jealous thus?
Lupino go unto the hunting strait,
I Will follow thee.

(Lu.) Mistress I go.
Exit.
Scene. 3 Siluio. Dorindo.
Is ought behind? Where is the Do you promised me?

Do. Will you her have alive or dead?

Sil. I understand you not.
How Is she alive, has not my dog her killed?

Do. But say the dog has not.

(Sil.) Is she alive?

Do. Alive.

(Sil.) So much more welcome she'is.

Do. Only she is wounded in the heart.

(Sil.) Thou mockst:
How can she live and wounded in the heart?

Do. My cruel Siluio, I am that same Do
Without pursuit or conquest taken so.
Quick if thou please to accept of me,
Dead if thou do despise my company.

Sil. Is this the Do, the game you told me of?

Do. This is the same. Ay me, why look you so?
Hold you a Nymph no dearer then a Do?

Sil. I neither hold thee dear nor like of thee:
But hate thee brute, vilde, lying filth.
Exit.
Do. Is this my guerdon cruel Siluio?
Ungrateful boy, is this all my reward?
I gave Melampo and my self with him to thee,
Hoping that thus thou would not have denide
The sunshine of thine eyes to me. I would
Have kept thee and thy dog most faithful company.
I would have wipte thy brows from toilefull sweat:
Upon this lap that never takes rest,
Thou might have taken thy rest. I would
Have carried all thy ^ew and proved thy pray,
When beasts had wanted in the woods thou might
Have shot at me for one, and in this breast
Have used still thy tough-well-sinew'd bow.
So as thou would, I like thy servant might
Thy weapons carried have, or proved thy pray,
Making my breast both quiver and the mark
For those thy shafts. But unto whom speak I?
To him that hears me not, but's fled from me,
Fly where thou will, thee will I still pursue,
Even into hell, if any hell can be
More painful then my grief, then thy great cruelty.

Exit. Scene 4.
Corisca. O How Fortune favors my disseignes
More then I looked for. She good reason has,
For I never asked her favor shamefastly.
Great pow're she has, and with good cause the world
Calls her a puissant goddess: yet must we not sit still,
For sildome idle folks prove fortunate.
Had not my industry made me companion unto her,
What would this fit occasion have auailed me,
To bring my purpose unto pass? Some fool
Would have her rival shund, and showed signs of
Her jealousy, bearing an evil eye
About, but that had been ill done, for easilier
May one keep her from an open then a hidden foe.
The covered rocks are those which do deceive
The wisest mariners Who cannot friendship feign,
Cannot truly hate. Now see what I can do,
I am not such an ^asse to think she does not love,
It might she make some other fool believe.
But tush, I am the mistress of this art. A tender wench,
Scarce from the cradle crept, in whom love has
Stilled but the first drops of his sweet, so long
Pursude and woo^d by a worthy friend,
And worse, (...), and ^ekist, and yet not loue^*
She is an ass that it believes. I Will not beleeu't.
But see how Fortune favors me: Behold
Where Amarillis is her self. I Will make
As though I saw her not, and stand aside.

Scene 5.
Amarillis. Corisca. Dear blessed woods, and you the silent groves
Of rest and peace, the harbour-houses true:
How willingly I turn to visit you.
And if my stars had so been pleased to have let
Me live unto my self, I with th'elizian fields
The happy gardens of the demi gods,
Would not have changed your gentle shadow spots.
If I judge right, these worldly goods are naught
But muschiefes, still the richest have least goods,
And he possesses most that is most poor.
Riches are ever snares of liberty.
What Is fame of beauty worth in tender years?
Or heavenly nobleness in mortal blood?
So many favors, both of heaven and earth,
Fields large, and happy, goodly meadow plains,
Fat pastures, that do fatter flocks present,
If in the same the heart be not content.
Happy that shepherdess, whose scarcely knees,
A poor, but yet a cleanly gown does reach:
Rich in her self, only in natures gifts.
Who in sweet poverty, no poorness knows:
Nor feels no tortures which this ^iches brings.
Desire to have much, nere does her torment,
If she be poor, yet is she well content.
She natures gifts does nurse with natures gifts,
Making milk spring with milk, saucing her native sweet
With honey of the Be, one fountain serves her
To drink, to wash, and for her looking glass.
If she be well, then all the world is well.
Let the clouds rise, and thunder threat amain,
Her poverty does all the fear prevent,
If she be poor, yet is she well content.
Finely the flock committed to her charge
Feeds on the grass, the whilst her shepherd friend
Feeds on her eyes, not whom the stars, or men,
Her destenies, but whom affection chooses.
Then in the shadow of a M^^tell tree,
Cherisht, she cherishes again; nor does
She feel that heat which she discouers not:
Nor ever heat discover which she does not feel.
Always declaring troth of her intent,
If she be poor, yet is she well content.
True life that knows not death before they die.
Ah that I might my fortune change with theirs.
But see Corisca. Gods save you good Corisca.

Co. Who calls me? Dear Amarillis dearer then
Mine eyes, my life, whither go you alone?

Ama. No further then you see, glad I have found you out.

Co. You have her found that will not part from you.
And even now, thus was I thinking with my self,
Were I her soul how could she stay away so long?
And therewithal you came my dear, and yet
You do not love your poor Corisca.

Am. Why so?

Co. Ask you why so? and you a bride to day.

Ama. A bride?

Co. A bride, and yet from me you keep it.

Ama. How should I utter that I do not know?

Co. Yet will you feign?

Am. You jest.

Co. It Is you that jest.

Ama. And can it then be true?

Co. Most certain true.
Do not you know thereof?

Ama. I know I promised was,
But know not that the marriage is so near.

Co. I heard it of my brother Ormin: and to say the troth,
There is no other talk. But you look pale.
This news perhaps does trouble you.

Ama. It is
Long since the promise past, and still my mother said
This day it should revive.

Co. Unto a better life
You shall revive, for this you should be merry,
Why do you sigh? let that poor wretch go sigh.

Ama. What wretch?

Co. Mirtillo, whom even now I found
Ready to die: and surely he had died
Had I not promised him this marriage to disturb,
Which though I only for his comfort said,
Yet were I fit to do it.

Am. And did he give consent?

Co. I: and the means.

Am. I pray you how?

Co. Easily:
So you thereto disposed be to yield.

Ama. That could I hope, and would you give your faith
Not to disclose it, I discover would
A thought which in my heart I long have hid.

Co. I it disclose! Ground open first thy jaws
And swallow me up by a miracle.

Ama. Know then ( Corisca) when I think I must
Be subject to a child, that hates, that flies from me,
And has no other sport but woods and beasts,
And loves a dog better then thousand Nimphs,
I malcontented ^^ue half desperate.
But dare not say so for respect I bear
Unto mine honesty, unto my faith
Which to my father, and what worser is,
Which to our puissant goddess I have given:
If by thy help my faith my life both saved,
I might divide me from this heavy knot,
Then should thou be my health, my very life.

Co. If so for this thou sigh'st good reason thou
Dear Amarillis have. How often he said?
A thing so fare to one that can despise it?
So rich a lemme to one that knows it not:
But you too crafty are to tell the troth.
What let us you now to speak?

Ama. The shame I have.

Co. Sister you have a mischievous disease,
I'had rather have the pox. the f^uer, or the fistula,
But trust to me, youl'e quickly leave the same:
Once do but master it, and then it is gone.

Ama. This shamefastness that nature stamps in us
Cannot be mastered for if you seek
To hunt it from your heart, it shes into your face.

Co. O Amarillis, who (too wise) conceales
Her ill, at last great folly she reueales.
Had thou but at the first discovered
This thought to me, thou had been lose ere this.
Now try Coriscaes art, you could not have
Entrusted you into more subtle faithful hands.
But when you shall be freed by my help
From this same captive husband, will you not
Provide you of another Lover then?

Ama. At better leisure we will think of that.

Co. Trust me you cannot faithful Mirtillo.
You know there is not at this day a swain
For value, honest troth and beauty, worthier
Of your affection. And you will let him die,
Without so much as saying so. Yet hear him once.

Ama. How better it were to give him peace and stab:
The root of such desire as has no hope.

Co. Give him this comfort yet before he die.

Ama. It rather double will his misery.

Co. Leave that to him.

Ama. But what becomes of me,
If ever it be known?

Co. Small hurt thou have.

Ama. And small t'shalbe before my name it do endaunger.

Co. If you may fail in this then in the rest.
I you may fail. Adieu.

Ama. Nay stay Coris^a,
Hear me but speak.

Co. No not a word, unless
You promise me.

Am. I promise you, so you
Do tie me to naught else.

Co. To nothing else.

Ama. And you shall make him think I knew not of it.

Co. I Will make him think it was by chance.

Am. And that I may
Depart as soon as I think good.

Co. As Soon
As you have heard him speak.

Ama. And that he shall
Quickly dispatch.

Co. So shall he do.

Ama. And that
He come not near me by my darts length never.

Co. O what a toil it is to reform your simpleness:
All parts saving his tongue we will surely tie.
Will you ought else?

Am. No nothing else.

Co. When will you do it?

Ama. When you think good, give me but so much time
I may go home and hear more of this marriage.

Co. Go. But take heed you do it warily.
But hear what I am thinking on. To day
About noone time among these shadow trees
Come you without your Nimphs, here shall you find
Me to that end, with me shall be Nerine,
Aglaure, Elisa, Phillis, and Licoris, all mine own.
As wise as faithful good companions.
Here may you now (as often you have done)
Play at blind buffe. Mirtill will easily think,
That for your sport and not for him you came.

Ama. This pleases me, but yet I would not have
Your Nimphs to hear the words Mirtillo speaks.

Co. I understand, and well aduisde, let me alone,
I Will make them vanish when I see my time:
Go, and forget not now to love your poor Corisca.

Am. How can I choose but love her in whose hands
I have reposde my life.

Co. So she is gone.
Exit. Am. Small force will serve to batter down this rock,
Though she have made defense to my assault,
Yet will she never his abide. I know too well
How hearty prayers of a gracious Love
Can tempt a tender wenches heart. Yet with this sport
I Will tie her so, she will scarcely think it sport.
I Will by her words, will she or nill she, spy
And pierce into the bowels of her heart,
I Will make me mistress of her secrets all.
Then I Will conduct her so that she shall think
Her most unbridled love and not my art
Has brought her in to play this wretched part.

Scene 6.
Corisca. Satir. O I am dead,

Sa. And I alive?

Co. Ah turn
My Amarillis, turn again, I taken am.

Sa. Tush Amarillis hears thee not, be quiet now.

Co. Oh me my hear.

Sa. I have hunted thee so long
That at the last thou art fallen into my snare.
This is the roabe sister, this is the hear.

Co. Speak you to me Satir?

Sa. I even to thee.
Are you not that same famous Corisca, that
Excellent mistress of lies, that at so dear a ra^e
False hopes, feigned looks, and lying words do sell,
That have betrayed me so many ways perfidous Corisca.

Co. I am Corisca gentle Satir, but not now
So pleasing to thine eyes as I have been.

Sa. I gentle wicked wretch, I was not so
When me thou (...) to follow Coridon.

Co. I le^t thee for another.

Sa. See, see a wonder,
This is news indeed. But when I stole
Fair Lillaes bow, Clor^ scarf, Daphnes rich ^oabe,
And Silutaes buskins, then thou promi'st me
Thy love thou gave another should be my reward.
The dainty garland which I gave to thee,
Thou gave to Nisus. And when me thou made
To watch so many frostie night* both ^n
The cave, the woods, and by the river side,
And ever mockedst me, was I not gentle then?
Believe me now thou shall me pay for all.

Co. Thou stranglest me as if I were a dog.

Sa. Now see if thou can run away again.
Thy policies shall not avail thee now.
If but thy head hold on it is vain to strive.

Co. Good Satir give me leave to speak to thee.

Sa* Sp^ak tlhen

Co. How can I speak? let me go:
Upon my faith I will not run away.

Sa. What faith oh faithless woman have? Dare thou
Yet speak of faith to me? I Will carry thee
Into the darkest cave this mountain has:
Where never Sun nor humane step approach't,
I Will hide the rest there thou with my delight
And with thy scorn shall feel what I will do with thee.

Co. And can thou be so cruel to that hair
For which thou often have sworn it were sweet to die,
And that thou coulst not suffer too much ill for me?
Oh heavens, oh fa^es, whom shall a woman trust?

Sa. Ah wicked, think thou to deceive me yet?
Can thou yet tempt me with thy subtilties?

Co. Oh gentle Satir do not make a scorn
Of her that thee adores. If so thy heart
Be not of marble made, behold me at
Thy feet, if ever I offended thee (o Idol of
My soul) I pardon crave. By these same strong
And more then manlike knees which I embrace,
By that same love thou sometime bar'st to me,
By that same sweetness which thou wont'st to draw
Thou said out of mine eyes calling them stars,
Now wretched fountains of these bitter tears,
I pray thee pity me, let me but go.

Sa. The wretch has almost moved me, should I but trust
Affection only I were overcome.
But to be short, I will not trust thee, strive no more.
For all this humbleness thou art Corisca still.

Co. Oh me my head, stay yet do not deny
Me one poor favor yet.

Sa. What fauour's that?

Co. Hear me but once.

Sa. Thou think with fained words
And forged tears to mollify my heart.

Co. Ah courteous Satir, what will thou make of me?

Sa. We Will try.

Co. No pity then?

Sa. No pity I.

Co. Art thou resolved of this?

Sa. I am resolved.
Have thou now made an end of all thy charms?

Co. Oh villain indiscreet, unseasonable.
Half a man, half a goat, and all a beast:
Dried Carogne, defect of wicked nature.
Do thou believe Corisca loves not thee?
It is most true. What should I love in thee:
This goodly bunch of that beslauered beard,
These goatlike ears, that stinking toothlesse cave?

Sa. Oh witch are these to me?

Co. These are to thee.

Sa. Ribald to me?

Co. Half goat to thee.

Sa. And do
Not I with these my hands thrust out thy bitches tongue?

Co. I if thou durst.

Sa. A silly woman in my hands,
Dares brave me? dares despise me thus? Well I Will.

Co. Villain what will thou do?

Sa I Will eat thee quick.

Co. Where be thy teeth?

Sa. Oh heavens who can endure
I Will pay you home, come on.

Co. I will not come.

Sa. That will I see.

Co. Spite of thy heart I will not.

Sa. Come on, we will see who has the stronger, thou
The neck or I the arms. Nay soft and fair.
Well let us see.

(Sa.) Go too.

(Co.) Satir hold fast.
Farewell, I would thy neck were broke.
Exit Co.
Sa. O me my head, my back, my side. Oh what
A fall is this? I scarce can turn my self.
And is she gone and left her head behind?
Unusual wonder. Nimphs and shepherds come,
Behold a witchcraft trick of one that is fled
And lives without a head! How light it is?
It has no brains, there comes out no blood.
Why look I so? Oh fool she gone without a head,
Thou art without a head that see not
How thou art mocked. Treacherous perfidous witch,
Is It not enough thou have made thy heart to lie,
Thy face, thy words, thy laughter and thy looks,
But that thy hair must lie. Poets behold
Your native gold, your amber pure, that you
So fondly praise, for shame your subject change,
In steed whereof sing me a witches subtlety,
That robs sepulchers and rotten heads
To dress her own. As well you may go praise
Megeraes viprous monstrous hairs. Lovers
Behold, and be ashamed wretches now,
Make this the means your senses to recover
That are ensnared in such without more plaints.
But why stay I to publish out her shame?
This hair my tongue so famous made erewhile,
I will go prove to make again as vile.

Finis Act. 2.
Chorus. Great was her fault and error sure,
That did occasion all our teene:
Who loves great laws holy and pure
(Breaking her faith) did violate
And thereby did illuminate
The mortal rage of our immortal queen.
That neither tears nor blood
Of many harmless souls have done us good.
So faith to every virtue root
The ornament of every soul well borne,
In heaven has surely set his foot,
That worthily are faithless held in scorn.
So nature truth would ever happy make,
Even for the true almighty makers sake.
Blind mortals you that have so deep desire
To get and to possess
A gilded carcass of a painted tire,
That like a naked shadow walks on still,
Seeking her sepulcher by guess:
What love, or rather fond will,
Has witcht your heart dead beauty to pursue?
Rich treasures are loves follies found. The true
And lively love is of the soul:
All other subjects want what love requires,
Therefore they not deserve these amorous desires.
The soul because it only loves again,
Is only worthy of this loving pain.
It is a pretty thing to kiss
The delicate vermilion Rose
Of some fair cheek, they that have proved that bliss
(Right happy Lovers) so will say. Yet those
Will say again kisses are dead and vain,
Where beauty kissed restores it not again.
The strokes of two enamored lips are those
Where mouth on mouth loves sweetest vengeance shows.
Those are true kisses where with equal wills
We ever give and take again our fills.
Kiss but a curious mouth, a dainty hand,
A breast, a brow, or what you can demand,
You will confess no part in woman is,
Save for sweet mouth that does deserve a kiss,
By which two souls with lively spirits meet,
Making live rubres kindly entergreet,
So among themselves those sowly sprightfull kisses
Do enter-speake, and in a little sown
Great things bewray, and sweetest secret blisses
To others hidden, to themselves well known.
Such joy, nay such sweet life does loving prove,
Soul knit to soul by th'earthly knot of love.
Kisses that kisses meet, do paint unmoved,
Th'incounters of two hearts, loving beloved.

Scene 1.
Mirtillo. O Spring, the gentle childhood of the year,
Mother of flowers, fresh herbs, and fresh desires,
Thou turn'st again, but with thee do not turn
The happy days of my delightful joys:
Thou turnst, thou turnst, but with thee turnst naught else
Save of the loss of my dear trusures lorne,
The miserable wretched memory.
Thou art the same thou were, so fresh, so fair,
But I am not as I was wont to be,
So dear to other eyes. Oh bitter sweets of love,
Much worser it is to leese you once possessed,
Then never to have you enjoyed at all,
Much like the grief to change a happy state.
The memory of any good that wastes,
Consumes it self as the other is consumed.
But if my hopes be not as is their use,
Of brittle glass, or that my deep desire
Make not my hope much greater then the truth,
Here shall I see the sunbeams of mine eyes.
Here if I be not mocked I shall her see
Stay her quick feet at sound of my lament.
Here shall my greedy eyes after long fast
Receive sweet food from her diuinest look.
Here will she turn her son'raigne lights on me,
If not gentle, yet cruel will they be.
If not the means to breed mine inward joy,
So ^ierce, yet as I die to mine annoy.
O happy day sighed for long time in vain,
If after times so clouded with complaints
Love thou do grant me sight of her fair eyes,
I mean made bright as is the morning Sun,
Hither Ergasto sent me, where he said
Corisca and my beauteous Amarillo
Would be together playing at blind man buffe:
Yet here see I none blind, save my blind will,
That wandering seeks her sight by other means
But finds it not. O poison to my food,
This long delay blinds my heart with fear.
My cruel desteny will never change.
Each hour, each moment that a Lover stays
Expecting his contentment, seems a world.
But who does know? perhaps I staid too long.
And here Corisca has attended me.
Ay me! If this be true, then welcome death.

Sce. 2.
Amarillis. Mirtillo. Chorus of Nimphs. Corisca. BEhold the buffe!

Ms. Behold indeed! ah sight.

Am. Why stay ye now*

Mir. Ah voice that have at once
Both wounded me and healed me again?

Am. Where be ye? what do ye? Lisetta you
That so desired this sport, where are you now?
Where is Corisca? and where be the rest?

Mir. Now may't be truly said that love is blind,
And has a scarce that binds up his eyes.

Ama. Come list to me! guide me clear of these trees,
There set me in the pain, you round about
A circle make and so begin the play.

Mir. What shall I do? I see not how this sport
Can do me good, not I Corisca see that is
The load-starre of my hopes. Heavens aid me.

Am. Why are ye come? think ye naught else to do
But blind mine eyes? Where are ye let us begin?

Cho. Nim. Blind love I do not trust to thee,
That makes desires full of obscurity.
Thou have s^^ all sight lesser troath,
Unhappy they that trust thine oath.
Blind or not blind thou tempest in vain,
For I can shift me in this plain.
Blind thou do see through Arons eyes,
Blind thou best sighted safely ties.
Now that I am at liberty,
I were a fool to trust to thee.
In test nor earnest I Will not stay,
Because thou kill'st when thou do play.

Am. But ye play too far off, ye should touch me.

Mir. O mighty Gods! what do I see? am I
In heaven or earth? y'haue no such h^rmonie.

Co. Nim. But you that blind and faithless prove,
That calls me to play this hour,
Behold I play and with my hand
Hit your back and by you stand.
I play and round about you run,
And for I trust not you I shun.
Here am I no^ and there again,
Whilst you take me strive in vain.
The reason is my heart is free,
Therefore you cannot handle me.

Ama. I thought I had Licoris caught, and I
Have got a tree. I hear you laugh full well.

Mir. Oh would I were that tree. Me thinks I see Corisca
Hidden in yonder shrubs, she nods to me,
It Is even she, she beckens still to me.

Cho. Nim. Free hearts have ever feet to fly,
And so (entising power) have I*
Yet will you tempt me in to train?
In says (sweet) no: t's all in vain.
The reason is my hearts is free,
Therefore you cannot handle me.

Ama. I would this tree were burned, now had I thought
I had E^sa taken.

Mir. Yet does Corisca point,
She threatens me, sh'would have me put my self
Among these Nymphs.

Ama. Belike thus I all day
Must play with trees.

Co. I must spite of my heart
Go out and speak. Why staist thou fearful wretch?
Until she come into thy arms? let her take thee,
Give me thy (...) (fool) go and meet with her.

Mir. How ill agree my heart with my desire?
The One dares so little, the other seeks so much.

Ama. It Is time I turn again unto the sport,
I almost weary am. Fie, ^ie: you make
Me run too much, in faith you are too blame.

Cho Nim. Now look about triumphant power,
That the worlds tribute do devour.
Now bearst thou mocks and many a bat,
And like an Owl thou art wondered at.
About whom birds fl^cke thick and round,
Vt hilst them she strives in vain to wound.
So art thou love this instant tide
Laughed at and mocked on every side.
Some hit thy back and some ^hy face,
Sparing thee neither time nor place.
It will not boot thee spread thy wings,
Nor that thy pi^tons whistling stings.
Catch how thou will thou geist not me,
The reason is my heart is free.
( Amari^^i^ takes Mirtillo now.) Him thou have caught it is no wonder,
For love holds all his senses under.

Exeunt Cho. Nim, Sce. 3.
Amaril^is. Mirtillo. Corisca. IN faith Auglaura I have caught you now.
Will you be gone? nay (...) I Will hold you fast.

Co. Trust me had I not unawares to him
Thrust him on her, this labor had been lost.

Ama. What not a word? are you she or not she?

Co. Here do I take this dart, and in this grove
I turn me to observe what follows.

Ama. So now I know Corisca are you not?
It Is so you are so great and have no hair,
I could have wished no better match then this.
And since you ti'de me, do untie me too,
Quickly my heart, and I will pay thee with
The sweetest kiss thou ever had. Why stai'st?
Me thinks your hands do shake. Put to your teeth,
If with your nails you cannot do the deed.
How tedious you are? Let me alone,
My self will rid me of this trouble soon:
But see how many knots have made me sure.
Ah that I may but make you play this part.
So now I see. Ay me what do I see?
Let me alone (traitor) ay wretched me.

Mir. Stand still my soul.

Am. Let me alone I say,
Date you thus offer force to Nimphs Aglaure,
Elisa treachours where are you become?
Let me alone.

Mir. Behold I let you go.

Ama. This is Coriscaes craft, well keep you that
Which you have not deserved.

Mir. Why fly you hence*
(Cruel) behold my death, behold this dart
Shall pierce my woeful breast.

Am. What will you do?

Mir. That which perhaps grieves you (most cruel Nymph.
That any else beside your self should do.

Am. Oh me, me thinks I am half dead.

Mir. But if this work belong alone to you,
Behold my breast, here take this fatal dart.

Ama. Death you have merited. But tell me who
Has made you boldly thus presume?

Mi. My love

Ama. Love is no cause of any villain-act.

Mi. Love trust me it was in me. I made me respective:
And since you first laid hold on me less cause
You have to call my action villainy.
Yea even when I by so commodious means
Might be made bold to use the laws of love,
Yet did I quake a Lover to be found.

Ama. Cast not my blind deeds in my teeth I pray.

Mir. My much more love makes me more blind then you.

Ama. Prayers and fine conceits, not snares and thefts,
Discreetest Lovers use.

Mir. Assauadge beast
With hunger hunted, from the woods breaks forth
And does assail the stranger on his way,
So I that only by your beauteous eyes
Do live: since that sweet food me have forbad,
Either your cruelty or else my fate
A starued Lover issuing from those woods
Where I have suffered long and wretched fast,
Have for my health assaid this stratage me
Which loves necessity upon me thrust.
Now blame not me (Nymph cruel) blame your self,
For prayers and conceits true loves discretion
As you them call, you not attend from me,
You have bereaved with shunning me the means
To love discreetly.

Ama. Discreetly might you to do
To leave to follow that which flies you so,
In vain you know you do pursue me still.
What is it you seek of me?

Mir. Only one time
Daine but to hear me, ere I wretched die.

Ama. T's well for you, the favor that you ask
You have already had: now get you hence.

Mir. Ah Nymph that which I have already said,
Is but a drop of that huge ample sea
Of my complaints, if not for pity sake,
Yet for your pleasure now hear (cruel) but
The latest accents of a dying voice.

Ama. To ease your mind and me this cumber rid,
I grant to hear you, but with this condition,
Speak small, part soon, and never turn again.

Mir. In too too small a bundle (cruel Nimphe)
You do ccommaund me bind my huge desires,
Which measure, but by thought naught could contain:
That I you love, and love more then life,
If you deny to know, ask but these woods
And they will tell, and tell you with them will
Their beasts, their trees and stones of these great rocks
Which I so often have tender made to melt
At found of my complaints. But what make I
Such proof of love where such rare beauty is?
See but how many beauteous things the skies contain,
How many dress the earth in brave attire:
Thence shall you see the force of my desire.
For as the waters fall, the fire does rise,
The air does fl^e, the earth lies firmly still,
And all these same the skies do compass round.
Even so to you as to their chiefest good,
My soul does fly, and my poor thoughts do run
With all affection to your lovely beauties:
He that from their dear object would them turn,
Might fast turn from their viuall course the sky,
The earth, the air, the water, and the fire.
And quite remove the earth from often his seat.
But why command you me to speak but small?
Small shall I tell, it I but tell you shall
That I must die, and less shall dying do,
If I but see what is my turn too.
Ay me, what shall I do? which may out-last
My miserable love? When I am dead,
Yet cruel soul have pity on my pains.
Ah fair! ah dear I sometime so sweet a cause
Why I did live whilst my good fates were pleased.
Turn hitherward those starry lights of love,
Let me them see once meek and full of pity
Before I die. So may my death be sweet.
As they have been good guide, unto my life,
So let them be unto my death, and that
Sweet lo^ke which first begat my love, beget
My death (...) my loves Hesperus become
The (...) star^e of my decaying day.
But you obdurate, never (...),
Whil^^ I more humble you more haughty are.
And can you hear me and not speak a word?
Whom do I speak too wretch a marble stone?
If you will say naught else, yet bid me die,
And you shall see what force your words will have.
Ah wicked love, this is a misery extreme,
A Nymph so cruel so desirous of my death,
Because I ask it as a favor, scorns to give it,
Arming her cruel voice in silence so,
Least it might favor mine exceeding woe.

Ama. If I as well to answer as to hear,
You pronus'd had, just cause you might have found
To have condemned my silence for unjust.
You call me cruel, imagining perhaps
By that reproof more easily to draw
Me to the contrary. No know (Mirtillo)
I am no more delighted with the sound
Of that desertlesse and disliked praise
You to my beauty give, then discontent
To hear you call me cruel and unjust.
I grant this cruelty to any else a fault,
But to a lover virtue t's and honesty,
Which in a woman you call cruelty.
But be it as you you would blameworthy fault,
To be unkind to one that loves. Tell me,
When was Amarillis cruel unto you?
Perhaps when reason would not give me leave
To use this pity: yet how I it used
Your self can judge, when you from death I saved:
I mean when you among a noble sort of maids,
A lustful Lover in a woman's clothes
Banded your self, and durst contaminate
Their purest sports, mingling mong kisses innocent,
Kisses lascivious and impure: which to remember
I am ashamed. But heavens my witness are,
I knew you not, and after I you knew,
I scornd your deed, and kept my soul untouched
From your lasciviousness, not suffering at all
The venom there to run to my chaste heart.
You violated nothing save th'out side
Of these my lips. A mouth kissed but by force
Spits out the kiss, and kill the shame withal.
But tell me you, what fruit had you received
Of your rash theft, had I discovered you
Unto those Nymphs? The Thracian Orfeus had not been
So lamentably torn on Ebers banks
Of Bacchus dames as you had been of them,
Had not you helped, her pity whom you cruel call.
That pity which was fit for me to give, I ever gave:
For other it is in vain you either ask or hope:
If you me love, then love mine honesty,
My safety love, and love my life withal.
Thou art too far from that which thou desir'st,
The heavens forbid, the earth contraries it,
Death is the punishment thereof. And above all
Mine honesty desies forbidden acts:
Then with a safer keeper of her honors flower,
A soul well-borne will ever scorn to have.
Then rest in peace ( Mirtillo) give ore this suite,
Get thee far hence to live if thou art be wise.
T'abandon life for peevish grief or smart,
Is not the action of a valiant heart.
From that which pleases virtue, it is t'abstaine,
Is that which pleases breeds offense again.

Mir. To save ones life is not within his power,
That has his soul forsaken and given ore.

Ama. One armed in virtue conquereth all desire.

Mir. Virtue small conquest gets where love tryumphes.

Ama. Who cannot what he would will he what he can.

Mir. Oh loves necessity no laws endures.

Ama. Distance of place may heal your wound again.

Mir. In vain one flies from that his heart does harbor.

Ama. A new desire an old will quite displace.

Mir. Had I another heart, another soul.

Ama. Time will at last clearly this love consume.

Mir. I after love has quite consumed my life.

Ama. Why then your wounds will not be cured at all?

Mir. Never till death.

Ama. Till death* well hear me now,
And look my words be laws unto your deeds.
Howbee't I know to die is the more usual voice
Of an enamored tongue, then a desire
Or firm conceit his soul has entertained,
Yet if by chance such a strange folly has
Possessed thy mind, know then thy death will be
Death to mine honor as unto thy life.
Now if thou love me, live and let it be
A token of thy wit henceforth thou shun
To see me, or to seek my company.

Mir. O cruel sentence! can I without life
Live think you then? Or can I without death
Find end unto my torment and my grief?

Ama. Well now it is time you go ( Mirtillo) hence!
Yow'le stay too long. Go comfort your self,
That infinite the troop of wretched Lovers is.
All wounds do bring with them their several pain,
Nor can you only of this love complain.

Mir. Among these wretches I am not alone: but yet
A miserable spectacle am only I,
Of dead and living, nor can live nor die.

Ama. Well go your ways.

Mir. Ah sad departure,
End of my life, go I from you, and do not die?
And yet I feel the very pangs of death,
That do give life unto mine exttasie,
To make my heart immortally to die.

Scene 4.
Amarillis. OH Mirtillo! oh my dearest soul
Could thou but see into her heart whom thou
Call'st cruel Amarillis, then would thou say
Thou had that pity which thy heart desires.
Oh minds too much unfortunate in love!
What boots it thee my heart to be beloved?
What boots it me to have so dear a Love?
Why should the cruel sates so disvnite
Who^ love conioines? and why should traitorous love
Conioyne them whom the destenies do part?
Oh happy sauadge beasts whom nature gives
No laws in love, save very love it self.
Inhumane humane law, that punish'st
This love with death, if it be so sweet to sin,
And not to sin so necessary be,
Imperfect nature that repugneth law,
Or law too hard that nature does offend.
But rush, she loves too little that fears death,
Would gods death were the worst that is due to sin.
Dear chastity, th'inviolable power
Of souls well-borne that have my amorous will
Retained in chains of holy rigor still:
To thee I consecrate my harmless sacrifize.
And thou my soul ( Mirtillo) pardon me,
That cruel (...) where I should piteous be.
Pardon her that in looks and only words
Does seem thy foe, but in my heart thy friend.
If thou would be revenged, what greater pain
Would thou (...), thou this my cruel grief?
Thou art my heart, and sha^t be spite of heaven
And earth, when thou do plain and sigh, and weep,
Thy tears become my blood, thy sighs my breath:
And all thy pains they are not only thine,
For I them feel, and they are turned mine.

Sce. 5.
Corisca. Amarillis. HIde you no more my Amarillis now.

Ama. Wretch I discovered am.

Co. I all have heard,
Be not afraid, did I not say I loved you,
And yet you are afraid? and hides your self
From her that loves you so* Why do you blush?
This blushing is a common fault.

Ama. Corisca I am conquered I confess.

Co. That which you cannot hide you will confess.

Ama. And now I see too weak a thing does prove
A woman's heart t'encounter mighty love.

Co. Cruel unto Mirtillo, but more cruel to your self.

Ama. It is no cruelty that springs of pity.

Co. Cicute and Aconite do grow from hoisome roots.
I see no difference twixt this cruelty
That does offend, and pity helping not.

Ama. Ah me Coriscal

Co. These sighs good sister
Are but weakness of your heart They Are fit
For women of small worth.

Ama. I could not be
Thus cruel but I should love cherish hopelesly.
Therefore to shun him shows I have compassion
Of his ill and mine.

(Co.) Why hopelesly?

Ama. Do you not know I am espows'd to Siluio,
And that the law each woman doomes to death
That violates her faith?

(Co.) Oh simple fool,
Is this the let? Which is more ancient among us,
Dianaes law or loves? this in our breasts
Is bred and grows with us, Nature her self
With her own hands imprints in our hearts breasts:
And where this law commands, both heaven and earth obey.

Ama. But if the other law do take my life,
How can loves law restore it me again?

Co. You are too nice, were every woman so,
Had all such straight respects Good times farewell,
Small practisers are subject to this pain.
The law does never stretch unto the wise.
Believe me should blameworthy all be slain,
The country then would soon prove womanlesse.
It needful was, theft should forbidden be
To them that closely could not cover theft.
This honesty is but an art to seem so,
Let others as they list believe, I Will think so still.

Ama. These are but vanities ( Corisca) it were best
Quickly to leave that which we cannot hold.

Co. And who forbids thee fool? This life's too short
To pass it over with one only love:
Men are too sparing of then favors now,
(Whether't be for want, or else for frowardness
The fresher that we are, the dearer still:
Beauty and youth once gone we are like Be hiues
That has no honey, no nor yet no wax.
Let men prate on they do not feel our woes,
For their condition differs much from ours,
The elder that they grow, they grow the perfectest:
If they loose beauty, yet they wisdom gain:
But when our beauty fades that oftentimes
Conquers their greatest wits, straight fades all our good,
There cannot be a vilder thing to see
Then an old woman. Therefore ere thou age attain,
Know me thy self, and use it as thou should.
What were a Lion worth did he not use his strength?
What Is a man's wit worth that lies idly by?
Even so our beauty proper strength to us,
As force to Lions, wisdom unto men,
We ought to use whilst it we have. Time flies
Away and years come on, our youth once lost
We like cut flowers never grow fresh again.
And to our hoary hairs love well may run,
But Lovers will our wrinkled skins still shun.

Ama. Thou speak this ( Corisca) me to try,
Not as thou think I am sure. But be assured
Except thou show'st some means how I may shun
This marriage bonds, my thought's irreuocable,
And I resolved am rather to die
Then any way to spot my chastity.

Co. I have not seen so obstinate a fool,
But since you are resolved I am agreed.
But tell me do you think your Siluio is
As true a friend to faith as you to chastity?

Ama. Thou make me smile. Siluio a friend to faith?
How can that be? he is enemy to love.

Co. Siluio an enemy to love? O fool,
These that are nice put thou no trust in them:
Loves theft is never so securely done
As hidden under veil of honesty,
Thy Siluio loves (good Sister) but not thee.

Ama. What goddess is she? for she cannot be
A mortal wight that lighted has his love.

Co. Nor goddess, nor a Nymph.

(Ama.) What do you tell?

Co. Know you Lisetta?

(Ama.) She that your cattle keeps?

Co. Even she.

(Ama.) Can it be true?

(Co.) That same's his heart.

Ama. Sure he is provided of a dainty Love.

Co. Each day he faines that he on hunting goes.

Ama. I every morning hear his cursed horn.

Co. About noone-time when others busy are,
He his companions shuns, and comes alone
By a back way, unto my garden there,
Where a shadow hedge does close it in,
There does she hear his burning sighs his vows,
And then she tells me all, and laughes at him.
Now hear what I think good to do. Nay I
Have don't for you already. You know the law
That ties us to our faith, does give us leave
Finding our spowses in the act of perfidie,
Spite of our friends the marriage to deny,
And to provide us of an other if we list.

Ama. That know I well, I have examples two,
Leucipp to Ligurine, Armilla to Turingo,
Their faith once broke, they took their own again.

Co. Now hear! Lisetta by my appointment has
Promised to meet th'vnwary Lover here
In thi^same Cave, and now he is the best
Contented youth that lives, attending but the hour
There would I have you take him. I Will be there
To bear you witness oft't, for else we work
In vain, so are you free from this same noisome knot
Both with your honor, and your fathers too.

Ama. Oh brave invention, good Corisca what is to do?

Co. Observe my words. In midst of this same cave
Upon the right hand is a hollow stone,
I know not if by Art or nature made,
A little Cave all linde with Iuy leaves,
To which a little hole aloft gives light,
A fit and thankful receptacle for loves theft.
Prevent their coming and attend them there:
I Will haste Lisetta forward, and as soon
As I perceive your Siluio enter, so will I:
Step you to her, and as the custom is,
We Will carry both unto the Priest, and there dissolve
This marriage knot.

(Ama.) What to his father?

Co. What matter's that? Think you Montanus dare
His private to a public good compare?

Ama. Then closing up mine eyes, I let my self
Be led by thee my dear, my faithful guide.

Co. But do not stay now, enter me betime.

Ama. I Will to the T^mple first, and to the Gods
My prayers make, without whose aid no happy end
Can ever sort to mortal enterprise.

Co. All places ( Amarillis) temples are,
To hearts devout, you will slack your time too much.

Ama. Time's never lost in praying unto them
That do command the time.

Co. Go then dispatch.
Now if I err not, am I at good pass,
Only this staying troubles me, yet may it help,
I must go make new snares to train in Coridon.
I Will make him think that I will meet him there,
And after Amarillis send him soon,
Then by a secret way I Will bring Dianaes Priests:
Her shall they find, and guilty doom to death.
My rival gone ( Mirtillo) sure is mine,
See where he comes. Whilst Amarillis stays
I Will somewhat try him. Love now once inspire
My tongue with words, my face with heavenly fire.

Sce. 6.
Mirtillo. Corisca. HEre weeping sprights of hell new torments hear,
New sorts of pain, a cruel mind behold
Included in a look most merciful,
My love more fierce then the infernal pit,
Because my death cannot suffice to glut
Her greedy will, and that my life is but
A multitude of deaths command me live,
That to them all my life might living give.

Co. I Will make as though I heard him not, I hear
A lamentable voice plain hereabouts,
I wonder who it is, oh my Mirtillo.

Mir. So would I were a naked shade or dust.

Co. How feel you now your self after your long
Discourse with your so dearly loved Nymph?

Mir. Like a weak sick man that has long desired
Forbidden drink, at last gets it unto his mouth
And drinks his death, ending at once both life and thirst.
So I long sick, burned and consumed in
This amorous drought, from two fair fountains that
Ice do distill from out a rockie brain
Of an indurate heart,
Have drunk the poison that my life will kill,
Sooner then half of my desire fulfill.

Co. So much more mighty waxes love as from
Our hearts the force is he receives (dear Mirtillo)
For as the Bear is wont with licking to give shape
To her misshapen brood, that else were helpless borne.
Even so a Lover to his bare desire,
That in the birth was shapelesse, weak and frail.
Giving but form and strength begets love:
Which whilst it is young and tender, then it is sweet,
But waxing to more years, more cruel grows,
That in the end ( Mirtillo) an mueterate affect
Is ever full of anguish and defect.
For whilst the mind on one thought only beats;
It waxes thick by being too much fixed.
So love that should be pleasure and delight,
Is turned to malancholy, and what worser is,
It proves at last, or death, or madness at the least:
Wherefore wise is that heart that often changes love.

Mir. Ere I change will or thought, changed must my life
Be into death, for though the beauteous Amarillis
Be most cruel, yet is she all my life:
Nor can this bodies bulk at once contain
More then one heart, more then one soul retain.

Co. O wretched shepherd, ill thou know to use
Love in his kind, love one that hates thee, one
That flies from thee, fie man, I had rather die.

Mir. As gold in fire, so says in griefe's refinde,
Nor can ( Corisca) am^rous constancy
Show his great power, but thorough cruelty.
This only rests amongst my many griefs.
My sole content does my heart burn or die,
Or languish never so much, light are the pains,
Plaints, torments, sighs, exile, and death it self,
For such a cause, for such a sweet respect.
That life before my faith shall broken be,
So worse then death I hold inconstancy.

Co. O brave exploit, Lover magnanimous,
Like an enraged beast or senseless rock,
There cannot be a greater damned plague,
More mortal poison to a soul in love.
Then is this faith. Unhappy is that heart
That let it self be guld with vain fantas^nes
Of this erroneous and unseasonable
Disturber of these amorous delights.
Tell me poor man with this thy foolish virtue of constancy,
What love thou in her that does thee despise?
Love thou the beauty that is none of thine?
The joy thou have not? the pity thou wantst?
The reward thou do not hope for? if thou deem'st right,
Thou love thine ill, thy grief, thy very death,
Thou Art mad to hunt thus that thou can not have.
Lift up thy self ( Mirtillo) happily thou wantst
^ome choice of friends, thou finds none to thy mind.

Mir. More dear to me is pain for Amarillis*
Then any joy a thousand else can give:
If me my fates forbid her to enjoy,
For me then die all other kinds of joy.
I fortunate in any other kind of love?
No though I would I could not:
Nor though I could I would not.
And if I thought in any time henceforth
My will would wish or power obtain the same,
I would desire of heaven and love at once
Both will and power might quite be taken away.

Co. Will thou then die for her that thee disdaines?

Mir. Who pity not expects does fear no pains.

Co. Do not deceive thy self, perhaps thou think
She does dissemble in this deep despite,
And that she loves thee well for all this show.
Oh that thou knewst what unto me she ever says.

Mir. All these are trophies of my truest faith,
With which I will triumph over her cruel will,
Over my pains, and my distressed chance,
Over worlds fortune, and over death it self.

Co. (What would he do, did he but know her love?)
How I bewail thee wretched frenzy man:
Tell me did thou e're any love besides?

Mir. She was my first, and she my last shall be.

Co. For ought that I can see you never tried
Love but in cruel moodes, but in disdain.
Oh if you had but proved him one time kind,
Prove him but so, and you shall see how sweet a thing
It is t'enioy a grateful Nymph; sheel'e you adore,
She Will make your Amarillis bitter to your taste.
How dear a thing it is wholly to have
What you desire, and be naught bard thereof.
Here your Nymph sigh to cool your scalding sighs,
And after say (my dear) all that you see is yours.
If I be fair, I am only fair for you:
Only for you I cherish these my cheeks,
My locks, my breast, your dear hearts only lodge.
But this (alas^e) is but a brook to that
Great Sea of sweets which we in love might taste,
Which none can utter save by proof.

Mir. Thousand times blessed that under such a star is borne.

Co. Here me ( Mirtillo) how like I was to have said
My heart) a Nymph as gentle as the wind
Does blow upon with hair of glistering gold,
As worthy of your love as you of hers,
Praise of these woods, love of a thousand hearts,
By worthy youths in vain solicited,
You only loves more then her heart, her life,
If you be wise do not despise her then.
She like a shadow to thy self will be,
A faithful follower of thy footsteps ever,
One at thy word, obedient at thy beck,
All hours of day and night at thy command.
Do not forsake this rare adventure then,
No pleasure in this earth so sweet as this,
It will not cost a tear, no not a sigh.
A joy accommodated to thy will,
A sweetness temp'red sweetly to thy taste,
Is It not a treasure worth the having (man)?
Leave then the feet of flying hopeless trace,
And her that follows thee, scorn not to embrace.
I feed you not with hopes of vanity.
If you desire to see her, you shall see her straight.

Mir. My hart's no subject for these loves delights.

Co. Prove it but once, and then return again
Unto thy sollitary grief, so may thou see
What are those joys that in loves pleasures be.

Mir. A taste corrupted, pleasant things abhors.

Co. Be not you cruel yet to rob her life,
That on your eye, depends, you know what it is
To beg with poverty, if you desire
Pity your self, do it not her deny.

Mir. What pity can he give that none can get?
In sum I am resolved whilst here I live,
To keep my faith to her how ere she prove,
Cruel or pitiful, or how she will.

Co. (Oh truly blind, unhappy senseless man)
To whom preseru'st thou faith? trust me I am loath
T'augment thy grief, but for the love I bear thee
I cannot choose. Think Amarillis is unkind
For zeal she to religion bears?
Or unto chastity? Thou art a fool,
The room is occupied and thou must weep
Whilst others laugh. What? now thou art dumb.

Mir. Now stands my life in midst twixt life and death,
Whilst I in doubt do stand, if to believe,
Or not believe, this makes me so amazed.

Co. You Will not believe me then?

Mir. Oh if I do,
Straight shall you see my miserable end.

Co. Live wretched man, live and revenged be.

Mir. Oh no it is not true, it cannot be.

Co. Well there is no remedy, I must rehearse
That which will vex thy heart. See thou that cave?
That is the true custodian of her faith
And her religion. There thee to scorn she laughes,
There with thy torments does she sauce the joys
Of thy thrice happy rival. There to be plain
Thy faithful Amarillis often is wont
To dally in the arms of a base shepherd slave.
Go sigh, preserve thy faith, there is thy reward.

Mir. Do thou tell true Corisca? may I believe thee?

Co. The more thou seek'st, the worse thou find still.

Mir. But have thou seen this thing Corisca?

Co. I have not seen't, yet may thou if thou will,
For even this day is order taken this hour,
That they may meet. Hide thee but somewhere here,
And thou shall see her first go in, then he.

Mir. Then comes my death.

Co. See where she comes,
Softly descending by the Temples way. See thou her?
Do not her stealing feet bewray her stealing heart?
Attend thou here and thou shall see the effect.

Mir. Since I am here, the truth I now will see,
Till then, my life and death suspended be.

Sce. 7.
Amarillis. LEt never mortal enterprise be taken in hand
Without this heavenly counsel, half confusde
And doubtful was my heart when I went hence
Unto the Temple, whence thanks be to heaven,
I do well comforted, and well disposed return.
Me thought to my pure prayers and devout,
I felt a spright celestial move within me
Hartning my thoughts, that as it were did say,
What fear thou Amarillis? be assurd.
So will I go assured, heavens be my guide,
Favor fair Mother of love her pure desseignes,
That on thy succor only does depend.
Queen of the triple sky if e're thou prou'dst
Thy suns hot fire, take pity then of mine.
Guide hither courteous goddess that same swain
With swift and subtle feet that has my faith.
And thou dear Cave into thy bosom take
Me, loves handmaid, and give me leave there to
Accomplish my desires. Why do I stay?
Here Is none does see or hear. Enter secure.
Oh Mirtillo, could thou but dream to find me here.

Sce. 8.
Mirtillo. WHat am I blind, or do I too much see?
Ah had I but been borne without these eyes,
Or rather not at all had I been borne.
Did spiteful fates reserve me thus alive
To let me see so bad, so sad a sight?
Mirtill thy torments pass the pains of hell.
No: doubt no more: suspend not thy belief,
Thine eyes, thine ears, have seen, have heard it true.
Thy love an other ownes not by the law
Of earth, that binds her unto any one,
But by loves law that ties her sole to thee.
O cruel Amarillis, wa'st not enough
To kill me wretch, but thou must scorn me too?
That faithless mouth that sometime gra^'t my ioies,
Did vomit out my hateful name, because
She would not have it in her heart to be
A poor partaker of her pleasures sweet.
Why stay'st thou now? she that did give me life
Has ta'n't away, and giu'n't an other man:
Yet wretch thou live, thou do not die. O die
Mirtillo, die to thy tormenting grief,
As to thy joy thou art already dead.
Die dead Mirtillo, finished is thy life.
Finish thy torment too: fleet wretched soul
Through this four constrained and wayward death:
It Is for thy greater ill that thus thou liust.
But what? And must I die without revenge?
First will I make him die that gives me death:
Desire to live so long I will retain
Till justly I have that Usurper slain.
Yield Grief unto Revenge: Pity to Rag^,
Death unto life, till with my life I have
Revenged the death, another guiltles gave.
This Steel shall not drink mine vnuenged blood,
My hand shall rage ere it shall pitteous be.
What ere thou art that ioyst my comfortes all,
I Will make thee feel thy ruin in my fall.
I Will place me here even in this very Grove,
And as I see him but approach the Cave,
This Dart shall sudden wound him in his side.
It shall be cowardlike to strike him thus,
I Will challenge him to single combat, I:
Not so; for to this place so known and vsd,
Shepherds may come to hinder us, and worse:
May search the cause that moved me to this fight,
Which to deny were wickedness to faigne,
Will make me faythlesse held: and to discover,
Will blot her name with endless infamiet
In whom albeit I like not what I see,
Yet what I loved I do, and ever shall.
But what hope I to see, th'adult'rer die
That robbed her of her honor, me my life?
But if I kill him, shall not then his blood
Be to the world a token of this deed?
Why fear I death? since I desire to die.
But then this murder once made plain, makes plain
The cause whereby she shall incur that infamy:
I Will enter then this Cave, and so assail him,
I so, that pleases me: I Will steal in softly,
So that she shall not hear me. I believe
That in the secretst and the closest part
I gather by her words I shall her find,
Therefore I will not enter in too far.
A hollow hole there is made in a Rock,
The left side covered all with Y^ie leaves:
Beneath the other asscent there will I stand,
And tune attend to effect what I desire:
I Will bear my dead foe to my living foe;
Thus of them both I shall be well revenged:
Then with this self same Dart I Will pierce this breast,
So shall there be three pier'st without relief,
First two with Steel, the third with deadly grief,
(Fierce) she shall see the miserable end
Of her beloved, and her betrayed friend,
This Cave that should be harbor of her joys,
Of both her loves, and that which more I crave,
Of her great shame, may prove the happy grave.
And you the steps that I in vain have followed,
Could you me speed of such a faithful way?
Could you direct me to so dear a Bower?
Behold I follow you. O Corisea, Corisea,
Now have thou told too true, now I believe thee.

SCE. 9.
Satyr. Does this man then believe Corisea, following her steps
Into the Cave of Eri^^a^. Well, he is mad,
He knows her not; believe me he had need
Have better hold of her engaged faith,
Then I had of her hear: But knottes more stranged,
Then gaudy guiftes on her he cannot tie.
This damned Whore has sold her self to him,
And here she will pay the shameful markets price.
She is within, her steps bewray the same,
This falls out for her punishment, and thy revenge:
With this great ouerstu^ding stone close thou the Cave,
Go then about, and fetch the Priest with thee:
By the hill way which few or none do know,
Let her be executed as the law commands,
For breach of marriage troth, which she to Coridon
Has plighted, though she ever it concealed
For fear of me, so shall I be revenged
Of both at once, I Will leese no farther time:
From off this Elm I Will cut a bough, with which
I may more speedely remove this stone! Oh how great it is!
How fast it sticks. I Will dig it round about.
This is a work in deed: Where are my wonted forces:
Oh perverse Stars! in spite of you I Will moou't.
Oh Pan Licciu, help me now, thou were a lover once,
Revenge thy love disdaind, upon Corisea.
So, in the name of thy great power it mooues.
So, in the Power of thy great name it falls.
Now is the wicked Fox taken in the trappe.
Oh that all wicked Women were with thee within,
That with one fire they might be all destroyed.

Chorus. HOw Puissaunt art thou Love,
Natures miracle, and the Worlds wonder?
What sauadge nation, or what rusticke heart
Is it that of thy power feels no part?
But what Wit's so profound can pull asunder
That powers strength?
Who feels those flames thy fire lights at length,
Immoderate and vain,
Will say amortall spright thou sole do reign
And live, in the corporal and fleshly breast.
But who feels after how a lover is
Wak'ned to Virtue, and how all those flames
Do tremble out at sight of honest shames,
(Vnbrid'led blustering lusts brought down to rest)
Will call thee Spright of high immortal bliss,
Having thy holy receptacle in the soul.
Rare miracle of human: and divine aspectes,
(That blind) do see, and Wisdom (mad) corrects,
Of sense and understanding intellects,
Of reason and desire confused affects.
Such Emperie have thou on earth,
And so the heavens above do thou control:
Yet (by your leave) a wonder much more rare,
And more stupendous has the world then you,
For how you make all wonders yield and bow
Is easily known. Your powers do berthe,
And being taken from virtue of a woman fair.
O Woman gift of the high heavenly sky,
Or rather his who did their spangled gown
So gorgious make unto our mortal eye:
What has it which a Woman's beauty push not down,
In his vast brow a monstrous Cicloplike,
It only one eye has,
Which to beholding gazers gives no light,
But rather does with terror blindness, strike:
If it do sigh or speak, it is like the wrath
Of an enraged Lion that would fight:
And not the skies alone but even poor fields,
Are blasted with the flames his lightning weildes.
Whilst thou with Lamps most sweet,
And with an amorous angelicke light
Of two Suns visible that never meet,
Do always the tempesteous troubled spright
Of thy beholder quiet and delight:
Sound, motion, light, that beauty does assume,
State, daintiness, and value, do aright
Mix such a harmony in that far sight,
That skies themselves with vanity presume,
If less then Paradise those skies do shine
To Paragon with thee (thing most divine)
Good reason has that sovereign creature (named
A Man) to whom all mortal things do how,
If thee beholding, higher cause allow
And yield to be.
What though he rule and triumph truly famed,
It is not for high powers more worth do see
In him then is in thee,
Either of scepter or of victory:
But for to make thee far more glorious stand,
Because the Conqurour thou do command:
And s^'t must be, for man's humanity
Is subject still to Beauties deutie.
Who will not trust this, but contrary says,
Let him behold Mirtilloes wondrous faith:
Yet Woman to thy worth this is a stain,
Love is made love so hopelesly and vain.

SCE. 1.
Corisea. SO fixed was my heart and whole intent
In bringing of this Dear unto the bow,
That I forgotten had my dearest heir
That brutish villain robbed me of: Oh how I grieud,
With such a price to purchase mine escape:
But it was of force to get out of the hands
Of that same senceles beast, who though he have
Less heart then any Conny has, yet might he do
Me many injuries and many skornes.
I always him despisd: whilst he had blood
In any of his veins (like a Horse-leach)
I sucked him still. Now does it grieve him that
I have given over to love him still; just cause he had.
If one could love a most unlovely Beast,
Like herbs that erst were got for wholesome use,
The juice drawn out, they rest unprofitable,
And like a stinking thing we them despise:
So him, (when I had what so ere was good sucked out
From him) how should I use, but throw the saples trunk
Unto the dunghill heap? Now will I see
If Coridon be gotten close into the Cave.
What news is this I see? Sleep I or do I wake?
I am assurd this Caves mouth erst was open,
How close it is shut? How is this ancient Stone?
Rould down? was it an Earthquake since.
Yet would I know if Coridon were there
With Amarillis, then cared I little for the rest,
Certain he is there, for it is a good while since
Lisetta gave him word. Who knows the contrary?
T'may be Mirtillo moved with disdain,
Has done this deed, he had he but my mind,
Could only have performed this rare exployte.
Well by the Mountains way will I go see,
And learn the troth of all how it has past.

SCE. 2.
Dorinda, Linco. LInco, I am assured thou know me not.

Lin. Who would have thought that in these rusty rags
Gentle Dorinda had been ever hid.
Were I some Dog, as I but Linco am,
Unto thy cost I should thee know too well.
What do I see? Dor. Linco, thou see great love,
VVorking effects both strange and miserable.

Lin. One like thy self, so soft so tender yet,
That were but now (as one would say) a babe,
And still me thinks it was but yesterday
Since in mine arms I had thee little wretch,
Ruling thy tender cries, and taught thee too
To call thy Father Dad, thy Mother Mamme:
When in your house I was a Servant hired,
Thou that so like a fearful Do wa'st wont
To fear earch thing before thou feltst this love,
Why, on a sudden thee would scarre each blast,
Each Bird that stird a bush, each Mouse that from
Her hole did run, each Leaf would make thee start,
Now wandrest all alone by hills, by woods,
Fearing no Beast that hauntes the Forrestes wild?

Dor. Wounded with Love, who fears another hurt.

Lin. Love had great power, that could not only thee
Into a Man, but to a Wolf transeforme.

Dor. O Linco, could thou but see here within,
There should thou see a living Wolf devour
My wretched soul like to a harmeles Lamb.

Lin. And who is that Wolf? Siluio. Do. Ah thou have said.

Lan. Thou, for he is a Wolf, have changd thy self
Into a Wolf because no humane looks
Could move his love, perhaps this beasts yet might.
But tell me, where had thou these clothes so ragd?

Do. I Will tell thee true, to day I went betime
There where I heard that Siluio did intend
A noble hunting to the savage Boore,
At Erimantus foot, where Eliceit
Puts up his head, not far off from the lawnd,
That from the hill is seuer'd by descent,
I found Mel^mpo my fair Siluioes Dog,
Whose thirst I think had drawn him to that place:
I that each thing of Siluio held full dear,
Shade of his shape, and footsteps of his feet,
Much more the Dog which he so dearly loved,
Him straightway took, and he without adoo,
Like to some gentle Cade, came quietly with me:
Now whilst I cast this Dog to reconuey
Home to his Lord and mine, hoping to make
A conquest of his love by gift so dear,
Behold he comes seeking his footsteps out,
And here he stays. Dear Linco I will not
Leese further time in telling every thing
That twixt us past, but briefly to dispatch:
After a heap of feigned vows and words,
The cruel Boy fled from me straight away
In ire'full mood with his thrice-happy Dog,
And with my dear and sweetest sweet reward.

Lin. Oh desperate Siluio! Oh cruel Boy!
What did thou then? Disdaind'st thou not his deed?

Dor. As if the heat of his disdain had been
Of love unto my heart the greatest fire,
So by his rage increased my desire:
Yet still pursuing him unto the chase,
Keeping my broken way, I Lupus met,
Here thought I good with him to change my clothes,
And in his servile habit me to hide,
That among the Swains I for a Swain might pass,
And at my pleasure see my Sila^o.

Lin. Went thou to hunt in likeness of a Woolfe,
Seen by the Dogs, and yet return^^'st safe?
Domida, thou have done (...).

Do (...)
No wonder it is, the Dogge^ could do no harm
Unto their Masters (...).
There stood I (...) sort
Of neighbor (...),
Rather to see the (...).
At every (...) Beast
My heart did quake: (...)
My soul step: (...)
But my chief hope the (...) disterb'd,
Of that immeasurable Boore (...),
Like as the rau'nous strength of (...) storm
In little time bringes trees and rocks to ground:
So by his tuskes bedewed with blood and foame,
We see Dogs slain, Staves broke, and wounded men.
How many times did my poor blood desire
For Siluioes blood to combat with the Boore,
How often times would I have stepped to make
My breast a buckler for my Siluioes breast,
How often said I in my sefe, excuse,
Excuse the dainty lapp of my dear Love:
So to my self spoke I with praying sighs,
Whilst he his Dog all armed with hardened skin,
Lets loose against the Beast, who waxed proud
Of having made a wretched quarries sight
Of wounded Shepheardes and Dogs slain outright:
Linca, I cannot tell this Dogs great worth,
And Siluio loves him not without good cause.
Look how an angry Lion entertaines
The poynted horns of some undaunted Bull,
Sometime with force, sometime with policy,
And fastens at the last his mighty paws
So on his back as no power can remou't:
So strong Me^^^^p' avoiding craftily
The Boores swift (...) and mortal wounding blows:
At last taints on his ear, which first he shakes,
And afterward so firmly him he holds,
As his vast sides might wounded be at ease:
The dismal token of a deadly stroke,
The Siluio innocating Phoebes name,
Du^ct this blow (said he) and here I vow
To sacrifize to thee his ghastly head.
This l^yd, from out his q^uer of pure gold,
He takes a speedy Sha^t, and to his ear
He draws his mighty Bow, and straight the Boore
Between his neck^ and shoulder wounded, dies:
I freed a sigh, seeing my Silui^ safe.
Oh happy beast might thy life so leave,
By him that hearts from humane beasts does reaue.

Lin. But what became of that same fearful beast?

Dor. I do not know, because I came away
For fear of being seen: But I believe
That solemnly they mean to carry it
Unto the Temple, as my Siluio vowed.

Lin. And mean you not to change these rustie clothes?

Dor. Yes wis full feign, but Liep^^e has my Gown,
And promised t'attende me at this Spring,
But (...) miss: dear Linco if thou love me
Go seek him in these Woods, he is not far,
I Will rest me in the mean time by this Den,
For weariness makes me to sleep desire,
Nor would I home return in this attire.

Lin. I go, and stir not you till I return.

SCE. 3.
Chorus, Ergasto. SHepheardes, have you not heard our Demi-God
Montanus, worthy son of Hercules descent,
Has slain the dreadful Boore, that did infest
All Arcady, and now he does prepare
To satisfy his Vows, if we will thankful be
For such a benefit, lets go and meet him,
And give him all the reverence that we can.

Er. Oh doleful fortune! Oh most bitter chance!
Immedicable wound, Oh mornefull day!

Cho. What voice of horror and of plaint hear we?

Er. Stars foomen to our good, thus mock you us?
Did you so high our hopes lift up, that with
Their fall you might us plague the more?

Cho. This seems Ergasto, and it is surely he.

Er. Why do I Stars accuse, accuse thy self,
That brought the Iron to Loves Anuile so,
Thou did it strike, thou made the sparks fly out
From whence this fire grows so unquenchable:
But heavens do know my pity brought me to it.
Oh haples Lovers, wretched Amarillis,
Unfortunate Titirus, childles father,
Sad Montanus, desolate Arcadia:
Oh miserable we; and to conclude,
All that I see, speak, hear, or think, most miserable.

Cho. What wretched accident is this that does contain
So many miseries? Gow' Shepherds Gow'!
Lets meet with him: Eternal heavenly powers,
Will not your rage yet cease? Speak good Ergasto,
What lamentable chance is this thou plainst?

Er. Dear friends, I plain us all the ruin of Arcadia.

Cho. What Is this?

Er. The prop of all our hopes is down.

Cho. Ah speak more plain.

Er. Daughter of Titirus,
The only branch of her decaying stock,
Hope of our health, which to Montanus son,
Was by the heavens promised and deste^ied,
Whose marriage should have freed Arcadia,
Wise Amarillis, Nymph celestial,
Pattern of honor, flower of chastetie:
My heart will not give me leave to speak.

Chapter Why, is she dead?

Er. Nay doomed to death.

Cho. Ay me, what is this.

Er. Nay worse, With infamy.

Cho. Amarillis infamous.

Er. Found with the adult'rour, and if hence ye go not soon,
Ye may her see led captive to the Temple.

Cho. Oh rare! but wicked, valor of this female sex,
Oh chastetie, how singular thou art,
Scarce can a man say any woman's chaste,
Save she that never was tried; unhappy age:
But courteous Shepherd, tell us how it was?

Er. This day betime you know Montanus came,
With th'haples father of the wretched Nymph,
Both by one self devotion led, which was
By prayers, to haste the marriage to good end:
For this the Sacrifizes offered were,
Which solemnly performed with good aspectes:
For never were there seen intrailes more fair,
Nor flames more bright, by which the blind Divine
Moved, did to Montanus say: This day
With Amarillis shall your son be wed:
Go quickly and prepare the marriage feast.
Oh blindly done, blind Prophets to believe,
The fathers and the standers by were glad,
And wept, their hearts made tender with this joy.
Titirus was no sooner gone, but straight we heard
And saw unhappy fearful signs, the messengers
Of sacredire: at which so sudden and so fierce,
Each stood amazed, the Priests enclosed were
Within the greater Cloysture, we without,
Weeping were saying holy pray'res, when lo
The wicked Satyr audience earnest craves
Of the chief Priest: and for this was my charge,
I let him in, to whom he thus begins,
Fathers, if to your Vows the Incense and
The Sacrifizes be not answerable,
If on your Aulters purely burn no flames,
Wonder not, for in Ericinaes Cave,
A treacherous Nymph prophanes your holy Laws:
And in adultry her faith does break.
Come Ministers with me, we will take in the fact.
A while the unhappy father breathes, thinking he had
Found out the cause of this so dismal signs,
Straight he commaundes chief Minister Nacander go
With that same Satyr, and captiud to bring
Them to the Temple both: him straight accompanied
With all our troop of under Ministers,
The Satyr by a dark and crooked way,
Conductes into the Cave: the young man scared
Without torch-light, so suddenly assailed:
Assayes to fly unto that outward issue,
But it the Satyr closed has too fast.

Cho. What did you then?

Er. I can not tell you how
Amazed we were, to see her that we taken had,
To be Titirus daughter, whom no sooner we
Had laid hold on, but out Mirtillo steps,
And throws his Dart, thinking to wound Nicander:
And had the steel hit as he did direct,
Nicander had been slain: but shrinking back,
Whether by chance or wit, he shund the harm:
But the strong Dart pierced his hayrie clothes,
And there stuck fast, Mirtillo not being able
It to recover, captive taken was.

Cho. What Is come of him?

Er. He by an other way is led.

Cho. What shall he do?

Er. To get more out of him,
Besides, perhaps he shall not skotfree escape:
For having so offended our high Priest,
Yet would I could have comforted the wretch.

Cho. Why could you not?

Er. Because the Law forbids
Us under Ministers to speak with gultie folks:
For this I came about, and left the rest,
Provoking heavens with tears and prayers devout,
To turn away this dreadful storm from us:
And so pray ye, and therewithal farewell.

Cho. So shall we do, had we but once performd
Our duty unto Siluio, eternal Gods
In pity, not in fury, show your selves supreme.

SCE. 4.
Corisea. NOw crown my temples with triumphant Bays,
Victorious ten ples, this day happily
I combated have in the field of Love,
And vanquished: this day both heaven and earth,
Nature and Art, Fortune and Destenie,
Both friends and enemies have fought for me.
The wicked Satyr whom I hated so,
Has helped me much: for it was better that
Mirtillo should, then Coridon, be taken,
To make her fault more likely and more ill:
What though Mirtillo taken be, he will soon be free,
To her alone the punishment is due.
O solemn victory, On famous triumph,
Dress me a Trophee amorous deceites,
You in this tongue, in this same precious breast
Are above Nature most omnipotent.
Why stay I now? it is time for me to go,
Until the Law have judged my rival dead,
Perhaps the Priest may draw the troth from me:
Fly then Corisea, danger it is to ly,
For them that have no feet wherewith to fly*
I Will hide me in these woods until I may
Return t'enioy my joys: happy Corisea,
Who ever saw a brauer enterprise?

SCE. 5.
Nicander, Amarillis. He had a heart most hard, or rather had
No heart at all, nor any humane sense,
That did not pity thee poor wretched Nymph,
And felt no sorrow for thy misery:
Only to see a Damsel captiuate,
Of heavenly countenance and so sweet a face,
Worthy the world should to thee consecrate
Temples and Sacrifices, led to the Temple
For a Sacrifice, surely it were a thing
That with dry eyes I think none could behold:
But who knows how and wherefore thou were borne?
Titirus daughter, Montan'es daughter in law,
That should have been, and that these two are they
Which do uphold Arcadia, and that thy self
A dainty Nymph, so fair of form,
The natural confines of this thy life,
Approachest now so near the bounds of death:
He that knows this, and does not plain the same,
He is no man, but beast, in humane shape.

Am. If that my fault did cause my wretchedness,
Or that my thoughts were wicked, as thou think
My deed, less grievous would my death be then:
For it were just my blood should wash the spots
Of my defiled soul, heavens rage appease,
And humane justice justly satisfy,
Then could I quiet my afflicted sprights,
And with a just remorse of well-deserued death,
My senses mortify, and come to death:
And with a quiet blow pass forth perhaps
Unto a life of more tranquillity:
But too too much Nicander too much grieved
I am, in so young years Fortune so hie,
An Innocent, I should be doomed to die.

Nic. Ah pleased it heavens we had against thee offended,
Not thou offended against the heavenly powers:
For we alas with greater case might have
Restored thee to thy violated name,
Then thou appeasd their violated powers:
But I see not who thee offended has,
Saving thy self. Tell me? were thou not found
In a close place with the Adulterer, alone
With him alone? Were thou not promised
Unto Montanus son? Have thou not broke thy faith?
How art thou innocent?

Am. I have not broke
The Law, and I am innocent.

Ni. Thou have not broke
The law of Nature happily ( Love if thou likest)
But humane law and heavens thou have transgrest,
( Love lawfully.)

Am. Both heavens and men have er'd to me:
If it be true that thence our haps do come,
For is it reason in my destenie,
I bear the pain that is due to other's faults?

Ni. Peace Nymph, came up thy tongue in wilful rage,
Let loose, do not condemn the Stars, for we
Our selves procure us all our misery.

Am. I none accuse in heaven, but my ill fates.
And worse then them is she, that me deceived.

Ni. Then blame thy self, that have deceived thy self,

Am. I was deceived, but by an others fraud.

Ni. It Is no deceit, to whom deceit is dear.

Am. Then you I see condemn me for unchaste?

Ni. I say not so, ask but your deeds, they'^e tell.

Am. Deeds often are false tokens of the heart.

Ni. The deeds we see, we cannot see the heart.

Am. See what you will, I Am sure my heart is clear.

Ni. What led you then into the Cave alone?

Am. Simplicity, and my too much belief.

Ni. Trust you your Chastity unto your Love?

Am. I trusted my false friend, and not my Love.

Ni. What friend was that, your amorous desire?

Am. Orminoes sister, who has me betrayde.

Ni Sweet treachery, to fall into your love.

Am. I knew not of Mirtilloes coming I.

Ni. Why did you enter then? and to what end?

Am. Let it suffize not for Mirtilloes sake.

Ni. You are condemned except y'haue better proof.

Am. Let her be asked of my innocence.

Ni. What she, that was the occasion of your fault?

Am. She that betrayed me, will you not her believe?

Ni. What faith has she that was so faythlesse then?

Am. I by our Goddess Cinthiaes name will swear.

Ni. Thy deeds have mard the credit of thine oath:
Nymph, to be plain, these are but dreams, and waves
Of muddy water, cannot wash clean, nor guilty hearts
Speak troth; thou should have kept thy chastity
As dearly as the apple of thine eye.

Am. And must I then thus (good Nicander) die?
Shall none me hear, nor none my cause defend?
Thus left of all, deprived of every hope,
Only accompanied with an extreme
Unhappy Funeral (...) that not helps me.

Ni. Nymph be content, and since thou were so fond
In (...), be more (...) punishment:
(...) eyes to heaven, thence (...) thou come,
And thence does come all (...) that hap^,
As from a Fountain does a (...):
And though to us it ill do seem, as every good
(...) with some ill, yet there it is (...).
Great (...) does know to whom all thoughts are known:
So does our Goddess whom we worship here,
How much I grieve for thee: and if I have
(...) with my words thy soul, like a Physician I
Have done, who searches first the wound
Where it suspected is: be quiet then
Good Nymph, and do not contradict that which
Is writ in heaven above of thee.

Am. O cruel sentence, whether writ in heaven
Or earth? In heaven it is not writ,
For there mine innocence is known: but what
Auailes it since I needs must die? Ah too too hard,
And too too bitter cupp. Ah good Nicander,
For pity sake make not such haste with me
Unto the Temple! stay, Oh stay a little while!

Ni. O Nymph, to whom death is so grievous now,
Each moment seems a death, it is thine ill to stay:
Death has not so much harm, as fear thereof;
Thou sooner dead, thy pain is sooner past.

Am. Some help may come, dear father: father now
Do thou leave me, now leave thine only child.
VVilt thou not help me yet before I die?
Do not deny me yet thy latest kiss:
One blade shall wound both breasts, and out of mine
Thy blood must stream. Oh father! Oh sweet name!
Sometime so dear which I never called in vain,
Make you your only daughters marriage thus,
A morninges Bri^e, an evening Src^^fize?

Ni. Nymph. Do not thus torment thy self and me,
It Is time I lead you to the Temple now,
My duty it is, I may not slack it so.

Am. Dear Woods farewell, my dearest Woods farewell,
Receive my latest sighs until my soul
By cruel wound from this my body free,
Return to seek your loved shadows out:
For Innocents can not be doomed to hell,
Nor among the blessed can despayrers dwell.
O Mirtillo, wretched was that day
That first I saw thee, and thy sight did please,
Since I my (...) must leave, more near to thee
Then thine, which proves the occasion (...) my death.
VVilt thou believe that she is doomed to death
For thee, that cruel ever was to thee,
To keep me innocent? For me too bold,
For thee too little dating (...) my will: ^ow ever it was,
I faultles die, fruitles, and without thee
My dear I die, my dear Mirt. Ni. Surely she
Is dead, and in Mirtilloes loved (...) her life
Has finished: her love and grief the blade
Prevented has: come help to hold her up,
She lives yet, I feel her heart does throb:
Carry her to the Fountain here hard by,
Fresh water may restore her stonied sprights,
But were it not a deed of pity now,
To let her die of grief, and shun the blade:
No let us rather succor now her life,
We do not know what heavens will do with her.

SCE. 6.
Chorus of Huntsmen. Chor. of Shepheardes with Siluio. Chor. Hunt. O Glorious
child of great Alci^es race,
That Monsters kilst, and Wild-bestes do deface.

Cho. Sh. O glorious child, who (...) Boore
Have overthrown, unconquerable thought:
Behold his head, that seems to breath out death,
This is the (...) of our Demi-God,
Help Shepheardes help to celebrate his name,
And with solemnity his deeds to grace.

Cho. Hu. O glorious child of great Alcides race,
That Monsters kilst, and Wild-bestes do deface.

Cho. Sh. O glorious child, by whom the fertile plains,
Deprived of till age, have their good regain^:
Now may the Plough-man go securely, and
Sow both his Seed, and reap his Harvest in:
These ougly teeth can now no more them chase.

Cho. Hu. O glorious child of great Alcides race,
That monsters (...), and wild Beasts do deface.

Cho. Sh. O glorious child, how thou do couple still
Pity with fortitude. (...) behold
Thy humble Silui^^ vow; behold this head,
That here and here in thy despite is armd
With white and crooked tuskes, envying thy horns.
Thou puissant Goddess, since thou did direct
His shaft: the price of his great victory
Is due to thee: he famous by thy grace.

Cho. Hun O glorious child of great Alcides race,
That monster, kilst, and wild Beasts do deface.

SCE. 7.
Coridon. Until this time I nener durst believe,
That which the Satyr of Corisea said,
Imagining his tale had been but fordg'd,
Maliciously to work me injury:
Far from the t^oth it seemd to me that place,
Where she appointed I with her should meet,
(If that be true which was on her behalf,
Delivered me by young Lisetta late)
Should be the place to take th'Adult^ ou^ in:
But see a sign that may confirm the same,
Even as he told me, so it is in deed.
Oh what a Stone is this, which shuts up thus
The huge mouth of this Cave? Oh Corisea,
All in good time I have found out your guiles,
Which after so long use, at last return
With damage to your self. So many lies,
So many trecheries, must needs presage
Some mortal disaduenture at the least,
To him that was not madd, or blind with love:
It Was good for mee^ stayde away so long,
Great fortune that my father me detained
So with a tedious stay, as then me thought,
Had I kept time but as Lisetta bad,
Surely some strange adventure had I had.
What shall I do? shall I attired with spleen,
S^eke with outrageous fury for revenge?
F^^no, I honor her too much: so be
The case with reason waighd; it rather would
Have pity and compassion, then revenge.
And shall I pity her, that me betrays?
She rather does betray her self, that thus
Abandons me, whose faith to her was pure,
And give her self in pray
To a poor Shepherd stranger vagaband,
That shall to morrow be more perfidous then she.
Should I according to the Satyrs counsel, her accuse,
Of the faith broken, which to me she swore:
Then must she die: My hart's not half so base,
Let her then live for me: or to say better,
Let her die unto me, and live unto others:
Live to her shame, live to her infamy;
Since she is such, she never can in me
Kindle one spark of fearful iealowsie.

SCE. 8.
Siluio. O Goddess, that no Goddess art, but of
An idle people, blind and vain: who with
Impurest minds and fond Religion,
Hallowes the Aulters and great Temples too.
What, said I Temples? wicked Theaters
O^ beastly deeds, to color their dishonest acts
With titles of thy famous Deity,
Because thy shames in others shames made less,
Let lose the raines of their lasciviousness.
Thou foe to Reason, plotter of mildeedes,
Corrupter to our souls, calamity
To the whole world; thou daughter of the Sea,
And of that treacherous monster rightly borne,
That with the breath of hope do first entice
These humane breasts, but afterward do move
A thousand storms of sighs, of tears, of plaintes:
Thou may be better called Mother of tempests and
O^ rage, then Mother of Love.
To what a misery have thou thrown down
Those wretched Lovers? now may thou vaunt thy self
To be omnipotent, if thou can save
That poor Nimphs life, whom with thy snares thou have
Conducted to this miserable death.
O happy day I hallowd my chaste mind
To thee my only Goddess Cinthia,
Such power on earth to souls of better sort,
As thou art light in heaven above the Stars.
Much better are those studious practices
Then those which Venus unchaste servants use:
Thy servants kill both Bears and ougly Boores,
Her servants are of Bears and Boores still slain.
Oh Bow and matchles Shaftes, my power and my delight,
Vain fantastiue Love, come prove thine arms,
^sseminate with mine: but fie, too much
I honor thee poor weak and wreckling child,
And for thou shall me hear, I Will speak aloud.
A rod to chastise thee will be enough. -- enough.
What art thou L^^ho that so soundes again?
Or rather Love, that answerest loudly so? -- y so.
I could have wished no better match; but tell
Me then, Art thou (by heaven) he -- eauen he
The son of her that for Aaenis did
So miserably burn, in whom naught good it. -- Goddess.
A Goddess? no, the Concubine of Mars,
In whom (...) does wholly lie -- ^holly a lie.
O fine, thy tongue does (...),
Will thou come forth? thou do^^ but darkly dare, -- y dare,
I held thee for a coward (...), art thou a (...)
Do thou that title bravely skorne -- y skorne.
O God, then art thou Vul^a^es son, by that
Lame Smith begot. -- God,
A God? of what? of Winds, madd with base ^^earth -- earth.
God of the earth? makes thou thy foes to rue: -- t'^ue.
With what do thou still punish those that strive,
And obstinately do contend with Love? -- with Love.
Nay soft, when shall crook't Love (tell me good fool)
Enter my breast? I warrent it is too straight. -- straight,
What, shall I fall in love so suddenly? -- suddenly,
What is her name that I must then adore? -- Door.
Dorind^ fool, thou can not speak out yet,
But do not thou mean her^ -- even her.
Dorinda whom I hate; but who shall force my will^ -- I will.
What weapons will thou use? perhaps thy Bow, -- thy Bow
My Bow? not till it be by thy leawd folly broken, -- broken
My broken arms encounter me, and who
Shall break them? thou? -- thou.
Fie fie thou art drunk, go sleep go sleep: but stay,
These maruailes must be done: but wheare? -- hear.
O fool, and I am gone, how thou art laden with
Wit-robbing Grapes that grew upon the Vine. -- Divine
But soft, I see, or else me thinks I see
Something that is like a Woolfe in yonder Grove.
It Is sure a Woolfe: How monstrous great it is.
This day for me is destenied to praise:
Good Goddess, with great favors do thou show
To triumph in one day over two Beasts:
In thy great name, I loose this shaft, the swiftest and
The sharpest which my Q^iue^ holds.
Great Archeresse, direct thou my right hand,
And here I vow to sacrifize the spoils
Unto thy name. O dainty blow, blow fallen
Even where my hand and eye it destenyed.
Ah that I had my Dart, it to dispatch,
Before it get into the Woods away.
But here be Stones, what need I any else?
Here Is scarcely one, I need none now: here is
Another Shaft will pierce it to the quick.
What Is this I see? unhappy Siluio?
I'haue shot a Shepherd in a Woluish shape.
O bitter chance! O ever miserable!
(...) thinks I know the wretch, it is Linco that
Does hold him up. Oh deadly shaft! Oh most
Unhappy Vow! I guilty of another blood?
I thus the causer of another death?
I that have been so liberal of my life,
So large a spender of my blood for others health?
So, cast away thy weapons, and go live
All glorilesse. But see where he does come,
A great deal less unhappy then thy self.

SCE. 9.
Linco, Siluio, Dorinda. Lean thou thy self (my Daughter) on this arm.
Unfortunate Dorinda. Sil. O me! Dorinda? I am dead.

Dor. O Linco L^nco, Oh my second father!

Sil. It is Dorinda sure: Ah voice; ah sight.

Dor. Dorinda to sustain, Linco has been
A fatal office unto thee: thou hardst
The first cries that I ever gave on earth,
And thou shall hear the latest of my death:
And these thine Arms, that were my Cradle once,
Shall be my Coffin now.

Lin. O child more dear
Then if thou were mine own. I cannot speak,
Grief has my words dissolved into tears.

Sil. On earth hold open thy jaws and swallow me.

Do. Oh stay both pace and plaint (good Linco) for
The one my grief, my wound the other does increase.

Sil. Oh what a hard reward most wretched Nymph,
Had thou received for thy wondrous love?

Lin. Be of good cheer, thy wound not mortal is,

Dor. I but Dorinda mortal, will be quickly dead:
But do thou know who it is has wounded me?

Lin. Let us care for the sore, not for the essence,
For never did Revenge yet heal a wound.

Sil. Why stay I still? Shall I stay whilst they see me?
Have I so bold a face? Fly Siluio fly
The punishment of that reuengefull sight,
Fly the just edge of her sharp cutting voice:
I cannot fly, fatal necessity does hold
Me here, an I makes me seek whom most
I ought to shun.

Dor. Why Linco, must I die
Not knowing who has given me my death?

Lin. It Siluio is.

Dor. P^^^so.

Lin. I know his shaft.

Dor. On happy issue of my lives last end,
If I be shune by such a lovely friend.

Lin. See where he is, with countenance him accusing.
Now heavens be praysd, you are at good pass,
With this your bow and shaftes omnipotent,
Have thou not like a cunning Wood-man shot?
Tell me, thou that of Sil^^^ liust; was it not I
That shot this dainty shoot? Oh Boy too wise,
Had thou believed this foolish aged man,
Had it not better been Answer me wretch.
What can thy life be worth, if thee do die?
I know thou'st say thou thoughtst to have shot a Woolfe,
As though it were no fault to shoot
Not knowing (careless wandering chi'd) if it were
A man or beast thou shotst at: what Heardsman, or
What Plougsman do thou see attyr'd in other clothes?
Ah Siluio, Siluio, who ever sows wi^t so green,
Does ever reap ripe fruit of ignorance.
Think you (vain Boy) this chance by chance did come?
Never without the powers divine did such like happen:
Heaven is enraged at your supportlesse spite,
To love and deep despising so humane affectes.
Gods will not have companions on the earth,
They are not pleased with this austeritie:
Now thou art dumb, thou were not wont t'indure.

Do. Siluio, let Linco speak, he does not know
What sou'raign^tie thou over Dorinda have,
In life and death by the great power of Love.
If thou have shot me, thou have shot thine own:
Thou hitst the mark that is proper to thy shaft,
These hands that wounded me, have followed right
The aim of thy fair eyes. Siluio, behold her whom
Thou hate so, behold her as thou would:
Thou would me wounded have, wounded I am:
Thou wished me dead, I ready am for death,
What would thou more? What can I give thee more?
Ah cruel Boy, thou never would believe
The wound by thee Love made, can thou deny
That which thy hand has done? thou never sawst
The blood mine eyes did shed; see thou this then,
That gusheth from my side: but if with pity now
All gentleness and valor be not spent,
Do not deny me cruel soul, I pray,
At my last gasp, one poor and only sigh:
Death should be blessed, if thou but thus would say,
Go rest in peace poor soul, I humbly pray.

Sil. Ah my Dorinda, shall I call thee mine,
That art not mine, but when I thee must loose:
And when thou ^ast thy death received by me,
Not when I might have given thee thy life:
Yet will I call thee mine, that mine shall be
Spite of my fortune: and since with thy life
I cannot have thee, I Will have thee in death:
All that thou see in me, is ready for revenge:
I kilde thee with these weapons, with the same
I Will kill my self: I cruel was to thee,
I now desire nothing but cruelty.
I proudly thee despi'd, upon my knees
I humbly thee adore, and pardon crave;
But not my life. Behold my Bow, my Shaftes.
Wound not mine eyes or hands, they are innocent:
But wound my breast, monster to pity, foe
To love: wound me this heart, that cruel was
To thee: behold, my breast is bare.

Do. Siluio, I wound that breast? thou had not need
Let it be naked to mine eyes, if thou desirdst
I should it wound. O dainty beauteous rock,
So often beaten by the waves and winds
Of my poor tears and sighs in vain: and is it true,
Thou pity feelst? or am I wretch but mocked:
I would not this same Alablaster skin
Should me deceive, as this poor Beasts has thee.
I wound thy breast? it is well, Love durst do so.
I ask no wore revenge, then thou should love.
Blessed be the day wherein I first did burn,
Blessed be my tears and all my martirdomes:
I wish thy praise, and no revenge of thee.
But courteous Siluio, that do kneel to her,
Whose Lord thou art; since me thou needs wilt serve,
Let thy first service be, to rise when I thee bid:
The second, that thou live: for me, let heavens
Work their will; in thee my heart will live:
As long as thou do live, I cannot die.
But if it seem unjust my wound should be
Unpunished, then break this cruel Bow,
Let that be all the malice thou do show.

Si. Oh curtuous doom: and so't shall be,
Thou deadly Wood shall pay the price of others life,
Behold, I break thee, and I render thee
Unto the Woods, a trunk unprofitable:
And you my Shaftes that pierced have the side
O^ my fair Love, because you brothers be
I put you both together, and deliver you,
Rods armd in vain, and vainly feathered.
It Was true Love told me late in Echoes voice.
O powerful tamer both of Gods and men:
Late enemy, now Lord of all my thoughts,
I^ thou esteemest it glory to have mollified
A proud obdurate heart, Defend me from
The fatal stroke of death? one only blow
Killing Dorinda, will me with her kill:
So cruel death, if cruel death she prove,
Will triumph over thee triumphant love.

Lin. So wounded both, yet wounds most fortunate,
Were but Dorindaes sownd. Let Us soon go seek
Some remedy.

Dor. Do not good Linco lead
Me to my fathers house in this attire.

Sil. Shall my Dorinda go to other house
Then unto mine? no sure: alive or dead
This day I Will marry thee.

Lin. And in good time,
Since Amarillis has lost life and marriage too.
O blessed couple! O eternal Gods!
Give two their lives, giving but one her health.

Dor. Siluio I weary am, I cannot hold me on
My wounded side.

Sil. Be of good cheer,
Thou shall a burden be to us most dear.
Linco give me thy hand.

Lin. Hold there it is.

Sil. Hold fast, and with our arms we will make a seat
For her. Sit there Dorinda, and with thy right hand
Hold Lincoes neck, and with thy left close mine:
Softly my heart, for rushing of thy wound.

Dor. O now me thinks I am well. Sil. Linco hold fast.

Lin. Do not you stagger, but go forward right,
This is a better triumph then a head.

Sil. Tell me Dorinda, does thy wound still prick?

Dor. It does; but in thine arms my lovely treasure,
I hold even pricking dear, and death a pleasure.

Chorus. O Sweet and golden age, when Milk
Unto the tender World was meat:
Whose Cradle was the harmless Wood,
Their dearer parts whose grass like silk,
The Flocks untouched, did joy to eat:
Nor feared the World the spoil of blood,
The troublous thoughts that do no good
Did not then make a cloudy veil
To dim our suns eternal light:
Now Reason being shut up quight,
Clouds do our Wits skies ouer-haile:
From whence it is strange lands we seek for ease,
Ploughing with huge Oak trees the Ocean seaes,
This bootlesse superstutious voice,
This subject profit less then vain,
Of toys, of titles, and of slight,
Whom the mad World through worthless choice,
Honor to name does not disdain,
Did not with tyranny delight,
To rule our minds, but to sustain
Trouble for troth, and for the right
To maintain says a firm decree
Amonst us men of each degree,
Desire to do well was of right:
Care of true Honor, happy to be named,
Who what was lawful pleasure to us framed.
Then in the pastures grony shade,
Sweet Carroles and sharp Madrigal^.
Were flames unto dear lawful Love:
There gentle Nymphs and Shepherds made
Thoughts of their words, and in the dales
Did Himen joys and kisses move,
Far sweeter and of more behoue,
True lovers only did enjoy
Loves lively Roses and sweet Flowers,
Whilst Wily-craft sound always showers,
Showers of sharp will, and wills annoy:
Were it in Woods or Caves for quiet rest,
The name of Husband still was lik^d best.
False wicked World, that courrest still
With thy base mercenary name
The souls chief good, and do entice
To nourish thought of newfound Will,
With likelihoodes (...) again:
Vnbridling eu^^ secret vice,
Like to a Net laid by device
Among (...) Flowers and sweet^ spread (...),
Thou cloathst vilde thoughts in (...),
Esteeming seeming goodness, deeds,
By which the life with Art deceive:
Nor do thou care (this Honor is thy act)
What theft it be, so Love may hide the fact.
But thou great Honor, great by right,
Frame famous spirits in our hearts,
Thou true Lord of each Noble breast:
O thou that rulest Kings of might,
Once turn thee into th^se our parts,
Which wanting thee, cannot be blessed:
Make the^r from out their mortal rest,
With mighty and with powerful stanges,
Who by a base vnwarthy will
Have left to work thy pleasure still,
And left the worth of antiqur things:
Let Us hope our ills a truce will one day take.
And let our hopes not waver no nor shake:
Let Us hope the setting sun will rise again,
And that the skies when they most aarke appear,
Do dravv (though covered) after wished clear.

Finis Cho. Act. 4.
SCENA. 1.
Vranio, Carino. THe place is ever good, where any thriues:
And every place is native, to the wise.

Car. True (good Vranio) I by proof can tell,
That young, did leave my fathers house, and sought
Strange places out, and now turn home gra^ heard,
That erst departed hence with golden locks;
Yet is our native soil sweet unto him
That has his sense: Nature does make it dear,
Like to the Adamant, whom though the Matrinet
Carry far hence, sometime where as the Sun
Is borne, and sometime where it dies; yet still
The hidden virtue where with it beholdes,
The Northren Pole it never does forgo:
So he that goes far from his native soil,
And often times in stranger land does dwell,
Yet he retains the love he to it bore.
O my Arcadia, now I greet thy ground,
And welcome good Vranio, for it is meet
You do partake my joys, as you have done my toil.

Vra. I may partake your toil, but not content,
When I remember how far hence I left
My house and little household off: well may I rest
My limbs, but well I wot my heart will moan,
Nor save thy self, could any thing have drawn
Me from Elidis now: yet I know not
What cause has made you travail to this place.

Car. Thou know my dear Mirtillo, whom the heavens
Have given me: for my Son came hither sick,
Here to get health, according to the Oracle,
Which said only Arcadia could restore it him:
Two months he has been here, and I not able to
Abide that stay, went to the Oracle
To know of his return: which answered thus.
Return thou to thy Country, where thou shall
Live merrily with thy Mirtillo dear:
Heavens have determined great things of him;
Nor shall thou laugh but in Arcadia.
Thou then my dear companion, merry be,
Thou have a share in all my good, nor will
Carino smile, if my Vranio grieve.

Vra. All labors that I for Ca^ino take,
Have their reward: but for to short the way,
I pray you tell what made you travail first.

Car. A youthful love I unto Music bore,
And greediness of foreign fame, disdayning that
Arcadia only should me praise, made me
Seek out Eli^^ and Pisa famoue so,
Where I saw glorious Aegen crowned with Bays,
With Purple next to Virtue evermore;
So that he Ph^bus seemed: when I devout
Unto his power did consecrate my Lute:
Then left I Pisa, and to M^cen^ went,
And afterward to Argos, where I was
At first, adored like a God: but twilbe too
Too troublesome to tell the story of my life.
I many fortunes tried, sometime disdaind,
Sometime respected like a power divine:
Now rich, then poor; now down, then up aloft:
But in the change of place, my fortunes never changd,
I learnd to know and sigh my former liberty;
And leaving Argos, I returned to
My homely Bower I in Elidis had:
Where Gods be praised) I did Mirtillo buy,
Who since, has comforted all mine annoyes.

Vr. Thrice happy they who can contain their thoughts
And not through vain and most immoderate hope,
(...) the sweet tasted fruit of moderate good.

Ca Who would have thought to have waxed poor in gold
I thought to have found in royal Paliaces
People of more humanity, then here,
Which is the noble ornament of worthy sprightes;
But I ( Vr^^io) found the contrary:
People in name and words right curtuous,
But in good deeds most ^^arse, and Pitties foes:
People in face, gentle and pleasant still;
But fiercer then th'outr^gious swelling Sea:
People with countenance all of charity,
But thoroughly Covetous, and fraught with Envy:
The greater shows they make, the less troth they mean*
That which is virtue otherwhere, is there but vice:
Vprightest deeds, true love, pity sinceere,
(...) faith, of hand and heart,
A hie most innocent; these they esteem
But cowards still, and men of silly wits:
Follies and vanities, that are rediculous,
Coosonage, lying, theft, and rapine clad:
In holiness, by others downefalles and their loss,
Rich still to grow, to build their reputation
On others infamy, to lay five snares
To trap the innocent; these are the virtues of that place.
No merit, worth, reverence of age,
Of law, or of degree, no raines of shame,
Respect of love or blood, nor memory
Of any good received: and to conclude,
nothing so reverend, pure, or just can be,
That seems forbidden to these gulfes of pride,
Of honor so ambitious: so covetous
Of getting still. Now I that always lived
Unwary of their snares, and in my forehead had
All my thoughts written, my heart discovered;
You well may judge, I was an open mark
To the suspicious shaftes of envious folks.

Vr. What can be happy in that caytiue land,
Where Envy ever Virtue does command?

Ca. If since I travailed, my Muse had had
As good a cause to laugh as t'had to weep,
Perhaps my style would have been fit to have sung
The arms, and honors, of my noble Lord,
So that he needed not to have enuyed
The brave Meonian trumpet of Achilles fame.
I might have made my Countries browe, been girt
With happy Laurel too: But too inhumane is this age,
And too unhappy gui^t of Poetry.
The Swans desire a quiet nest, a gentle air,
Pernassu^ never knew this biting care.
Who quarrels with his fate and fortuue still,
His voice must needs be hoarse, his song but ill:
But now it is time to seek Mirtillo out.
Oh how this Countrey's chaungd! I scarcely know it:
But Strangers never want a guide that have a tongue,
We will enquire to the next harbor house,
Where thou thy weary limbs may well repose.

SCE. 2.
Titirus, Nuntio. WHich plain I first (my child) of thee? thy life
Or honesty? I Will plain thine honesty,
Because thy fire (though mortal) honest was:
And in thy steed my life I Will plain and spend,
Of thy life and thine honesty to see an end.
O Montane, only thou with thy devices
And ill-^und Oracles, and with thy love,
And proud despiser of my daughter, to this end,
Have brought my child. Oh doubtful Oracles,
How vain you be? and honesty against love
In youthful hearts a weak defense does prove,
A woman whom no match has ever sought,
Is evil guarded from this common thought.

Nun. If dead he be not, or that through the air
No winds have carried him, him might I find:
But see him now, when least I thought I should:
O late for me, for thee too quickly found,
Except the news were better that I bring.

Ti. Bringes thou the weapon that has slain my child?

Nun. Not this, but less: But how heard you this news?

Ti. Why lives she then?

Nun. She lives, and may do still,
For in her choice it is to live or die.

Ti. Oh blessed be thou that liftes me up from death:
But how is she unsafe, since at her choice it is
To live or die?

Nun. Because she will not live.

Ti. She will not live? What madness makes her thust

Nun. Another death: and if thou do not move her,
She is so bent, as others send in vain
Their praying words.

Ti. Why stay we? let us go!

Nun. What, soft and fair, the Temples gates are shut,
And know you not how it unlawful is
For any one save sacerdotall foot,
To touch the sacred ground, until such time
The Sacrifize unto the Aulters come,
Adorned with the Sanctuary rites?

Ti. How if shee'ffect her purpose in the while?

Nun. She cannot, for she is kept.

Ti. in mean time,
Then tell truly how all this is come to pass?

Nun. Thy mournful child now come before the Priest
With looks of fear and grief, that tears brought forth,
Not only from us by, but by my troth,
Even from the pillors of the Temples self
And hardest stones, that seemd to feel the same,
Was in a trice accused, conuic't, condemned.

Ti. O wretched child, and why was she condemned?

Nun. Because the grounds of her defense were small:
Besides, a certain Nymph, whom she did call
In testimony of her innocence,
Was absent now, and none could find her out:
And fearful signs, and monstrous accidents
Of horror in the Temple proou'd the doubt,
As dolorous to us, as strange and rare,
Not seen since we did feel heavenly ire
That did revenge Amyntas love betrayde,
The first beginning of our misery.
Diana swet out blood, the Earth did shake,
The sacred Cave did bellow out unwonted howling*
And dire deadly cries:
Withal, it breathed out such a stinking mist,
As Plutoes impare kingdom has no worse.
And now with sacred order goes the Priest
To bring thy daughter to her bloody end,
The whilst Mirtillo (wondrous thing to tell)
Offered by his own death, to give her life,
Crying, unbind those hands (unworthy striges)
And in her steed that should be sacrifiz'd
Unto Diana, drove me to the Aulters
A Sacrifize to my fair Amarillis.

Ti. O admirable deed of faithful love.
And noble heart.

Nu. Now hear a miracle:
She that before so fearful was to die,
Chaung'd on the sudden by Mirtilloes words,
Thus answers with a bold undaunted heart:
Think thou (my dear) then by thy death to gain
Life to her death, that by thy life does live.
O miracle unjust: on Ministers, on on, why do you stay?
Lead me forthwith unto mine end: I Will no such pity I,
Mirtill replies, Live cruel pitteous love,
My heart his spightfull pity does reprove:
To me it longes to die. Nay then to me
(She answers) that by Law condemned am:
And here anew begins a wondrous strife,
As though that life were death, and death were life.
(O souls well borne) O couple worthy of
Eternal honor, never dying praise:
O living, and o dying glorious lovers.
Had I so many tongues, so many voices,
As Heaven has eyes, or Ocean sea has sands;
All would be dumb and hoarse in setting out
Their wondrous and incomprehended praise.
Eternal Child of heaven, O glorious Dame,
That mortal deeds enchroniclest to time,
Write thou this History, and it infold
In solid Diamond with words of gold.

Ti. But what end had this mortal quarrel then?

Nun. Mirtillo vanquisheth? O rare debate,
Where dead on living getts the victory.
The Priest speaks to your Child, be quiet Nymph,
We cannot change this doom, for he must die
That offers death, our Law commands it so:
And after bids, your Daughter should be kept,
Least griefs extreme should bring her desperate death*
Thus stood the state When Montane sent me for thee.

Ti. In sooth it is true, sweet scented Flowers shall cease
To dwell on Rivers banks, and Woods in Spring
Shall be without their Leaves, before a Maid
Adorned with youth, shall set sweet Love at naught:
But if we stay still here, how shall we know
When it is time unto the Church to go?

Nun. Here best of all, for in this place alas,
Shall the good Shepherd sacrifized be.

Ti. And why not in the Church?

Nu. Because there where
The fault is done, the punishment must be.

Ti. And why not in the Cave? there was the fault.

Nun. Because to open skies it mus be hallowed.

Ti. And how know thou all these misteriall rites?

Nun. From the High Priest, who from Tireno had them,
For true Amyntas and untrue Lucrine,
Were sacrifized so: But now it is time to go;
See where the sacred Pempe softly descendes:
Twere well done of us by this other way,
To go unto the Temple to thy daughter.

Finis Sce. 2. Act. 5.
ACTVS. 5 SCE. 3.
Chorus of Shepherds, Chorus of Priests, Montanus, Mirtillo. Chorus of Shep.
OH daughter of great Joue, sister of Phoebus bright,
Thou second Titan, to the blinder world that give light

Cho. Pri. Thou that with thy well tempered vital ray,
Thy brothers wondrous heat does well allay,
Which make sweet Nature happily bring forth
Rich firtile birthes of Herbs, of Beasts, of Men:
As thou his heat do quench, so calm thine ire
That sets Arcadiaes wretched hearts on fire.

Cho. Sh. O daughter of great Jove. etc.

Mon. Yea sacred Priests, the Aulters ready make,
Shepheardes devout, reiterate your soundes,
And call upon the name of our great Goddess.

Cho. Sh. O daughter of great Jove. etc.

Mon. Now Shepherds stand aside, nor you my servants
Come not near, except I call for you.
Valiant young man, that to give life else where,
Abandonest thine own, die comforted thus far:
It Is but a speedy sigh, which you must pass;
For so seems death to noble minded sprightes,
That once performed, this envious age,
With thousands of her years shall not deface
The memory of such a gentle deed:
But thou shall live the example of true faith,
But for the Law commaundes thee sacrifiz'd,
To dye without a word: Before thou kneelst,
If thou have ought to say, say it, and hold thy peace
For ever after that.

Mir. Father, let it be lawful that I call thee so,
For though thou gave not, yet thou take my life:
My body to the ground I do bequeath, my soul
To her that is my life: But if she die,
As she has threatened to do; aye me,
What part of me shall then remain alive,
Oh death were sweet, if but my mortal parts
Might die, and that my soul did not desire the same:
But if his pity ought deserves that dies,
For sovereign pity then courteous father,
Provide she do not die; and with that hope
More comforted, I Will pay my destenies,
Though with my death you me from her disioyne,
Yet make her live, that she may me retain.

Mon. Scarce I contain from tears: o frail mankind!
Be of good cheer my son, I promise thy desire,
I swear it by this head, this hand take thou for pledge.

Mir. Then comforted, I die all comforted:
To thee my Amarillis do I come,
Soul of the faithful Shepherd, as thine own
Do thou receive, for in thy loved name
My words and life I will determine straight:
So now to death I kneel, and hold my peace.

Mon. On sacred Ministers, kindle the flame
With Frankensence and Mirrhe, and Incense throw thereon
That the thick vapoure may on high ascend.

Cho. Sh. O daughter of great Jove. etc.

ACT. 5. SCE. 4. Carino, Montanio, Nicander, Mirtillo, Chorus of Shepherds.
Car. WHat Countrymen are here, so bravely furnished
Almost all in a Liuerie? Oh what a show
Is here? how rich, how full of pome it is?
Trust me, I think it is some Sacrifize.

Mon. Reach me ( Nicander) the golden Basin,
That contains the juice of Bacchus fruit.

Ni. Behold it is ready here.

Mon. So may this faultles blood
Thy breast (Oh sacred Goddess) mollify,
As do these falling drops of Wine extinguish
This blasing flame. So, take the Basin, there;
Give me the silver Ewer now:

Ni. Behold the Ewer.

M. So may thine anger cease with that same faithles Nymph
Prouok't as does this fire, this falling stream extinguish.

Car. This is some Sacrifize, but where is the holocaust?

Mon. Now all is fit, there wantes naught but the end.
Give me the Axe.

Ca. If I be not deceived,
I see a thing that by his back seems a man:
He kneeles: he is perhaps the holocaust.
O wretch it is so, the Priest holds him by th'ead:
And have thou not unhappy country yet,
After so many years heavens rage appeasd?

Cho. Sh. O daughter of great Jove, sister of Phoebus bright,
Thou second Titan, to the blinder world that give light.

Mon. Reuengefull Goddess that for private fault,
Do public punishment on us inflict,
(Whether it be thy only will, or else
Eternal providence immutable command)
Since the infected blood of ( Lucrina false)
Might not thy burning justice then appease,
Drink now this innocent and voluntary Sacrifize,
No lesser faithful then Amyntas was,
That at thy sacred Altar in thy dire revenge I kill.

Cho. Sh. O daughter of great Jove, sister of Phoebus bright,
Thou second Titan, to the blinder world that give light.

Mon. Oh how I feel my heart wax tender now,
Binding my senses with unusual maze:
So both my heart not dares, my hands unable are
To lift this Axe.

Car. I Will see this wretches face,
And then depart: for pity will not let me stay.

Mon. Perhaps against the Sun my strength does fail,
And it is a fault to sacrifize against the Sun,
Turn thou thy dying face toward this hill.
So now, it is well.

Car. O wretch! what do I see?
My son Mirtillo, Is not this my son?

Mon. So now I can.

Car. It is even so.

Mon. Who lets my blow?

Car. What do thou sacred Priest?

Mo. O man profane,
Why have thou held this holy Axe? how dare
Thou thy rash hands inpose upon the same?

Car. O my Mirtillo, how camst thou to this?

Nic. Go dotard old and foolish insolent.

Car. I never thought to have thee embraced thus.

Nic. Patch stand aside, thou may not handle things
Sacred unto the Gods, with hands impure.

Car. Dear to thee Gods am also I, that by
Their good direction hither came even now.

Mo. N^er cease, hear him, and turn him hence.

Car. Then courteous Priest, before thy sword does light
Upon his neck, Why dies this wretched Boy?
I, why the Goddess thou ador'st, beseech thee tell?

Mon. By such a heavenly power thou coniur'st me,
That I were wicked, if thee denied:
But what will it profit thee?

Ca. More then thou think.

Mon. Because he for an other willing is to die.

Car. Dye for an other? then I for him will dye:
For pity then, thy falling blow direct,
In stead of his, upon this wretched neck.

Mon. Thou dotest friend.

Ca. And will you me deny
That which you grant another man?

Mo. Thou art
A Stranger man.

Ca. How if I were not so?

Mon. Nor could thou, for he dies but by exchange.
But tell me, what art thou? thy habit shows
Thou art a Stranger, no Arcadian borne.

Ca. I an Arcadian am.

Mo. I not remember
That I ever saw thee erst.

Car. Here was I borne,
(...), and father of this wretch.

(...). Art thou Mirtill^es father then? thou come
(...) both for thy self and me:
Stand now aside, least with thy fathers tears,
Thou make fruitless, vain our Sacrifize.

Car. If thou a father were?

Mon. I am a father man,
A tender father of an only son:
Yet were this same, my Siluioes head, my hand
Should be as ready for it as it is for this:
For he this sacred habit shall unworthy wear,
That to a public good, his private does prefer.

Car. O let me kiss him yet before he dye.

Mo. Thou may not man.

Car. Art thou so cruel son?
Thou will not answer thy sad father once.

Mir. Good father hold your peace.

Mo. O wretched we
The holocaust contaminate o Gods.

Mir. The life you gave, I cannot better give,
Then for her sake, who sole deserves to live.

Mon. Oh thus I thought his fathers tears would make
Him break his scilence.

Mir. Wretch with error have
I done the law of scilence, quite I had forgot.

Mon. On Ministers, why do we stay so long?
Carry him to the Temple back to th'noly Cell,
There take again his voluntary vow.
Then bring him back, and bring new Water too,
New Wine, new Fire: dispatch, the sun grows low.

Finis Scena 4. Acta. 5.
ACTA 5. SCE. 5. Montan. Carino, Dametas.
Montan. But thank thou heavens thou aged impudent,
Thou art his father? if thou were not: well,
(I swear by this same sacred habit on my head I wear)
Thou should soon taste how ill I brook thy boldness.
Why, know thou who I am* know thou that with
This Rodd I rule affairs both human and divine?

Car. I cry you mercy holy sacred Priest.

Mon. I suffered thee so long, till thou grow'st insolent.
Know thou not Rage that Justice (...) up,
The longer it is delayde, the greater it is?

Car. Tempestius ^urie never waigned rage,
In breasts magnanimus, but that one blast
Of Generous effect could cool the same:
But it I can not grace obtain, let me
Find justice yet, you can not that deny,
Law makers be not freed from the Laws:
I ask you justice, justice grant me then,
You are unjust, if you Mirtillo kill.

Mon. Let me then know how I can be unjust?

Car. Did you not tell me it unlawful was
To sacrifize a Strangers blood*

Mon. I told you so,
And told you that which heavens did command.

Car. He is a Stranger you would sacrifize.

Mon. A Stranger, how? is he not then thy son?

Car. Let it suffize, and seek no further now.

Mon. Perhaps because you not begot him here.

Car. Often he least knows, that most would understand.

Mon. Here we the kindred mean, and not the place.

Car. I call him Stranger, for I got him not.

Mon. Is he thy son, and thou begots him not?

Car. He is my son, though I begot him not.

Mon. Did thou not say that he was borne of thee?

Car. I said he was my son, not borne of me.

Mon* Extremity of grief has made thee madd.

Car. If I were madd, I should not feel my grief.

Mon. Thou art ore-madd, or else a lying man.

Car. A lying man will never tell the truth.

Mon. How can it be son, and not son at once?

Car. The son of love, and not of nature he is.

Mon. Is he thy son? he is no Stranger then:
If not, thou have no part at all in him:
Father or not, thus thou convinced art.

Car. With words and not with truth, I am conuin'st.

M^n. His faith is doubted that his words contraries.

Car* Yet do I say thou do a deed unjust.

Mon. On this my head, and on my Siluioes head,
Let my injustice fall.

Car. You will repent it.

Mon. You shall repent, if you my duty hinder.

Car. I call to witness men and Gods.

Mon. Gods you
To witness call, that you despised have.

Car. Since you will not hear me, hear me heaven and earth.
Mirtill a stranger is, and not my son,
You do profane your holy sacrifice.

Mon. Heavens aid me from this Bedlam man.
Who is his father since he is not your son?

Car. I cannot tell you, I am sure not I.

Mon. See how he wauers, is he not of your blood?

Car. Oh no.

Mon. Why do you call him son?

Car. Because I from his cradle have him nourisht still,
And ever loved him like my son.

Mon. Bought you him? stole you him? where had you him:

Car. A courteous stranger in (...) gave me him.

Mon. And that same stranger, where had he the child?

Car. I gave him.

Mon. Thou mou'st at once disdain and laughter.
First thou him gave, and then had him in gift.

Car. I gave him that which I with him had found.

Mon. And where had you him?

Car. In a low hole,
Of dainty Mutle trees upon Alpheus bank:
And for this cause Mirtillo I him called.

Mon. Here Is a fine tale, what have your woods no beasts?

Car. Of many sorts.

Mon. How scapte he being devoured:

Car. A speedy Torrent brought him to this hole,
And left him in the bosom of a little I Will,
On every side defended with the stream.

Mon. And were your streams so pitiful they drowned him not?
Your Rivers gentle are that children nuise.

Car. Laid in a cradle like a little ship,
With other stuff the waters wound together,
He was safe brought by chance unto this hole.

Mon. Laid in a cradle?

Car. In a cradle laid.

Mon. And but a child?

Car. I but a tender child.

Mon. How long was this ago^^

Car. Cast up your count
Is it not nineteen years since the great flood?
So long it is since.

Mon. Oh how I feel a horror shake
My bones.

Car. He knows not what to say:
Oh wicked act, overcome yet will not yield:
Thinking t'ourstrip me in his wit, as much
As in his force, I hear him murmur,
Yet he nill bewray that he convinced is.

Mon. What interest had the man you speak of in
That child? was he his son?

Ca. I cannot tell.

Mon. Had he no better knowledge then of it then thus?

Ca. Nor that know I.

Mon. Know you him if you see him?

Ca. He seemed a shepherd by his clothes and face,
Of middle stature, of black hair his beard
And eyebrows were exceeding thick.

Mon. Shepherds
Come hither soon.

Damet. Behold we are ready here.

Mon. Which of these did he resemble then?

Ca. Him whom you talk withal he did not only seem,
But it is the same, who though it be twenty years ago,
Has not a whit altered his ancient look.

Mon. Stand then aside, Dametas stay with me,
Tell me know thou this man?

Da. Me seems so,
But yet I know not where.

Ca. Him can I put in mind.

Mon. Let me alone, stand you aside a while.

Ca. I your commandment willingly obey.

Mon. Now answer me Dametas, and take heed
You do not lie, it is almost twenty years
Since you returned from seeking out my child,
Which the outrageous River bare away:
Did you not tell me you had searched in vain
All that same country, with Alpheus waters?

Da. Why ask you this?

Mon. Did not you tell me him
You could not find?

Da. I grant I told you so.

Mon. What child then was it (tell me) which you gave
Unto this stranger which did know you here?

Da. Will you I should remember what I did
So long ago? old men forgetful are.

Mon. Is not he old? yet he remembers it.

Da. Tush he does rather dote.

Mon. That shall we see,
Come hither stranger, come.

Ca. I come.

Da. Oh that
Thou were as far beneath the ground.

Mon. Tell me
Is this the shepherd that gave thee the gift?

Ca. This same is he.

Da. What gift is it thou speak of?

Ca. Do not remember in the temple of Olimpich Jove,
Having had answer of the Oracle,
And being ready to depart, I met with thee,
And asked thee of the Oracle, which thou declaredst,
After I took thee home unto my house,
Where did thou not give me an Infant child,
Which in a cradle thou had lately found?

Da. And what of that?

Ca. This is that very child,
Which ever since I like mine own have kept,
And at these Aultars must be sacrificed.

Da. Oh force of Destiny.

Mon. Yet will thou feign?
Is it not true which he has told thee here?

Da. Oh were I dead as sure as it is true.

Mon. And wherefore did thou give another goods?

Da. Oh master seek no more, let this suffice.

Mon. Yet will thou hold me off and say no more?
Villain thou dyest if I but ask again.

Da. Because the Oracle foretold me that the child
Should be in danger on his fathers hands
His death to have if he returned home.

Ca. All this is true, for this he told me then.

Mon. Ay me, it is too manifest, the case is clear.

Ca. What rests then, would you more proof then this?

Mon. The proofe's too great, too much have you declared,
Too much I understand, ^o Carino, Carino,
How I change grief and fortunes now with thine,
How they affections now are waxen mine,
This is my son, oh most unhappy son,
Of a more wretched father. More sauadge was
The water in him saving, then in running quite away,
Since at these sacred Aultars by thy fathers hands
Thou must be slain, a woeful sacrifice,
And thy poor blood must wash thy native soil.

Ca. Art thou Mirtilloes father then? how lost you him?

Mon. The deluge ravished him, whom when I lost,
I left more safe, now found, I leese him most.

Ca. Eternal providence which with thy counsel have
Brought all these occurrents to this only point,
Thou Art great with child of some huge monstrous birth,
Either great good or ill thou will bring forth.

Mon. This it was my sleep foretold, deceitful sleep.
In ill too time, in good too lying still.
This was the unwonted pity, and the sudden horror that
I felt to stay the axe and shake my bones:
For nature sure abhorres a stroke should come
From fathers hands, so vilde abominable.

Car. Will you then execute the wicked sacrifice?

Mon. By other hands he may not at these Altars die.

Ca. Why will the father murder then the son?

Mon. So bids our law, and were it piety to spare
Him since the true Amyntas would not spare himself?

Ca. O wicked Fates, me whither have ye brought?

Mon. To see two fathers sovereign pity made a homicide*
Yours to Mirtillo, mine unto the Gods,
His father you denying for to be,
Him thought to save, and him you lost thereby,
Thinking and seeking, I to kill your son,
Mine own have found, and must mine own go kill.

Ca. Behold the monster horrible this Fate brings forth.
O cruel chance ( Mirtillo) o my life.
Is this that which the Oracle told of thee?
Thus in my native soil have thou me happy made:
O son of me poor old and wretched man,
Lately my hope, my life, now my despair and death.

Mon. To me Carino leave these woeful tears,
I plain my blood: my blood, why say I so,
Since I it shead? poor son why got I thee?
Why were thou borne? did the mild waters save thy life,
The cruel father might the same bereave?
Sacred immortal powers, without whose deep insight
No wave does stir in seas, no blast in skies,
No leaf upon the earth: what great offense
Have I committed, that I worthy am
With my poor offspring for to war with heaven?
If I offended have, oh yet my son
What has he done you cannot pardon him?
O Jupiter the great disdainful blast
Would quickly suffocate my aged sense,
But if thy thunder bolts will not, my weapons shall.
The dolorous example I Will renew,
Of good Amyntas our beloved Priest,
My son amazed shall see his father slain,
Ere I a father will go kill my son:
Die thou Montane, it is only sit for thee,
O powers, I cannot say whether of heaven or hell,
That agitooke with grief, dispairefull minds,
Behold your fury thus it pleases you.
I naught desire save only speedy death,
A poor desire my wretched life to end,
Some comfort seems to my sad spright to send.

Ca. Wretched old man, as greater flames do dim
The lesser lights, even so the sorrow I
Do of thy grief conceive, has put out mine,
Thy case alone deserves pity now.

Act. 5. Sce. 6.
Tireme Mon. Carino. SOftly my son, and set thy feet secure,
Thou must uphold me in this rugged way,
Thou art my bodies eye, I am thy minds,
And when thou come before the Priest, there stay,

Mon. Is It not the reverend Tirenio which I see?
Who blind on earth, yet sees all in heaven?
Some great thing moves him thus, these many years
I saw him not out of his holy Cell.

Ca. God grant he bring us happy news.

Mon. Father Tirenio, what is the news with you*
You from the temple? how comes this to pass?

Tire. To you I come for news, yet bring you news
How often blind eyes do aid the inward sight,
The whilst the mind vntraueld with wild sights,
Withdrawes into it self, and Linceus eyes
Does set a work in sightlesse senses blind.
We may not Montane pass so lightly ore
The unexpected things, that heavenly mixture temps with humane,
Because the Gods do not converse on earth,
Nor partly hold with mortal men at all.
But all these works so great, so wonderful,
Which the blind world to blinder chance ascribes,
Is nothing but ce'estiall counsel talk,
So speak the eternal powers amongst themselves,
Whose voices though they touch not deafened ears,
Yet do they ^ound to hearts that understand.
O four, o six times happy he that understands it well.
The good Nicander as thou did command,
Stays to conduct the holy sacrifice,
But I retaind him by an accident
That Is newly fallen: the which (I know not) all
Unwonted and confused, twixt hope and fear.
Dulleth my sense. I cannot understand, and yet the less
I comprehend, the more I do conceive.

Mon. That which you know not wretch, I know too well,
But tell me can the Fates hide ought from thee?
That piercest to the deep'st of Destinies.

Tire. If (son) the use divine of light prophetical
Were natures gift, and not the gift of heaven,
Then might thou see as well as I, that Fates
Secrets sometime deny our working minds,
This only it is that makes me come to thee,
That I might better be informed who it is
That is discovered father to the youth
That Is doomed to die (if I Nicander understand.)

Mon. That father you desire to know am I.

Tire. You father of our Goddess sacrifice?

Mon. I am the wretched father of that wretched son.

Tire. Of that same faithful shepherd, that to give
Life to an other, gives himself to death?

Mon. His that by death gives an other life,
Yet by that death kills him that gave him life.

Tire. And is this true?

Mon. Behold my witness here.

Ca. That which he says is true.

Tire. And who art thou?

Ca. I am Carino his father thought till now.

Ti. Is this the child the flood so bare away?

Mon. The very same.

Ti. And for this then do thou
Montanus call thy self a wretched father?
O monstrous blindness of these earthly minds,
In what a dark profound and mystie night
Of errors be they drowned? when thou O heavenly son
Do not enlighten them: Montanus thou
Art blinder in thy mind then I of eyes,
That do not see thy self the happiest father
And dearest to the gods that ever yet did child beget.
This was the secret which the Fates did hide.
This is that happy day, with so much blood
So many tears we did expect.
This is the bl^ssed end of our distress.
O thou Montanus turn into thy self,
How is the famous Oracle forgot,
Printed in the hearts of all Arcad^a?
No end there is for that which you offends,
Till two of heavens issue love unite,
The tears of ioye^ so satisfy my heart
I cannot utter it. No end there i^,
No end there is to that which you offends,
Till two of heavens issue love unite,
And for the ancient fault of that false wight,
A faithful shepherds pity make amends.
Tell me Montanus, is not this thy son
Heavens issue? is not Amarillis so?
Who has united them but only love?
Siluio by parents force espowsed was
To Amarillis, whom he hated still,
If thou the rest examine, you shall plainly see
The fatal voice only Mirtillo meant.
For since Amyntas chance where have we seen
Such faith in love that might coequall this?
Who since Amyntas willing was to die
For any Nymph, only Mirtill except.
This is that faithful Shepherds pity, which deserves
To cancel that same ancient error of Lucrine.
With this deed is the heavens ire appeaz'd,
Rather then with the sheading humane blood,
Rendering unto the eternal justice, that
Which female treachery did take away.
Hence it was no sooner he unto the temple came,
There to renew his vow, but straight did cease
All those prodigious signs, now did
The holy Image sweat out blood no more,
Nor shook the ground, nor any noise nor stinch
Came from the Cave, save gracious harmony,
And odours. O sweet mighty providence,
O heavenly Cods, had I all words, all hearts,
All to thy honor would I consecrate:
But to my power I Will render you your due.
Behold upon my knees o heavenly powers,
I praise your name, how much am I obliged
That you have let me live until this day?
An hundred years I have already worn,
And never yet was life so sweet as now:
I but begun to to live, now am I borne again.
Why leese I time with words that unto deeds is due?
Help me up son, without thee can I not
Vpraise these weak and feeble members son.

Mon. Tirenio has wak't such joy in me
United yet with such a miracle
As I scarce feel I joy, nor can my soul
Confounded show me high retained mirth,
O gracious pity of the highest Gods,
O fortunate Arcadia, o earth,
More happy then all earths beneath the sun,
So deare's thy good, I have forgot mine own,
And my beloved sons, whom twice I lost,
And twice again have found, these seem a drop
To the huge waves of thy great good: o dream,
O blessed dream, celestial vision rather.
Arcadia now thou waxest bright again.

Ti. Why stay we Montane now? heavens not expect
A sacrifice of rage, but thanks and love,
In stead of death our Goddess now commands
Of marriage knot a sweet solemnity:
But say how farre's to night?

Mon. Not past one hour.

Ti. Then to the Temple turn, where let thy son
Espowsed be to Amarillis straight, whom he may lead
Unto his fathers house before the sun be set,
So heavens command. Come, gow Montanus, gow.

Mon. Take heed Tiremo we do not violate
Our holy law, can she her faith now give
Unto Mirtillo, which she Silu^o gave?

Ca. And unto Siluio may she give her faith,
So said thy servant, was Mirtillo called,
Though I more liked Mirtillo him to name.

Mon. That Is very true, I did revive his name
In this my younger son.

Ti. That doubt's well cleared, now let us go.

Mon. Carino go with us, this day Mirtillo has
Two fathers found, Montane a son, and thou a brother.

Ca. In love Mirtilloes father, and your brother,
In reverence a servant to you both:
And since you are so kind to me, I pray you then
Bid my companion welcome for my sake.

Mon. Most welcome both.

Ca. Eternal heavenly powers,
How diverse are your high untrodden ways
By which your favors do on us descend?
From those same crook't deceitful paths whereby
Our thoughts would fame mount up into the sky?

Sce. 7.
Corisca Linco. LInco belike the spightfull Sil^io
When least he meant, a Lover is become,
But what became of her?

Lin. We carried her
To Siluioes house, whose mother her embraced
With tears of joy or grief I know not whether,
Glad that her son is waxt a loving spowse,
But sorry for the Nymphs mishap, and that
She is a stepdame evil furnished
Of two daughters in law: playning one dead,
An other wounded.

Co. Is Amarillis dead?

Lin. She must die straight, for so does fame report,
For this, I go to comfort old Montanus,
Who l^esing one sons wife, has found an other.

Co. Then does Dorinda live?

Lin Live. I it were well
Thou were so well.

Co. Her wound not mortal was.

Lin. Had she been dead, yet Siluioes cunning would
Have her (...).

Co. What Art her healed so soon?

Lin. From top to toe i will tell the wondrous cure.
About the wounded Nymph stood men and women,
Each with a ready hand, but trembling heart.
But fair Dorinda would not any should
Save Siluio touch her, saying that the hand
Which was her hurt, should be her remedy.
Siluio, his mother, and I, stayed there alone,
Working with counsel too one with his hand,
Siluio when gently he had wiped away
The bloody streams that stained her Iuory flesh,
Assayes to draw the shaft out of the wound,
But the vilde steal yielding unto his hand,
Left hidden in the wound the harmfull head.
Hence came the grief, for it was impossible
With cunning hand, or dainty instrument,
Or other means, to draw it out from thence.
Opening the wound perhaps with wider wound
He might have found the steel with other steel.
So might he do, or so he must have done,
But too too pitious, and too loving now
Was Siluioes hand, for such like cruel pity
By such hard means, love never heals wounds.
Although it seemed to her that pain it self
Was pleasant now between her Siluioes hands.
He not amazed says thus: this head shall out,
And with less pain then any will believe.
I put it there, and though I be not able straight
To take it out, yet with the use of hunting
I will restore the loss I have by hunting.
I do remember now an herb that is well known
Unto the sauadge Goat, when he is wounded
With some Huntsmans shaft: this they to us,
Nature to them bewrayed, and it is hard by.
All suddenly he parts unto a neighbor hill,
And there a bundle gathers, straight to us
He comes, and out he draws the juice thereof,
And mingles it with veruine seed, and root
Of Centaures blood, making a plaster soft,
Which on the wound he lays: virtue myraculous,
The pain straight ceased, the blood was quickly staid,
The steel straightway without or toil or pain,
The workmans hand obeying, issues out.
And now her strength returns to her again,
As though she had not suffered wound at all:
Nor was it mortal, for it had untouched
Both left the bones and bellies outward run,
And only pie^st into the musclouse slanke.

Co. Great virtue of an herb, but much more great
For fortune of a woman have thou told.

Lin. That which between them past when this was done,
Is better to be gesl'd at then be told.
Dorinda sure is well, and with her side
Can serve her self to any use she likes.
Thou think she has endured more wounds by this,
But as the piercing weapons diverse are,
So are the wounds: of some the grief is sharp,
Of some it is sweet, one healing waxes sound,
The less an other heales, the sounder it is.
In hunting he to shoot such pleasure found,
That now he loves he cannot choose but wound.

Co. Still thou will be that amorous Linco.

Lin. In mind but not in force my dear Corisca,
Green bloomes desire within this aged tronke.

Co. Now Amarillis has resigned her life,
I will go see what dear Mirtillo does.

Sce. 8.
Ergasto. Corisca. ERg. O day of wonders, day all love, all grace,
All joy, o happy land, o heavens benign.

Co. See where Ergasto is, he comes in time.

Er. Now all things joyful are, the earth, the air,
The skies, the fire, the world, and all things laugh.
Our joys have pierced the lowest hell, nor is
There any place that not partakes our bliss.

Co. How iocond is this man?

Er. O happy woods
That often sighed and wept out woeful case,
Enjoy our joys, and use as many tongues
As leaves that leap at sound of these sweet winds,
Which ^^^l'd with our reioycings calmely smile,
Sing they the sweet adventures of these friends.

Co. He speaks of Siluio and Dorinda sure,
Well, we must live, tears are no sooner ebbed,
But straight the flood of joy comes hussing in
Or Amarillis, not a word he speaks
Only takes care to joy with them that joy.
Why it is well done, for else this humane life
Would still be full of sighs: whither away
Ergasto go so pleasantly, unto some marriage?

Er. Even so, but have thou heard the happy chance
Of the two fortunate Lovers? is it not rare Corisca?

Co. To my contentment even now I heard it all
Of Linco, and t'doth somewhat mittigate
The grief I for my Amarillis feel.

Er. Why Amarillis? Of whom think thou I speak?

Co. Of Siluio and Dorinda man.

Er. What Siluio? what Dorinda? thou know naught,
My joy grows from a higher nobler root.
I Amarillis and Mirtillo sing,
The best contented subjects of loves ring.

Co. Why is not Amarillis dead?

Er. How dead?
I tell thee she is a bright and merry B^ide.

Co. Was she not then condemned unto death?
She was condemned, but soon releast again.

Co. Telst thou me dreams? or dreaming do I hear?

Er. Thine eyes shall tell thee if thou wilt stay a while,
Soon shall thou see her with her faithful friend
Come from the Temple, where they plighted have
Their marriage troth, and so go to Montanus h^use
To reap sweet fruit of their long amorous toiles.
O had thou seen ( Corisca) the huge joy,
The mighty noise of joy full voices, and
Th'innumerable troops of men and women,
Thou should have seen, old, young, sacred and profane,
But little less then mad or drunk with (...).
With wonder who ran not to see the Lovers?
Each reverence to each them embraced there.
Some praised their pity, some their constancy.
Some praised the gifts that Jove, and some that nature gave.
The hills, the dales, the meadows did resound,
The glorious name of faithful Shepherd,
From a poor Shepherd to become so soon
A Demy-god, and in a moment pass
From life to death, the neighbor obsequies
To change for unexpected and dispaired nuptials.
This is some what ( Corisca) but not half
Her to enjoy, for whom he sought to die,
Her that disdaind to live if he had died,
This is fortune, this is such a sweet
As thought preuents, and yet thou art not glad.
Is not thy Amarillis then as dear to thee,
As my Mirtillo is to me?

Co. Yes, yes, Argasto, see how glad I am.

Er. O had thou seen but Amarillis when
She gave Mirtill her hand for pledge, and took
His hand again, thou easily had perceived
A sweet but unseen kiss: I could not say
Whether she took it, or she gave it him.
Her cheeks would have the purest color stained,
Purple or Roses Art, or nature brings,
How modesty was armed in dainty shield
Of sanguine beauty, with force of that stroke
Unto the strikor turned, whilst she all nice
Seemed as though she fled, but to recover force
She might more sweetly encounter that same blow,
Leaving it doubtful if this kiss were given or taken,
With such a wondrous Art it granted was.
This taken sweet, was like an action mixed
With rapine and with yielding both at once,
A^o so courteous, that it seemed to crave
The very thing that it denying gave:
Such a retrait, and such a speedlesse flight,
As mend the pace of the pursuer, might,
O sweetest kiss, I cannot stay Corisca,
I go directly I to find a wife:
For among the joys there is no pleasure sure,
If gentl^ love do not the same procure.

Co. If he say true, then thou Corisca have lost all.

Sce. 9.
Chorus of Shephear is, Corisca, Amarillis, Mirtillo. CHo. Sh. Come holy
Himeneus, come this even
According to our vows and to our songs
(...) thou these Lovers (...).
(...) one (...) of heaven,
Knit thou the (...).

Co. Ah me it is too true, this is the fruit
Thou from thy store of vanities must reap.
O thoughts, o my desires, no less unjust
Then false and vain. Thus of an innocent
I sought the death to have my beastly will,
So bloody cruel was I then, so blind.
Who opens now mine eye^? Ah wretch, I see
My fault most ^oule that seemed felicity.

Cho. Sh. Come holy Himeneus* etc.
See faithful Shepherd, after all thy tears,
All thy distresses, whither thou art come,
Is not this she from thee was taken away
By law of heaven and earth? by cruel fate?
By her chaste will? and by thy poor estate?
By her faith given another man, and by her death,
Behold Mirtillo now she is only thine.
This face, these eyes, this breast, these dainty hands,
All that thou see, hear'st, and feel'st, so often sought
In vain by thee, are now rewards become
Of thine undaunted faith, yet thou art dombe.

Mir. How can I speak, I scarce know if I breathe,
Nor what I see, I scarce believe I see:
Let Amarillis you that pleasure give,
In her alone my souls affections live.

Cho. Sh. Come holy Himeneus, etc.

Cor. What do ye now with me treacherous toies,
Vilde frenzies of the body, spots of the soul?
You long enough have me betrayed here,
Go get you to the earth, for earth you are,
You wear the arms erst of lascivious love,
Trophes of chastity now may you prove.

Cho. Sh. Come holy Hymeneus, etc.

Co. Why tris^est thou Corisca^? now is fit time
(...) impetrate, ^ear'st thou thy pain?
Beheld, thy pain cannot be greater then thy fault.
(...) and blessed couple, of the skies
And earth b^lou'd, since to your glorious fate
This day has me^kely bowed all earthly force,
(...) reason she do bow that against the same
(...) set a work a^l of her earthly force.
Now (...), I will not deny
(...) the same which you desired,
But you enjoy it, for you worthy were.
You do enjoy the loyalst man alive.
And you Mirtillo do enjoy the chastest Nymph
(...) the world has bred. Believe you me,
For (...) whetstone was unto your (...),
And to her chastity. But courteous Nymph, before
Your anger do descend on me, behold
Your (...) face, there shall you find the force
Both of my fault, and of your pardon too:
For in the virtue of such worthiness,
You cannot choo^^ but cause of pardon find.
Beside^ you (...) the selfe^ame fire
That did inflame unfortunate desire.

Ama. I do not only pardon thee (...)
I count thee (...) the effect beholding not the cause.
For fire and sword, although they wounds do bring,
Yet those once he^ld to us to whole (...) dear,
Howsoever now thou prou'st or f^iend, or foe,
I am well (...) the Destinies did make
Thee the good instrument of my content.
Happy (...),
And if you please (...) with us to be,
Come then and take part of our joys with us.

Co. I have (...) pardon me,
And that (...).

Mir. And I ( Corisca) pardon all thy harms,
Save this delaying of my sweet content.

Co. You and your mirth I to the Gods commend.

Cho. Sh. Come holy Himeneus* etc.

Sce. 10.
Mirtillo. Amarillis. Chorus of Shepherd. MIr. I am so tied to pain, that in
the midst
Of all my joys I needs must languish still.
Is It not enough this ceremonious pomp
Does hold us thus, but that Corisca must
Come in to hinder us?

Ama. Thou Art too quick my dear.

Mir. O my sweet treasure I am not secure,
Yet do I quake for fear of le^sing thee.
This seems a dream, and still I am afraid
My sleep should break, and thou my soul should fly away.
In better proof my senses would I sleep,
That this sweet sight is not a dreaming sleep.

Cho. Sh. Come holy Himeneus, come this even
According to our vows, and to our songs
Dress thou these Lovers as them best belongs.
Both the one and the other of the seed of heaven,
Knit thou the fatal knot this blessed eauen.

Chorus. O Happy two,
That plants have sowed, and reaped smyles.
In many bitter grievous foyles
Have you imbellist your desires,
Henceforth prepare your amorous fires,
And bolden up your tender sprights,
Unto your true sincere delights.
You cannot have a sounder joy,
There is no ill can you annoy.
This is true joy, true pleasure, and true mirth,
T'which virtue got, in patience gives birth.

FINIS.

