The Funeralles of King Edward the sixth.

VVherin are declared the causers and causes of his death.

EDVARDVS SEXTVS GRACIA, ANGLIE, FRANCIE ET HIBERNIE REX. ET C^ AETATIS SVAE.
XV.
portrait of Edward VI

Wisdom.iiii. He pleased God, and was beloved of him, and therefore has God
removed him from sinners among whom he lived. Yea suddenly was he taken away,
to the end that wickedness should not alter his understanding. Though he dyed
young, yet fulfilled he much time, for his soul pleased God, therefore hasted he
to take him away from among the wicked.

William Baldwin to the Reader.
GReat has been the doubt among many, ever since the death of our late
virtuous soverayne Lord King Edward the syxt, by what mean he dyed, and what
were the causes of his death. This doubt is fully resolved in this book,
penned before his corse was buried, and endeavored since by many means to have
had been printed: but such was the time, that it could not be brought to pass.
Wherefore now at length (good Reader) it is set forth, both to take away all
doubt in this matter, and to exhort thee to leave thy sins, and noughty
living: Least, that as they were in part the undoubted cause of that most godly
princes death, so they becum the destruction of our virtuous Queen his sister,
and the utter ruin of this whole realm. For as thou shall perceive by this
true Treaty, our innumerable sins were the chief, yea the only cause why
God so soon took good King Edward from us: which surely if we do not spedely
repent and amend, I dare not declare with how grevous and heavy plages God him
self will purge and punish them. Wherefore I earnestly beseech thee, as thou
love the Queen, the Realm, yea thine own body and soul, amend thy life.
God grant this may persuade thee.

Amen.
Love and live.
The Funeralles of the most noble and godly Prince King Edward the syxt.
WHen bitter Winter forced had the Sun
Fro the horned Goat to Pisces ward to run,
And lively sap, that greneth gardins soote,
To fly the stock to save her nurse, the root,
And sleety Cech that blowth by North fro East,
Decayed the health and wealth of man and beast,
The almighty mind that rayneth three in one,
Disposing all things from his stable throne,
Beheld the earth, and man among the rest:
Movde by the cry of such as were oppressed.
And when he had the maynland thoroughly vewed,
With Mahometrie and Idol blud embrewed,
Wherthrow his Law and Gospel were defylde,
His love, his awe, his worship quite exilde,
He turned his iyes from that so foul a sight,
And toward the Isles he cast his look a right:
In hope that where true knowledge did abound,
He should sum lovelyer sight have quickly found.
But when he saw all vice most vile and naught
Most rifely swarm, where truth had most be taught,
In England chief, which he of special grace
Had made his wurd and chosens resting place,
And had for that cause powrd on it such store
Of welthy gifts as none could wish for more,
Joint with a King, of such a godly mind,
As seldom erst he elsewhere had assinde,
All woe and wroth he flang away his face,
And to him self he thus bewayld the case,
To see this people should their sins forsake,
I have looked so long, until mine eyes do ache.
To hide their mischiefs waring more and more,
I have winkt so long till lo my bryes be sore.
My throat is horce, my lips have lost their skin
Through fervent cry to fray them from their sin.
Might gentleness have movde them to relent,
What have they wished, that has not strait be sent?
Since then they pass for neither threats, nor love,
Nor easy plages whereby I do them prove,
What else remayns but to destroy them all,
The young, the old, the mighty with the small.
Christ hearing this, and moved with the tears
Of virtuous folk, (for whose sake God forbeares
The wicked sort although their sins be great)
For his elect on this sort began entreat.
If Justice due (dear father) should have place,
I know it booteth not to sewe for grace:
But though their sins all measure far excede,
Yet stay thy wrath, have mercy on our need.
And since through faith a mayny of them be mine,
Grant leave this once to water this thy vine:
That done, if so their fruytes do not amend,
As barrayne brambles bring them to an end.
When Christ our saviors merciful request
Was sonke into his fathers tender breast,
He neither granted it, nor yet denayd
But fatherlike thus to his son he said:
To sewe for mercy I maruayle what ye mean,
For such a sort as have reject us clean.
Behold the heads, what else do they devise,
Save in our name to cloak their couetise?
Thine heritage they have thee whole bereft,
Except thy shurt, let see, what have they left?
Thy gold, thy plate, thy lodgyng, yea thy lands
That are the poores, are in the richest hands:
They waste, they spoil, they spill upon their pride
That which was geven the nedy corse to hide:
And thou lie naked starving at their gates
While they consume thy substance with their mates.
As for their law whereby men should have right
Is ruled hole by money and by might.
And where the rich the nedy should relive
They do their best to beggry all to drive.
What titles forge they falsely to their lands,
Until they wrongly wring them from their hands?
How join they house to house, how farm to farm?
How lease to lease, the selly sort to harm?
How raise they rents, what incoms, yea what fines
Exact they still though all the world repines?
How suffer they their grain to rot and hoar
To make a dearth when I give plenty store?
And where they brag they do thy word auaunce,
Have they not spoyld or fliste all mayntenaunce,
That thereto servde? what kind of Clergy land
Or fee, is free now from the Lay man's hand?
What gentleman, what merchant, yea what swayne,
But has or may have a personage or twain?
I loath to name the vileness of the rest,
So sore my heart their robbry does detest.
Is this the way our Gospel to defend?
No no, we see to well what they entend.
But pass we this, and mark their godly lives,
How do they keep their promys with their wides?
For what respect do they their marriage make
Save riches, honor, or promocion sake?
Alas how are our Orphans bought and sold,
Our widows forced to mary where they nould,
What vow, what oath, what bond most strongly knit,
Does hold, where gain may grow by breaking it?
And when our preachers tell them ought hereof,
What do they then save either threat or skof?
Which causes such as would thy manhood spoil,
And rob from thee the merit of thy royle,
To hate thy word, and count our prophets evil,
Wyshing them both together at the devil.
Are these thy vine? thy flock can thou them call
That steal thy lands, thy goods, thy glory and all?
When for these sins I sent them late the sweat,
How low they croucht, so hard they did entreat,
What earnest vows they made they would amend,
But as you see naught less they did entend:
For I no sooner had withdrawn my curse,
But they as soon were fallen from ill to wurse.
For where they vowed to fly and set aside
Their covetise, their oaths, their fare, their pride,
They raysd their rents, their fines, their marcha^dises,
And glut their paunche with daynty wine and spices,
The Idollyke with pounsed silk and gold,
Arayd their wives and children young and old:
As for them selves who marketh their attyer,
Would think them Gods more like then brittle myer,
And shall we suffer so perverse a nation
To skorne and mock their God on such a fashion?
No no my son, that were against all right,
Yet for thy sake, I will not stroye them quight,
But for to try them once at thy request
I will but touch their king, and warn the rest
To amend their lives, which if they do delay
I will take their king, their comfort life and stay:
And if they set his death to at their heel,
I will power down plages till every one do feel.
This said, he called to his servant Crasy cold,
Whom the Isy king kept prisoner in his hold
Beneath the Poales, where under he does dwell
In grysly dark like to the diepe of hell,
In rocks and caves of snow and ^^^ttred yse
That never thaw, and said hi^ in this wise.
About five Climates henceward to the South
Between the maynland and the Occean mouth,
Two ylandes lie, skarce distant forty mile:
Whereof the larger and more Eastward isle
Called Britain once, til time that peoples sin
Drove out them selves and brought strange nations in,
Is now divided into portions three,
And in the same three sundry peoples be.
Of which the best and cyuil like in sight,
But wurst in deed, the english nation hight
And they indwel the Southpart of the land.
Fro the midst whereof (mark well, and understand)
A River runs Eastward to the main
Sea arm, that parts it and France in twain.
About this river many mighty Bowres
Are cumly buylt with Castles, Halles, and Towers,
In which the King and Rulers commonly
In Winter time with all their housholdes lie.
To one of these I will thou hye in post,
To that I mean where as the prince is most:
I thought to bid thee mark the great resort,
But do not so, for other bear a ports
As great as he, and greater otherwhile:
But take this note, which will the not begile,
The mournful chere of many a suitors face
Will show the sure which is his biding place.
And when thou have his place and person found,
I will thou shall his helthy body unsound:
But see thou hurt him not unto the death,
Thou shall but stop his Loungpipes, that his breath
Constraynd, may cause the cough bread in his breast:
Else what shall cure or quel up all the rest.
But in this feat I charge the sea thou look
Thou harm him not while he is at his book,
Or other kind of virtuous exercise:
Neither yet at game so it ve void of vice.
But if this Winter time thou may him mark
To ride all day all armde about the park,
Or else at dice, or tenis out of time
To overwatch or toil him self, for such a crime
Strike hardily, but not to hard, I say:
This is thy charge, about it, go thy way.
Scarce was this errand throwly to him told,
But forth he came this shivering crasy cold,
With Ysikles bebristled like a Bore,
About his head behind and eke before.
His skin was hard, al made of glassy yse,
Ouerheard with hoar frost, like gray Irishe Frise,
His arms and legs, to keep him warm I trow,
Were skaled through with flakes of frosen snow,
And from his mouth there reekt a breath so hot,
As touched nothing that congeled not.
And when he had arowsd him self a while.
And stretched his joints as stiff as any style:
Because he would his charge no longer slack.
He got him up on blustering Boreas back,
And forth he went: but his horse so heavy trod,
That all the world might know which way he rode.
For in his way there grew no manner grene,
That could in three days after well be seen.
His breath and braying was so sharp and thryl,
That fluds for fear hard cluddered stood full still.
The seas did quake and tremble in such sort,
That never a ship durst venture out of port.
The holtes, the heathes, the hills became al hoar,
The trees did shrink, al things were troubled sore.
When this fell horseman with his griesly stead
Had passed Iseland, and made forth such speed,
That many Skots bad: Fule isle ta the Churl,
That slew their lambs and cattall with his whurle;
He passed York, and came to London strayt,
And there alight to geve his horse a bayt.
Where ere he had three days in stable stood,
Be eat so much, the poor could get no wood,
Except they would pay after double price,
For Billet treble under common cise.
But Crasy cold lurkt all this while at court,
To watch his time when he the king might hourt:
And when he saw him on a morning, sweat,
And call for drink to cool his tennis heat,
He slyly crept, and hid him in the cup:
And when the King, alas, had drunk him up,
Into his stomach downward he him got,
And there parceyving all the inwards hot,
And that each part full gredily did pluck
To save it self, all succor it might suck,
He mark the chile that went unto the Lounges,
And throwly myxt his virtue there among:
And cooling it, so stopped the pipes therewith,
As to dissolve pure nature wanted pith?
This done, to London strait this fyend he came,
And there infected diverse with the same:
Whereof most part not over charely tended,
Recovered well, and throwly are amended,
And sum whose nature physic overprest,
Are goen to God, and sleep in quiet rest.
When Crasy cold this cruel fear had wrought,
He took his steed that had him thither brought.
And forth he rode to him that sent him hither,
And so forth home, or else I wot not whither.
Right sore ackrasde, within a day or twain
The King began sick, and of his breast complain.
The juice congelde that in his Lounges lay raw,
Did stop the pipes, wherthrough the breath should draw*
By mean whereof his stomach waxed faint,
Till nature help through medicinal constraynt,
Did make a way by purging part thereof,
Whereof ensewed a sore and vehement cough,
With reaching often, as if the heart should break,
Whereby the vital blud becam to weak.
For help whereof phisici^ns did repair,
And for his aid did keep him from the air:
But when the King awhile was mist abroad,
His lovers mournde, the preachers laid on lode,
Who seeing the prince plagde for the peoples sin,
Exhorted all amendment to begin.
Fore warning, if we would not turn in time,
His grace should dye, and we should bear the crime:
And after his death such cruel plages ensue.
As all should feel, and then to late, should rue.
The Magistrate was plainly told his fault.
The man of law was warned not to halte:
Request was made the church goods to restore,
Or put to the use that they were taken for.
Leasmungring Landlords, such as raised rent,
Were moved to bate their Lands to ancient stent,
The waste, the fare, the vaynnes of attire,
Extorcion, malice, covetous desire,
All Papistry, with fruteles gospel boast,
Was cried against, and damnde as wicked most.
And to be brief, fro the lowest to the highest,
All were desired to live the law of Christ.
With earnest threats, from God the living Lord,
In whose just iye all sin is sore abhord,
That if we did not these our faults repent,
The King should dye, and we to late lament.
But out alas, how were these preachers heard?
The heads withdrew their presens, all afearde
Least sum good mocion might amend their mind.
By whose example, the people (naught by kind)
Took heart of grass the preachers to despise:
And slaundred them with shameless forged lies.
Gods bitter threats they made a very mock,
His prophets eke a common jesting stock,
As for amendment, none at al was seen,
But into wurs all yls were turned clean.
When God had suffered all these things a space,
And saw at last how all refused his grace,
And that no threats might cause them to retyer,
To stay the stroke of his consuming ire,
He fully agreed to take this blessed child:
For speed whereof, he utterly exylde
All means by which he might recover force.
Than did his grief so sore assault the corse
That every vain and muscle began to swell,
Which bred a pain much like the panges of hell:
In which the piteous Prince a pining lay,
In hope all hopeles, many a woeful day.
But God which saw the terror of the pain
Wherein so long this innocent had layne,
Because he would for it provide an aid,
He called Death, and thus to him he said:
Dispatch at ones, to Greenwich se thou hye,
Where my elect, King Edward, sick, does lie
In paynfull panges, wherein he has be long,
Not for his own, but for his peoples wrong:
Enforce thine arm, and with thy cruel dart
Cleave me in twain his virtuous godly heart.
What, wepest thou Death? Ceas fool, and hold thy tongue*
What though he be both beawtifull and young,
So learnd a prince, so manly, and so meek
As seldom had, nor eft shall have his like?
He is to good for that ungracious Realm:
Wherefore dispatch, go strike thy stroke extreme.
Take no compassion on his tender youth,
His wit, his virtue, or earnest zeal of truth.
But wotst thou what, let not thy form be such
An ougly shape, as to the worldly ruch
It often appears: But lovely, as it is
To such as long for everlasting bliss.
With cumly shape, and smiling chere, I say,
Go lewse his soul, have done, and go thy way.
When doutful Death had heard this hard devise,
He trymd him self in his most cumly guyse,
Like Mercury in every kind of grace,
Save that he had a much more lovely face:
And forth he flewe, and got him to the bed,
Wherein the King lay neither quick nor dead,
But in a trance: for why his deadly grief,
And nature strave, to prove who should be chief.
But when weke nature had consumde her best,
She yielded her, and so the struggle ceast.
Whereby the King came to him self again,
And seeing death, he turned away amayne:
For why his yongth, and yet vnfloured breath,
Could not consent to so unripe a death.
Dry Death him self with pity moved thoe,
Had much to do to hide his inward woe:
And seeing the lovely prince so sore afraid,
With smiling there to cumfort him, he said.
Most noble King, abashe not, but assent,
Nor God the almightye has me hither sent:
Who much lamenting this your woeful case,
Would have you cum to solas with his grace,
In life, in bliss, in everlasting glory,
From worldly things all vile and transitory,
From this your state uncertain and unsure,
Unto a Raygne that shall for ay endure.
No sooner had our Soverayne heard of this,
But lo, his goast (which long had longd for bliss)
Would needs away: Howbeit his careful mind
For this his realm, which he should leave behind,
Did move his grace to pray death stay awhile,
To thend he might him self both reconcile
To God his king, and also recommende
His realm to him for ever to defend.
And while that Death for this cause gladly stayed,
He set him up, and thus to God he prayed.
HAve mercy on me father dear, O Lord, and God of truth,
O let thy mercy hide the sins, and fraylty of my youth.
I have transgrest thy law to often, full woe is me therefore,
But for thy son my saviors sake, my selly soul restore.
My flesh does crave to keep the life, full loath to loose the light:
But Lord, do thou as shall seem best, to thine almighty sight.
And when thou have receyved my soul, which troubles overwhelm
Be merciful (most merciful) to this my wretched Realm.
Preserve thy truth, maintain thy word, power plenty of thy grace,
On all such hearts as thou shall set, to govern in my place.
Thus Lord, I render to thy hands, my self, my flock, my seat,
Do with them all thy blessed will, for Christ's sake I entreat.
Amen quod death, and with his percing dart,
He struck in twain the kings yet praying heart.
But Lord how glad the goast was of the stroke,
For when it saw the prison gate was broke,
Fast forth it flewe, and up to heaven went
To rest with God in joys that never stent:
The soulles body about the bed did sprall,
While they about it on the King did call,
Adawing him as if he were in swound:
But all for naught, he had his deadly wound.
And when the blud, that went to help the heart,
Had sweltred it, and left each other part,
Than waxt his face and hands all pale and wan,
And when the bludles parts to cool began,
To heavenward his hands and iyes he cast,
Down fell his jaws, his heart stringes all to brast,
And still he lay, for lively heat was past.
Thus dyed this King, this giltles blessed child,
In body and soul, a virgin vndefilde,
The sixtenth year of his imperfect age.
Woe wurth us men, whose sins let run at rage
Have murdered him: woe wurth us wretches all,
On whom the wreke of righteous blood must fall.
Woe wurth our sins, for they, alas, have slain,
The noblest prince that did, or eft shall rain.
Sapien.iiii. Thus the righteous which is dead, condemns the ungodly which
are living, and the youth that is soon brought to an end, the long life of
the unrighteous.
An exhortacion to the repentance of sins, and amendment of life, which
were the cause of the kings death, and will be the destruction of the Realm if
God be not the more merciful unto us.
ALl English people what so ever ye be,
Rulers, and subjects of every degree,
Whose horrible vices have moved the wrath
Of God so to skourge us, as lately it has,
By bringing our Sovereign to soon to his end,
Repent your misliving, and quickly amend:
For that was the cause of the Kings death in deed,
And will be his heirs to, without better heed.
Repent O ye Princes, your gredy desyer
Of honor and riches, whereby set on fire,
You rob under color of Christen professson,
From Christ and his poor, their right and possession.
You oppress the people through sale of your lust,
Repent, recompense to, and learn to be just:
For this was the cause of the Kings death in deed,
And will be the kingdoms without better head.
Repent you prelates your seking promocion,
Your gredy gathering, your lack of devotion,
Your to much care for your children and wives,
Your whorish abusing, your wife lothing lives,
Your popish errors, your foul dirogacion
Of Christ his manhood, his merits and passion:
For this was the cause of the Kings death in deed
And will be his heirs to, without better head.
Repent O you subjects, your disobedience
To God and good Rulers, your great irreverence
To true religion, your elders and teachers,
Your mocking and skorning of gods holy preachers,
Your common swearing, transgression of laws,
Your troubling your neighbors for every light cause
For this was the cause of the Kings death in deed,
And will be the Queen's without better head.
Repent you officers all the deceytes
You use in your paymentes and in your receytes,
Your bribe bought audites, your subtle surueyinges,
Your thevish accounts made by crafty conueyings,
Your robbing the rulers that put you in trust:
Repent, recompense to, hence forward be just.
For that was the cause of the Kings death in deed,
And will be his sisters, without better heed.
Repent you false lawiers your racking and strayning
To make all laws serve to your gredy gayning,
Your robbing the rich, your undoing the poor,
Your making the law and justice an whore,
Which no man enbrace may until she be sold
For great men's favors, or hye heaps of gold.
For this was the cause of the kings death in deed,
And will be the kingdoms without better head.
Repent you marchantes your strange marchandises
Of personages, prebends, auowsons of benefices,
Of lands, of leases, of office, of fees,
Your monging of vitayles, corn, butter, and cheese:
Your cariyng out good wares, and bringing such in
As sarve to no purpose, save bredyng up sin.
For this was the cause of the kings death in deed
And will be his sisters without better head.
Repent you caytifes your raising of rent
Your fines, your incoms, yet never at a stent.
Your turning of tillage so much into pasture,
That towns and towneships are ruyned past cure:
Your wasting of woods, your engrossing chepe wares,
To make dearth of plenty, to encreace others cares.
For this was the cause of the Kings death in deed,
And will be the kingdoms without better head.
Repent you Judges your parciall judgments,
Your quitting the giltye, your quelling innocents
For mede, for dread, for spite or for pleasure.
Repent you Rufflers thabuse of your treasure,
Your oaths, your fury, your else many a crime
Beside the expense of your bodies and time.
For these were a cause of the Kings death in deed
And will be the kingdoms without better head.
Repent you Leachers your dissolute lives,
Your causeles divorsing your true wedded wives,
Your crafty alluring the silly to sin,
Your bying of Orphans to wed to your kin,
Your forcing of widows unwilling to mary
To cause breath of wedlock, since needs they must vary:
For this was the cause of the kings death in deed,
And will be the kingdoms without better head.
To conclude, let each man of every degree
Bewail his offenses what so ever they be,
And ask God forgevenes, and make recompens
To those he has harmed through any offense:
For sure if we do not, such plagues will ensewe,
As never came yet upon heathen nor Jew.
For our sins were the cause of the Kings death in deed,
And will be the kingdoms without better head.
Since we all already are gilty of murder,
Ceas we all for Gods sake, to sin any further,
O sleys not our Soverayne, our most noble Queen,
Whose match in virtue has seldom be seen,
But pray the almighty her life to defend.
Repent, recompense, pray, pay, and amend.
For if our sins send her to her brother,
Swift vengeance will follow, let none look for other.
Syrach the.x. Because of unrighteous dealing, of wrong, of blasphemies, and
sundry deceytes, a Realm shall be translated from one people to an other.
An Epitaph. The Death playnt or life praise of the most noble and virtuous
Prince, King Edward the syxt.
THe noble heart which fear might never moove,
Wherein a mind with virtue fraught did rest,
A face whose chere allured unto loove
All hearts, through ties which pity whole possessed,
The brain, which wit and wisdom made their chest,
Fulfyld with all good gifts that man may have,
Rest with a princely Carkas here in grave.
Whose virtuous gifts immixed with the mind
As godly fear, with constant zeal to truth,
Such skill of tounges, and arts of every kind,
Such manhood, prudens, justice joined with ruth
As age seeld has, though here they greed with youth,
Are from their wemles undefiled host,
Goen hence to heaven with their godly goast.
Of which two parts belinkt in lace of life,
It pleased the Lord to lend us late a king:
But out alas our sins they were so rife,
And we so unworthy of so good a thing,
That Atropos did knap in two the string
Before her sisters sixtene whurles had spun,
Or we the gain of seven years rain through wun.
Woe wurth our sins, our sins, our sins I say,
The wreke whereof has rest us such a loan
As never realm the like recover may,
In princely gifts, the Phoenix byrd alone.
Oh happy he, but we full woe begoen.
Whose heinous sins have slain the giltles gide,
Whose souls the heaven, whose corse this hearse does hide
Finis.
King Edward sickened the first day of February, at Whitehall, and on the syxte
day of Iulye next following, died he at Greenwich, And was buried in Westminster
church. Anno. 1553.
EDVARDVS SEXTVS GRACIA, ANGLIE, FRANCIE ET HIBERNIE REX. ET C^ AETATIS SVAE.
XV.
portrait of Edward VI

