The Groome-porters laws at Mawe, to be observed in fulfilling the due orders
of the Game.
1. IF you change hands, it is the loss of the Set, 2. If you renounce, it is
the loss of the Set. 3. If you lead when your Mate should, it is the loss
of that game and vied cards. 4. If you lose dealing, it is the loss of four
cards, but if the loser of the dealing deal not again, you acquit the
four, and no gain to either of both parties. 5. If you look either on ye
asked card, or the bottom card, it is the loss of that game and vied
cards, in whom the fault is found. 6. If you roub (not having the Ace) you
lose four, and all the vied cards although you lay down the same card which
you took up. 7. If you make out the card when your Mate rubbeth it is the
loss of four, for the roubber must make out the card himself. 8. If you
turn up the Ace of Hearts you gain four thereby. 9. If you turn up the Ace
of Hearts, and thereby make either party above xxvi. the contrary part must
have Livings, but if the contrary part be xxv. by means whereof Livings sets
them out, then is he who turned up the Ace of Hearts to make for the Set, so
that he make not one Game nor the first Trick, without the consent of both
parties. 10. The party that asks a card, may not vie any card, before the
first trick be played. 11. You may not vie it after your card is led, but the
contrary part may. 12. Three cards crossed, no card by any means given
back. 13. Neither party may give back his own vied card, though none be
crossed. 14. You may not ask a card to set the contrary part or your self
at Livings or out. 15. Provided always, that if the contrary part be xxiii.
or above, by reason that four sets the other party behind the Liuinges, it
shall be lawful for the party which is behind to ask a card, although the
card so asked put the other to Livings. 16. Provided also that if you mean to
lead a help, you may vie it upon your own asked card, so as it be done
before the help be out of your hand, the contrary part may pledge you a card
after he sees your help upon the board, so as it be done before his own card
be played.

