THE HONOR OF CHRISTIAN CHVRCHES; AND THE NECESSITY OF frequenting of Divine
Service and Public Prayers in them. Delivered in a Sermon at White Hall before
the Kings most excellent Majesty on the eight day of December last being
Sunday, BY WALTER BALCANQVALL Doctor of Divinity and Deane of Rochester being
then in his ordinary attendance. And now published by his Majesty's special
commandment.

LONDON, Printed by George Miller for Robert Allot at the black Bear in Paul's
Churchyard. 1633.

MATH. 21. Ver. 13. It is written, my house shall be called the house of prayer,
but you have made it a den of thieves.
THe occasion of which words was briefly this; Kings at the first entry unto
their Reigns do use to begin with the reformation of abuses crept into the
Church and Service of God: so did David, Josias, Ezekiah before Christ, so did
the Christian Emperors and Princes after Christ, as appears in their first
rescripts: so do yet all Christian Kings, their first Acts of State or
Parliament take rise at the threshold of the Sanctuary, and begin with
confirmation, or (if need be) reformation of the Church: Now the Son of God
in this Chapter making his solemn entry like a King into Jerusalem, and so
received by the people, he first gets him to the Temple, and finding it most
lewdly profaned both by secular and spiritual or Simoniacall negotiation he
falls upon them with both hands: as a King with his secular arm he whippeth
out the profaners; as a Priest he uses the spiritual arm, It is written: and
these words, It is written, be all the words of this text, which may properly
be said to be Christ's own words, the rest are but cited by him from others; the
first sentence my house shall be called the house of prayer, from Isaiah 56. 7.
the other, but you have made it a den of thieves, from Iere. 7. 11. But both of
them so rehearsed and withal applied by him, that they are now become his own,
for as well quem been, as quem male dum recitas, incipit esse tuus.

And as these two sentences when they were first spoken of by these two
Prophets, were a Prophecy of Christ his times, and the iniquity of the Jews
in his time fulfilled them, so as they are now rehearsed by Christ, they seem
to have been a Prophecy of our times, which have fulfilled them by repeating
the same profanations: In which regard I should not perhaps divide these words
much amiss, if I should divide them into an Appropriation, and an
Impropriation: an Appropriation, or the proper use for which God appointed his
Temple, my house shall be called the house of prayer; an Impropriation, or the
abuse of the Temple, whereby men disappoint God of his appointment, but you
have made it a den of thieves: And this division is much about one with our
Proverb, wheresoever God has a Church the Devil has a Chapel; my house
shall be called the house of prayer, there is Gods Church; but you have made it
a den of thieves, there the Devil goes about presently to turn it into his
Chapel.

Or these words being spoken of the Material Temple of Jerusalem may be
divided as in some sort that Temple might have been divided: amongst diverse
gates in the Temple there were these two, afore-gate and a backe-gate, the
fore-gate at which the people entered called the Beautiful gate, where the
diseased lay and begged alms, Acts 3. 2. The backe-gate called Shallecheth or
the dung-gate, out of which was carried all the filth or sulledge of the
Temple: now between these two gates stood the Temple it self; so here, first
you have the preface or fore-gate to the text, it is written; and we may call
it the beautiful gate, for it points to the very beauty of holiness, that
is, the Scripture: next the Temple it self, which is the maine structure and
building of the text, my house shall be called the house of prayer: and lastly,
the back or dung-gate at which Christ throws out the profaners of the
Temple, who had made it a dunghill, or a den of thieves, but you have made it a
den of thieves.

But there is one word in the text from whence I mean to fetch that division
of the words which at this time I purpose to pursue, and that is the word
appellabitur, shall be called; since the text is of the right naming, calling, or
as it were christening of the Temple, I shall pray you to take notice of these
four particulars* First of the Churches name, my house, and we may call it the
proper name of the Church, for it gives God a propriety in it: Secondly, the
Churches surname or appellative name by which it shall be called, the house of
prayer, my house shall be called the house of prayer: Thirdly, the Churches
nicke-name, by which in regard of the great abuse offered unto it, Christ
miscalleth it, a den of thieves, but you have made it a den of thieves:
Fourthly, the Church-booke or register in which all these names are recorded,
the name and surname in Isaiah, the nickname in Jeremiah, it is written:
Neither need we doubt but that all these names are very significant, for if
Adam by that original wisdom wherewith God endued him was able to give names
to all the creatures according to their natures, much more is God himself able
to do so when he will name any thing.

Now in each of these four there be two particulars; in the first, that is,
the name, my house, these two: First, It is fit God should have houses built to
him on earth as well as men, my house. Secondly, These houses built unto God
become God his houses by propriety, so his, that they may never be taken from
him; my house. In the second, that is, the surname of the Church, shall be called
the house of prayer, these two: First, Houses built unto God are to be solemnly
called, or (as it were) christened, that is, consecrated and dedicated to the
service of God, shall be called. Secondly, As they are to be dedicated to all the
parts of God his service, so especially they are to be consecrated to prayer,
shall be called the house of prayer. In the third, that is, the Churches
nicke-name, but you have made it a den of thieves, these two: First, God his
Church may become the Devils Chapel, Bethel may become Bethaven; the house of
prayer, a den of thieves. Secondly, The thieves and robbers who make it so, are
principally the Priests, but in their own place the people too; for both are
here meant by you; the Priests for letting out the shopkeepers standings, and
the Lay People for selling in those shops, being upon holy ground. In the
fourth, that is, the Church-booke or Register, It is written, these two: First,
The authority by which the proper use for the Temple for prayer is to be
proved, by Scripture: next, the authority by which the abuse of the Temple is
to be reproved, by Scripture too: Christ indeed (who was a King as well as a
Priest) besides the text, uses the whip too: but Church-mens best whip is
Scriptum est, It is written; in the old Testament, in the new Testament, and in
their own place, in the Canons of the Church; a threefold cord is not easily
broken, this three-stringed whip will hold upon the consciences of men, or
nothing will: if not, the Prince then must use the secular whip indeed: As
Christ used the Devil, sometimes throwing him by maine force out of them that
were possessed, sometimes throwing him upon his back by force of Scripture, It
is written, as in his temptations, so here he uses these divellish men; as a
King* he drives them out of the Temple with a whip; as a Priest, with the text;
It is written, my house shall be called the house of prayer, but you have made it
a den of thieves. And of so many of these parts in this order which I have now
propounded, as the time and your royal patience shall give me leave.

And first of the Church its name, my house, and in it of the first particular,
which is this, It is fit God should have houses built unto him upon earth as
well as men, for though the heaven of heavens cannot contain him, much less
this house which is made with hands, as Solomon speaks at the Dedication of
his Temple; and the Almighty dwells not in houses made with hands, as Peter
speaks in the Acts; yet since God has given to man the whole surface of the
earth to build upon for himself, he expects that man by way of gratitude
should find out some corner whereupon to build to his God; as when God requires
of us to give some of our goods to the poor, it is not that he could not
provide for the poor without us, If I were hungry (says the Lord) I would not
tell thee, for all the beasts of the field are mine, and the flocks upon a
thousand mountains: but since he has given unto us all that we have, he
expects that by way of thankfulness we should give back unto him (for what
we give to the poor he accounts given to himself) a little of that all:
Even so having given man the whole earth to build upon for himself, he looks
that man should set out some part of that whole whereupon to build, and be at
some cost with his God: that was a noble strife between a King and his
subject, David and Araunah the Iebusite, Sam. 2. 24. concerning the threshing
floor upon which David was commanded to build an Altar to God, Araunah would
have given it freely because it was for God, but David scorned to build unto
his God upon that ground which should cost him nothing.

Now these houses built by men unto God were of old called Temples, now
Churches, and though they were of men's building, yet were they not of men's
devising, but of God his own institution: Moses is the auncientest writer we
have extant, and in him we have the first mention of a Temple, for God
delivered unto him in the pattern of the Tabernacle the model of the Temple:
It is true indeed that the Gentiles by instigation of the Devil who is God his
ape, in imitation hereof did erect Temples to false gods; but first we have
mention of God his Temple, as truth is more ancient than a lie: And even before
either that Tabernacle or Temple, we find that there were Analogicall Temples,
that is, places set apart and consecrated to the service of God. Abel though he
sacrificed abroad and in an open place, yet was it a place prepared; Noah
offered sacrifice upon an Altar, Jacob upon a stone turned to the form of a
Pillar and anointed with oil, which he called by the very name in the text,
my house, Bethel the house of God, Genes. 28. The same custom was (no
question) observed by the Patriarchs down to Moses, unto whom God himself
delivered the pattern of the Tabernacle, which should be a pattern of the
Temple; and then came the Temple of Jerusalem it self, the most glorious
structure the Sun did ever behold: To this Temple, under the Gospel succeeded
the Churches of Christians, at first indeed but mean, the Church being under
persecution: but when the Emperors and Princes became Christians, most
glorious; so magnificent for structure, so rich for indowments, that as Moses
was glad by sound of trumpet to make proclamation throughout the Camp that the
people should bring no more materials for the furnishing of the Tabernacle; so
Christian Princes were overruled by their subjects, to make Edicts of
restraint for giving any more to the Church. From whence appears the vanity
and ignorance of those humorists, who ask, what needs all this cost of
ointment upon Christ his head? all this cost upon the building and ornaments of
Churches? since the first and best Christians were not acquainted with them?
They may as well ask what silly men were David to provide such a mass of money
and materials, and Solomon to spend them all and many millions more upon the
Temple of Jerusalem, since God before was well enough worshipped and
sacrificed unto by Abel and Noah perhaps upon a turfe, by Jacob upon a stone.
But when God had given to his people the blessing of a magnificent Monarchy,
he would not have them dwell in houses of Cedar, and his house remain within
curtains, but would have the house where his honor was to dwell, for state
and magnificence to be the beauty of the whole earth; so while Christians at
the first had much ado to live and breathe under their persecutions, God was
contented to be worshipped by them in such mean places as they could provide
for him: but when Emperors and Princes became Christian, and Christians under
them enjoyed peace and plenty, he expected from them glorious and sumptuous
Churches, neither was his expectation deceived: for though they were not able
to reach the beauty of the Temple of Jerusalem, the Jews themselves not being
able to match the first Temple; yet we find that Christians in building their
first Churches had an eye to that Temple: for though our novelists if they
chance to build a Church, (as they do sometime beyond the seas) will take any
model perhaps of a great hall or barn, rather than of the ancient Christian
Churches; yet the first builders of Christian Churches even for the form of
fabric did in some sort imitate that Temple of Jerusalem. For, as in that
Temple there were four distinctions, the Porch which was called Salomons;
Atrium or the Court, whither the people came; Sanctum the holy place, whither
the Priests came; and the Sanctum Sanctorum the holy of holiests, into which
only the high Priests were to enter: So in the old Christian Churches (though
not for the same uses) were four distinctions; the outmost place of all
answerable to the Porch, unto which infidels or such as were excommunicate and
cast out of the Church might come, but no further; into the next place as it
were in Atrio, came the penitents, such as did penance, but no further; the
third place was the body of the Church, which we may call Sanctum, and whither
the people came to be partakers of Gods worship; and the fourth was as it were
the Sanctum Sanctorum, the enclosed place where the Altar or Communion Table
stood, into which none did enter but such as were in holy Orders, and had power
to consecrate the blessed Elements; so great followers were the Primitive
Christians of antiquity, rather than incliners unto novelty.

Now to move our times (in which some pull down as fast as our Fathers built,
and deface as much as they did deck) a little to look to Gods houses and
buildings, I shall briefly offer two things to your consideration. First, the
great estimation which God has of these houses; next, the high esteem in
which men have had them: so that if we either fear God, or reverence men,
there can no argument be wanting God his estimation of Temples appears by his
delivering unto Moses the pattern of the Tabernacle even to the least pin,
which was to be but a pattern of the Temple; by not giving way to David his
building of the Temple, although a man according to Gods own heart, only for
that exception of blood which God had against him, and not of blood unlawfully
shed, but in lawful wars, and undertaken by God his own commandment; for
this exception was laid against David, before the matter of Vriah; by his
accepting the Temple at Salomons hands in the very time of the dedication of
it, filling it so with his presence in the cloud, that the Priests were
interrupted in performing the rites of consecration; by promising to put his
name there for ever, and to fix his eyes and heart there perpetually, by
performing this his promise of presence* for many times he appeared between
the Cherubins, and in that Temple did inspire diverse with the spirit of
prophecy; by ordering that the most precious and holy things should be kept in
it; the Arc of the Testament, the Tables of the Law, Aarons rod, the heavenly
fire, Vrim and Thummim, etc. By threatening the destruction of that Temple, as
the greatest judgment that should ever befall them, (as indeed it was) for
after the destruction of that Temple they ceased to be any more a people. And
as by God, so by men this Temple of all buildings had in the highest esteem,
Jerusalem in regard of it counted the joy of the whole earth; to this Temple
came all the people once in the year, and when they did not come, they powered
forth their supplications with their faces toward it: you know David his one
wish, although it was not granted him, that All his life long he might dwell in
the house of the Lord, and visit the beauty of his holy Temple; he accounted
the Sparrowes happy which might but hop and sing and lay their young about the
Altars of it; he accounted the meanest officer, even a doore-keeper in it
happier than they that lived in the Palaces of Princes: In a word, consider
the revenge which Christ (who was God) takes here upon the profaners of the
Temple, and the vast expense laid out upon it by David and Solomon who were
men, and we must needs see that high esteem in which that Temple was had both
by God and men.

But what is all this (will you say) to our Christian Churches? Very much; for
they are come in place of that Temple, as the Christian Religion is come in
place of the Jewish: that Temple was but a type of our Churches, as all that
service was a type of our Christ: We have an Altar, says the Apostle, and
therefore a Priesthood as that Temple had: there was the Arc of the Testament,
our Churches are the Arkes of two Testaments: of theirs, which was the old
Testament; and of another better than theirs, the new Testament: in our
Churches are the daily sacrifices of praise and prayer, the two Tables of the
Law, and they expounded and vindicated from false gloses and interpretations by
our Savior in the 5 of Math. which that Temple had not; in our Churches is
Aarons rod* that is, Ecclesiastical discipline; Vrim and Thummim in our
Priests: and above all, in our Churches is celebrated the commemorative
sacrifice of the most precious body and blood of the Son of God: no doubt
then to be made of Gods high esteem of Christian Churches built unto him. Now
how they have been honored by men, witness the infinite cost bestowed by our
forefathers in fabric and maintenance of them, the infinite privileges
granted by Christian Princes unto them; although the beginning of our age did
scatter as fast as the former age did gather; and the later laws of taking no
more from the Church, were far more necessary than those former laws, for
giving no more to it.

Whose charity then can be straightened when a house of God is to be enlarged;
when either it is to be built, or being built is to be kept from ruin? Can men
have summer and winter houses, and the Temple of God lie so, as it keeps out
neither summer Sun nor winter weather? the Temple of God I say, a name so
glorious, that even the most glorious; all the persons of the Trinity delight
to be called by it: God the Father, Revel. 21. 22. John saw no Temple in the
holy City, For the Lord God Almighty and the Lamb are the Temple of it. God
the Son, his person the Lamb in that place is called a Temple by Saint John,
his body by himself, Destroy this Temple, and I will build it up again in
three days. The Holy Ghost, although he be not called a Temple, yet Temples he
has, and delights to dwell in them, even our bodies, Know ye not that your
bodies are the Temples of the Holy Ghost? The sum of all is, houses are to be
built unto God, and being built, are highly to be honored, because they are
his houses by propriety: which I told you was the second particular in the
Church its name, and is now the next point to be spoken of, My house.

My house, that is, mine by propriety, and if so, then we must look to three
things. First, if the Church be Gods house, then Take heed to thy foot when
thou enterest into it, Eccles. 4. 17. do not rush rudely nor rashly into it,
but be sure you keep your distance, else you may be turned back with shame
enough, and sent home unjustified as the Pharisi^ was, because he kept not the
Publican his distance, who stood afar off and would not so much as lift up
his eyes toward heaven: How fearful (says Jacob) is this place, the Lord
was in it and I knew it not, it is nothing else but the house of God, and the
very gate of heaven. The truth then is, if the Church be my house, that is,
Gods, we must observe a reverend distance in all our approaches which we make
to God in it, else we run upon certain danger; are you in this house to speak
unto God by prayer? be sure you make a curtsie low enough with David, I am a
worm and no man: or if you will, a little lower with Abraham, Since dust and
ashes have begun to speak unto thee: else you may justly fear that your
prayers shall be turned into sin. Are you in this house to hear God speak
unto you by his Word read or preached? Be sure you keep your distance, as the
people were commanded at the hearing of the Law, else you know your danger, For
if so much as a beast shall touch the smoking mountain, it shall be stoned to
death, or thrust through with a dart. Are you in this house to converse with
God in the blessed Sacrament? Use first a reverent preparation, Let a man
examine himself, and so let him eat of that bread and drink of that cup; else
you know the danger, You shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord. For
observing this distance in Gods house, I will but name unto you two reasons.
First, we do not find in Scripture* that God has used to be familiar with any,
to entertain them, or be entertained by them, unless they have observed this
distance, and first prepared themselves for that interviewe or parlie. Before
God would speak one word to Moses on the back of Mount Horeb, he first
bids him put off his shoes, because the place on which he stood was holy
ground: when God delivered his Law to his people from the top of Mount Sinai,
he first commanded them to sanctify themselves three days before, that all
that while they might be the more reverently prepared to harken unto that which
God was to say unto them; so must we when we come into the house of God (if we
be to speak to him by prayer, or to hear him speak to us by his Word) put
off our shoes, that is, all worldly thoughts and affections; and sanctify our
selves, that is, put on all new and holy thoughts and affections. The second
reason is this: We do not find that God has ever yet suffered the unreverent
handlers, or lookers upon the places of his presence, to go away unpunished;
Vzza did but irreverently touch the Ark of the Lord, and the Lord presently
killed him; the men of Bethshemesh did but irreverently look into the Ark of the Lord, and the Lord presently slew fifty thousand of them: How few be they
in our times, who by observing this distance do declare that they believe the
Church to be Gods house, how many that come in without preparing themselves at
first by devotion and prayer? How many who clap on their hats when God is
speaking to them by his Word, I mean in the time when the very text is
reading? Nay the servant who will be uncovered before this master in his own
house, will many times be covered before him in Gods house; all which bewrays
that many men do either take the Church not to be my house, that is, Gods; or
(which is worse) Gods house not to be so good as their own.

Next, if the Church be my house, that is, Gods, then the zeal of the Church
must eat us up: to this we are warranted both by David and by Christ the Son
of David, The Zeal of thine house has eaten me up, says David; and in this
Christ showed himself truly to be the Son of David, for we do not find that
Christ in his life did ever use severity with his hands, but once; twice he did
it, but it was one and the same case, the profanation of the Temple: When he
was apprehended, bound, buffered, smitten, mocked, reviled, scourged, spit
upon, tortured, crucified, he bare all patiently, and As a sheep before the
slaughterer is dumb, so he opened not his mouth: but if he see the least
indignity offered to his Fathers house, his zeal bursteth out into a flame, he
sets his hand to the whip, and his tongue to the t^xt: When his Disciples
did see that fierceness of his in the 2. of John, they were astonished at it;
especially comparing it with his usual meekness at other times, when they
thought there was greater occasion offered; but at the 17 Verse of that Chapter
they were easily satisfied, when They remembered how it was written, The Zeal
of thine house has eaten me up. Now the best way to try whether we have this
zeal toward Gods house, is the comparative rule: if we express more
reverence in this house than in the house of any other man whosoever; if we be
more forward (according to our places) to punish an offense or irreverence in
this house, than those that are committed any where else; if we can be contented
to be at more cost for repairing and adorning this house, than if it were our
own: if not, then certainly either we do not believe the Church to be my
house, that is, Gods; or (which is worse) Gods house not to be so good as our
own.

Thirdly, if the Church be my house, that is, Gods, then no humane power may
take it from him; his title is like the Character of his Priesthood,
indelebilis; no time, no prescription can prejudice it: for if nullum tempus
occurrit Regi, if no time can prescribe against our King his title to the
Patronage of a Church, much less can it prescribe against his title who is the
King of Kings: Before thou buildedst a house to God, the ground and the cost
were thine own, and thou might have done with them what thou would, as
Peter told Ananias; but when thou have once given them to God, it is no more
thine, but my house: for as Gods gifts toward us are without repentance, so
ought our gifts toward God to be: He who among us shall kill himself, and
become fello de se, makes all his goods Deodands; and it is as true inverted,
he who has made any of his goods Deodands, and shall afterward do any act of
resumption, is fello de se, a murderer of himself, and a destroyer of his
own soul. Stories are full of their tragedies who any ways went about to
alter either the property or use of the Temple of Jerusalem; we know what
became of Antiochus after he set up the statue of Jupiter Olympius in it; upon
the Caldeans destruction of that Temple followed the loss of their Empire; the
Macedonians after their violation of it lost their Dominions; Pompey after his
coming up to the Sanctum or holy place, which was not lawful for him to do,
had never luckie day after; no more had Cassius after his profanation of it.
They who have meddled with the Christian Churches have not fared much better:
for they who have pulled down these houses of God, have found that withal
they have pulled down their own houses; and they who have built their own
houses where Gods house stood, have found that they have built upon sandy and
sinking ground, and that the Church-stones have crumbled their houses to
nothing, and sunk their estates irrecoverably. Now they who pervert Gods house
and turn it to any secular use, do deny it to be my house, that is, Gods, as
much as they who evert it and pull it down. It is a notable cunning of the
Devil, as to make us believe that God is a good fellow, and that we may
retain him in our hearts with our sins; so to make us believe that his house
is a house of good-fellowship, and that it may serve for other uses besides the
service of God; to lay lumber in, or things out of the way, in a Progress time
to serve for a Wardrobe, in the country for Iuries of Leets to sit in and
consult about their verdicts, and most commonly at the Communion Table to make
their Sesses, not only for the poor (which is a Church-duty) but also for all
other compositions, where they seldom meet without wrangling, and I am afraid
many times not without swearing: But if it be Gods house, he must and will have
it alone, or not at all: That passage of the Philistims setting the Ark of God
in the Temple of Dagon, is very remarkable; one would wonder why God should
plague the Philistims for it; for I am persuaded the Philistims made account
they had done the Arc the greatest honor that they could imagine, by setting
it in the Temple of their own god: yet God tumbled down Dagon, smote the
Philistims, and would have consumed them if they had not dismissed his Arc:
What meant this? Only to tell the world that with God it is all one to be
turned out of doors, and to be lodged by an Idol: Let God have his house
alone, there he will dwell: make it thine as well as mine; that is, make it
serve for thine use and the service of God too, thou diseasest God and turnest
him out of doors* The reason is, because houses built to God are only to be
consecrated to him and his service, which is now the next point to be spoken
of, I called it the Churches surname, shall be called the house of prayer.

In it I told you of two particulars. First, Gods house is to be called, or as
it were christened, that is, consecrated and dedicated to God and his service,
my house shall be called. Secondly, among all the parts of Gods service, it is
especially to be consecrated to prayer, shall be called the house of prayer. For
the first, that the consecra^ion and solemn dedication of Temples and Churches
is very ancient, it is argument enough, that in all the three languages we have
a proper word for it, in the Hebrew (Chanucah) from Chanac, which signifies to
dedicate a thing when it is finished, in Greek (...) encoenia from (...) and
(...) which signifies an initiation or making of a thing new, the word used by
John 10. 22. for that feast of dedication at which Christ was present, and then
the Latin words dedicatio and consecratio: Consecration or setting apart
persons or things to God both by God himself and men, is very ancient. God
consecrated to himself our first parents, and made their marriage a kind of
Sacrament of the union and spiritual marriage between Christ and his Church,
as the Apostle testifies, Ephesians. 5. so he consecrated to himself the
posterity of Seth, of Jacob, every male which first opened the womb, at last
the Jews had delivered unto them among other parts of the Ceremonial Law, the
rites of dedication of certain persons, vessels, vestures: Now for the solemn
dedication of the houses of God, we have first the dedication of the Tabernacle
which was but the pattern of the Temple, Exodus 40. then of the Temple it self
we have three solemn dedications recorded in Scripture: the first by Solomon,
Kings 1. 8. the second by Zorobabel and others, Ezra 6. and related by Josephus
antiq. lib. 11. cap. 4. the last by Judas Macchabeus after the defeat of
Antiochus, which was indeed especially of the Altar, of which we read Match. 1.
4. and Joseph. antiq. lib. 12. cap. 10. and this last was the feast of
dedication which Christ honored with his presence, John 10. for it is plain
by the text both that it was in winter, and anniversarie, neither of which is
true of the two former dedications: Among Christians their Churches used ever
to be consecrated. Eusebius. lib. 9. cap. 10. of his History, and in the life of
Constantine describes unto us the dedication of that Church which Constantine
first built at Jerusalem. When Churches at the first were rare, the authority
of consecration came from the Prince and Magistrate, but the rites of
consecration in the Jewish Church were ever performed by the Priests; in the
Christian by the Bishops: the first dedication of the Temple of Jerusalem done
by the authority of Solomon, the second of Zorobabel, the third of Judas
Macchabeus; but all of them performed by the Priests: so among Christians, the
first Christian Church at Jerusalem consecrated by the authority of
Constantine, but by the ministry of Eusebius: that of Alexandria by the same
authority, but by the ministry of Athanasius: The rites of consecration are
left to the Church and her Bishops; only there be some of them of the Quorum,
without which there cannot well be any consecration: as first, Churches ought
to be consecrated by prayer; for Solomon his dedication is conceived in the
very form of a prayer: next, Churches are to be consecrated by reading of the
Word; for at the dedication of the Temple the law was ever read: Thirdly,
Churches are to be dedicated with the celebration of the Sacrament of our
Savior his most precious body and blood, as in all the three dedications of
the Temple ever sacrifice was offered: But above all, Churches must only be
consecrated and dedicated to God, not to Saints, Angels, or any created
Patrons: But may not the Churches of Christians be called by the names of
Saints and Martyrs, as S. Mary's, S. Peter's, etc? Yes, they may be patrini, but
not patres, godfathers, but not fathers of our Churches; as men are contented
their children should be called by the names of their friends whom they choose
for godfathers, but will have themselves still only acknowledged for fathers:
so God allows that his Saints and Martyrs should be susceptores, godfathers
of Christian Churches, especially if it shall not be done as now it is in the
Church of Rome, to derogate from God his Patronage: and no particular office or
service shall be allowed to be said in the Church to that Saint after which it
is named. The truth is, in the Primitive Church, Christian Churches were called
by the names of Saints and Martyrs for two reasons, the equity of both which
holds still. First, to testify their thankfulness to God for the benefits
which the Church had received by the ministry of these Saints. Secondly and
principally, God in the infancy of the Church did show many miracles at the
Tombs and Sepulchers of the Martyrs; and therefore the Christians did there
erect Churches, and call them by the names of those Martyrs, out of a desire to
honor those whom God had so much honored, and the world so much despised. The
sum then of all is, Christian Churches may be called by the names of Saints
and Martyrs, but must be dedicated only to God and his service; and as to all
parts of his service, so especially to prayer: which I told you was the second
particular in the Churches surname, and is now the next point to be spoken of,
shall be called the house of prayer.

Why not the house of Sacrifice, Sacraments, Prophesying, Preaching? Because
all these are worth nothing unless they be seasoned with prayer: It is not to
be passed over with slight observation, that although all these, except their
Sacraments, were performed in the Jewish Temple, and all of them are performed
in Christian Churches; yet the duties of the Temple most commonly have their
denomination in Scripture from that of prayer: Solomon in the dedication of his
Temple (as he conceived it in the form of a prayer) especially beggeth of God
his attention to the prayers that should be made in that place, and the whole
tenor of his dedication runs upon it, and God his answer to Solomon is
accordingly for prayer: Anna in the 2. of Luke is said not to have gone out of
the Temple, but to have continued in it fasting and praying; In Luke 2. 37. the
Pharisie and the Publican went up to the Temple to pray: Acts 3. 1. Peter and
John went up to the Temple about the hour of prayer, being the ninth hour;
which to the Jews was the third hour before the setting of the Sun, the very
hour of the evening Sacrifice; here the Temple is called the house of prayer,
and the Christian Churches accordingly were called Oratories; why all this? To
teach us two things. First, the excellency of prayer among all other religious
duties. Secondly, the excellency of public prayer above all other private
prayers made any where else. For the first, I will not in a Sermon enter upon
the common place of prayer, only this: you shall not find in Scripture any man
registered for one of God his special friends and favorites, who was not
likewise a man of prayers and supplications, Moses, Abraham, Job, David; but
above all look upon Christ, so given to prayer, that as he was called by the
Prophet vir dolorum, a man of sorrows, so he might have been called vir
clamorum, a man of cryings and supplications; for he used them at home and
abroad, upon the Mount, in the Garden, upon the Cross dying, nay after his
death; which makes highly for the commendation of prayer; Christ was a Priest,
now the office of the Priest consisted in these two things, in offering up
sacrifice for the sins of the people, and in offering up prayers for the
sins of the people: that part of Christ his Priesthood which concerned
sacrifice expired with his life, for he offered up the perfect sacrifice of his
body once for all, but so did not that part of his Priesthood which concerns
prayer; for as he died praying, so he still continues a Priest in regard of
prayer, two ways. First, because he himself at the right hand of God still
makes intercession for us, Heb. 7. 25. Wherefore he is utterly able to save
all them that come to him, since he ever lives to make intercession for us.
Secondly, because as our Advocate he offers up into the bosom of his Father
all the Prayers which we make to God in his name, Rev. 8. 3. It is said of
Christ the Angel of the covenant, that he offers up many sweet odours, which
are the prayers of the Saints.

Secondly, the Temple is called the house of prayer, as to show us the
excellency of prayer in general, so in particular to express unto us the
excellency of public prayer in the Temple. And here I am sorry that the
iniquity of the times should put me upon two comparisons which to some will
seem odious: the one is between prayer in the Temple, and preaching in the
Temple: the other between prayer in the Temple, and prayer any where else. For
preaching, far be it from any Christian to under-value the holy and blessed
Ordinance of God: only I would have men, as upon preaching, so likewise to set
a true value upon prayer in the Temple. There is a generation of fools risen
up in the world, who think that all religion consists in preaching and
hearing of Sermons, and will run some miles to hear them: But for the public
prayers of the Church, they will hardly cross the street; but cast themselves
to come into the Church about the ending of Divine Service, and beginning of
Sermon: now S. Paul's question poseth them all, If all were hearing, where were
seeing, and the rest of the senses? so does this name which Christ here gives
to the Temple, the house of prayer. But they will say, can there be too much
preaching or hearing? Yes, there may be too much of any thing: Take this for a
rule, no truth can be repugnant to another truth in any science whatsoever:
much less can Theological truths be repugnant one to another, and therefore
all Theological truths must be expounded as they may stand in gross one by
another: He that has said, Be swift to hear, has likewise said, Pray
continually, and he that provideth not for his family is worse than an
Infidel: Men then must so hear, as they neglect not prayer, as that in week
days, if their families be sustained by their trade and calling, they neglect
not that, to run after Sermons; for there is no religious work which may not
be over-done: we are commanded to give alms, but if one shall give all he
has, knowing that he must become chargeable to others, it is sin, and that
voluntary poverty which we condemn in many of the Mendicant Friars: Fasting is
a religious duty, but if one shall abstain so much, as he knows he shall be
accessory to his own death, it is a sin, as Gregory Nazianzen complained of
his sister Gorgonia: Even prayer it self, which I am now commending, when it
is over-done, it is called by our Savior, vain babbling and idle repetitions:
So for hearing, we ought to hear on that day which God has set apart for his
service, all excuses laid aside; and on the week days too, omit no good
occasion of hearing, so far as our callings and places will permit; but so as
we never omit the frequenting of the Divine Service and Public Prayers of the
Church.

Next from this, that the Temple is called the house of prayer, we may see the
excellency of public prayer in the Temple, above private prayer any where else:
which I pray you may not be taken as spoken any way in derogation from private
prayer, to which I find our Savior was so much addicted, as appears by his
prayer in the Garden, which he powered forth in a private place, a garden; at a
private time, in the night, privately and alone by himself; for he was
separated not only from the rest of his Disciples, but even from the three
Disciples that entered with him, by the space of a stones cast: Sure none can
speak against private prayer, but they who never felt that sweetness which
the soul of a Christian finds in her private retirement, familiarity and
conversation with God: You who do use it, use it still; for besides many other,
you shall find these three great conveniences in it. First, an easy ravishing
of the mind of a Christian: for if that definition of prayer which the Fathers
give us be true, that prayer is nothing else but the lifting up or ravishing of
a man's mind from all worldly things toward God; how can the mind of man be
more easily lifted up from worldly things, than when being alone with his God,
he is remooved from the sight and sense of them? Secondly, in private prayer we
find greater security from vainglory, which though perhaps in public prayer
we do not affect, yet we do not know how the Devil may spice our prayers with
pride, when we think that every one is looking upon us. Thirdly, in private
prayer we may use greater freedom and liberty with God in expressing of our
wants; as broken words, crying, ejaculatorie voices, confused sighs, etc. which
though they be acceptable to God, yet are not seemly nor decent before men; and
therefore may be used with greater freedom in private, than they can be in
public prayer: For these and many more such reasons, follow Christ his
counsel, Enter into thy chamber and shut the door behind thee, that is, give
your selves to private prayer.

But much more, be sure never to neglect public prayer, to which we find
likewise that our Savior was so much addicted; take for instance those prayers
which he powered forth publicly at his death, for they were made at a public
time, the time of the Passover, when until that time twelvemoneth there was
not so great a confluxe of people to be at Jerusalem to hear; in a public
place, the place of execution, large and able to receive great multitudes: and
that they might yet be heard the better, made upon the top of a hill, Mount
Calvarie: nay yet, upon the top of a beacon which stood upon the top of that
hill; nay yet, that they might be the better heard, as it is said in the
Gospel, that he spoke his last word consummatum est, with a loud voice, so
says the Apostle Heb. 5. 7. that he offered up his prayers there clamore
valid^, Who offered up prayers and supplications with strong cryings and tears,
which place the Fathers expound of his prayers upon the Cross among the rest;
and here I think public prayer is sufficiently warranted. And if you shall
say, what is all this to public prayer in the Temple? I answer, very much; for
that place in which our Lord dying prayed, was a Temple: the reason is this,
sacrifice was only to be offered up in the Temple; Christ therefore in this
place offering up the sacrifice of his own body, made it truly to be a Temple:
truly I say, because the Temple of Jerusalem in which the daily sacrifice was
offered up, was nothing else but a type of this very place in which was to be
offered this perfect sacrifice once for all; as therefore Christ called his
body a Temple, Destroy this Temple, and I will build it up in three days, so
offering up the sacrifice of his body in this place, he might challenge God to
hear the prayers which he should make in this place, by virtue of that promise
which he had made, to hear the prayers which should be made in the Temple: And
Christ praying in this place, was quit with the Jews in my text; for this
place was Golgotha, the place of dead men's sculs; that is, the place where lay
the bodies of executed malefactors and thieves: so that look how much the
Jews had dishonored the Temple in my text, so much did Christ honor Mount
Calvarie. As they had made the house of God, which was the house of prayer, to
be a den of thieves, so Christ made Golgotha which was a den for the dead
bodies of thieves, to become the house of prayer.

The excellency of public prayer is well set forth by our Savior, Math. 18.
in that excellent rule which he gives for public prayer, for that rule
includes three reasons why we should give our selves to it. The first is, the
consent and agreement of Christian minds in prayer, a thing most acceptable to
God, Verse. 18. If two of you shall agree upon any thing in earth, it shall be
given unto you. Secondly, because of the assembling of the Saints together in
one place, which meeting even of their bodies is a thing most delightful unto
God, in the next verse, For where two or three are gathered together, there
will I be in the midst of them. Thirdly, because of the unity of faith which
is most pleasant unto God, the people assembling themselves in the name of
Christ, in the same verse, where two or three are gathered together in my name,
there will I be in the midst of them: to these reasons we may add this, that
the public prayers of the Church are far more excellently conceived and penned
than any private extemporary prayers can be: for there is more pith in one of
the well conceived Collects of the Church, than in many of those pitiful
fellows more pitiful bablings and idle repetitions, in which (as our Savior
speaks) they think to be heard for their length, whereas prayer consists
not in length, but strength, which is to be had in the well compacted Collects
of the Church. Have you not heard some of these men in their extemporary
exclamations, or declamations rather, (for sometimes their prayers are libels)
talk to God, not only with that familiarity, but homeliness, that you would
not have endured them to talk to you? And perhaps they who stand now so much
only for extemporary prayer and preaching too in the Church, ere it be long
(for I see no reason why it may not hold in this, as well as in the other two)
will venture and put in for extemporary singing in the Church, and then they
will make themselves ridiculous indeed. The sum of all is, although thou
give thy self never so much to private prayer, which is well done, yet do
not neglect the public prayers of the Church, in the Church, which is here
called the house not of knowledge, righteousness, mercy, preaching, hearing,
etc. although it be all these, but the house of prayer. So that those men who
do wilfully excommunicate themselves by not coming to the prayers of the
Church, but only to the Sermon, or usually go out of it before the blessing or
last prayer be pronounced, since the Church is called the house of prayer, they
are like them who come unto a school, but will not learn, to a battle, but
will not fight, to a bed, but will not sleep, to a feast, but will not feed:
all which tends nothing to any derogation from private prayer: For as God
dispersed the places of refuge throughout the land to his people, so thick and
at such distances, as the offenders might reach some of them by night, lest
they should be over-taken by the avengers of their blood, but yet appointed the
Temple for the only place whither afterward the offenders were to resort, and
to expiate their offense by sacrifice: so for our sins which we daily and
hourly commit, God allows and requires us daily to have refuge to him by
private prayer, but so, that we neglect not to reconcile our selves to him for
these sins by our public prayers in the Temple, which is the house of
prayer; for whosoever robs God and his Temple of this honor which is due
unto him in it, does what in him lies in some sense to make the house of
prayer a den of thieves; which is now the next point to be spoken of, I called
it the Churches nicke-name, but you have made it a den of thieves.

In unfolding of which part (if time had suffered me) many would have been
found thieves and robbers who pass for virtuous and honest men: Hardly would
any pretense have served their turn: For the money changers and dove-sellers,
and the Priests suffering them to sell in the Court, (for it was in the Atrium
or Court only that they sold, not in the Temple it self, although it be here
called so, because it was consecrated and holy ground as the Temple was) had as
specious a pretense for this their merchandising as might be, even the pretense
of that Law, Deuteronomy. 14. 24. whereby it was permitted to the people for the more
easy carriage, to change their tithes and offerings into money, and with that
money at Jerusalem to buy the like: Now for this purpose, to fit such people
with sacrifices and offerings, did the Priests pretend that they suffered the
money changers and dove-sellers to set up their shops there, although indeed
they did it to get money for their standing, and the shopkeepers to make gain
of the people; and therefore our Savior here calls their getting plain thee
very and robbery: But the time will not give me leave to arraigne these thieves
now. To God the Father, God the Son, God the Holy Ghost be ascribed all
honor and praise, now and ever. Amen.

FINIS.

