THE CIVIL Conversation of M. Steeuen Guazzo written first in Italian, and
now translated out of French by George Petty, divided into four books.

In the first is contained in general, the fruits that may be reaped by
conversation, and teaching how to know good company from ill.

In the second, the manner of conversation, meet for all persons, which shall
come in any company, out of their own houses, and then of the particular
points which ought to be observed in company between young men and old,
Gentlemen and Yeomen, Princes and private persons, learned and unlearned,
Citizens and Strangers, Religious and Secular, men and women.

In the third is perticularly set forth the orders to be observed in
conversation within doors, between the husband and the wife, the father and
the son, brother and brother, the Master and the servant.

In the fourth, the report of a banquet.

Imprinted at London by Richard Watkins. 1581.

To the honorable, and his very good Lady, the Lady Norrice, GEORGE PETTY
wishes contentation in all things.
GOOD Madame, the force of virtue is such, that it purchases to those which
are endued with it, the good will of those which are strangers unto them (...)
much more must it make me duetifully affectioned to your Ladyship, who am
neither stranger to you, nor unacquainted with your noble and virtuous
disposition: in sign of which my duty and affection I have presumed to
present unto you the first sight of this my translation, humbly dedicating it
to your honorable protection, knowing that none will more willingly undertake
the defense of learning, then those who are endued with singular wit and
learning, and thinking none more worthy to receive the first fruits of
learning, then those who bear especial favor to learning. I will not here
enter into the wide field of your virtues, for that I know you take more
pleasure in doing well, then in hearing well, and for that the right Corrall
needs no coulouring, neither the fine Marble painting, neither can my pen
possibly procure more honor to your name, then it has alredie gotten, partly
by your own doings, partly by the renowned deeds of the noble* Gentlemen
your sons, of whom, some are furnished with such wisdom, with such
discretion, and with such sufficiency every way, that our Prince and Country
cannot spare their good service: some are endued with such valor, that our
Country is too little to contain the greatness of their minds, some with
such manly prowess, even in their childishe years, that it stood our
Country of late in no small steed, in repressing and subduing our rebellious
enemies. And though some of them like Alexander the great, seek new
Countries, and new worlds to show their valiancie in, yet they remain most
ready to do our country service, whenever it shall please our Prince to
command their return. And would to God it might please her Majesty with
speed to command it: for such rare jewels are well worth the wearing, such
worthy Captains are necessary to be had in these dangerous times: especially
being such whose valiancie is sufficiently known to all men, and whose
fidelity may be sufficiently warranted to her Highness, by the good and
trusty service of their noble father my Lord Norrice, both within this
Realm, and out of the Realm, and of their worthy grandfather, my Lord
Williams, both before her Majesty came to the Crown, and after: and by the
rare virtue which they have showed, and the faithful service they have done
where they are: Whose credit is so great, whose name so renowned, that it
shall never die, while the low Countries, while Macklin, while Stenewike, no
not while the world stands. And if any name within these late years, have by
their valiant deeds won honor to England (without derogation be it spoken)
it is the name of the Norrices. And if any parents in England may count
themselves happy in their children, it is my Lord Norrice, it is your
Ladyship. You may compare with Olimpias for her Alexander, with Hecuba for her
Hector, with Thetis for her Achilles. And if you be asked where your jewels
are, you may with Cornelia point to your children, you may point to that rare
jewel which you have continually about you, who both in virtue and beauty
excels the richest Diamond, and the most precious Pearl that is. But I am
entering into a matter without end, therefore I will stay at the beginning:
humbly requesting you to accept in good part this small proof of my good will,
and to assure your self of my readiness to do you service in greater matters
when it shall please you to employ me. From my lodging this sixth of February.
1581.

Your Ladyships redily to com^^^nd, George Petty.

The Preface to the Readers.
Having (gentle Readers) by reason of a trifling work of mine (which, by
reason of the lightness of it, or at least of the keeper of it, flewe abroad
before I knew of it) already won such fame, as he which fyred the Temple of
Dianae, I thought it stood me upon, to purchase to my self some better fame
by some better work, and to counteruayle my former Vanity, with some formal
gravity. And though I know all fame to be dangerous, for that if it be good,
envy follows it, and if it be ill, shame accompanyeth it: yet, seeing report
once spread, cannot be revoked, and h^^yng already past the Pikes in a
dangerous conflict without wound of ho^^ (such was your courtesy) I doubt
not now but to escape a few straggling shot in a light skirmishe, without so
much as bearyng the discharge of their Pieces: for the men which will assail
me, are in deed rather to be counted friendly foes, then deadly enemies, as
those who will neither mislyke with me, nor with the matter which I shall
present unto them, but tendryng, as it were, my credit, think it convenient
that such as I am (whose profession should chiefly be arms) should either
spend the time in writing of Books, or publyshe them being written. Those
which mislyke study or learning in Gentlemen, are some fresh water Soldiers,
who think that in war it is the body which only must bear the brunt of all,
not knowing that the body is ruled by the mind, and that in all doubtful and
dangerous matters, it is the mind only which is the man: but having showed
else where how necessary learning i^ for Soldiers, I ad only, that if we in
England shall frame our selves only for war, if we be not very well Oyled, we
shall hardly keep our selves from rustyng, with such long conti^^ance of
peace, it has pleased God to bless us. Those which mislike that a Gentleman
should publish the fruits of his learning, are some curious Gentlemen, who
think it most commendable in a Gentleman, to cloak his art and skill in
every thing, and to seem to do all things of his own mother vvitte as it
were: not considering how we deserve no praise for that, which God or
Nature has bestovved upon us, but only for that, which we purchase by our
own industry: and if you shall chance to enter into reasonyng with them, they
will at the second word make protestation that they are no Scholars:
whereas notwithstanding they have spent all their time in study. Why Gentlemen
is it a shame to show to be that, which it is a shame not to be? In diverse
things, nothing so good as Learning. You are desirous to seem to be that,
which you are not, and in Learning, the best thing of all others, are you
afearde to show to be that, which you are? Alas you will be but ungentle
Gentlemen, if you be no Scholars: you will do your Prince but simple service,
you will stand your Country but in slender stead, you will bring your
selves but to small preferment, if you be no Scholars. Can you counsel your
Prince wisely, foresee dangers prouidently, govern matters of state
discreetely, without Learning? no, experience must then be your guide, which
will be but a blind one: it must be your Scholemaister. but you shall find it
a dangerous one. To come lower, can you discourse with Strangers, inquire the
state of foreign Countries, give entertainment to Ambassadors, being no
Scholars? no surely, unless it be with dum shows and signs: like as of late
a pleasant Gentleman (who could have spoken sufficiently, if he had been put
to it) being amongst others commanded to ride to meet an Ambassadoure that
was coming to the Court, at his return a Noble man asked him merrily, what he
said to the Ambassadoure when he met him: nothing (said he) but kissed my Horses
main, and came my way. To come lowest of all, Can you so much as tell your
Misstresse a fine tale, or delight her with pleasant device, being unlearned?
no it must needs either be altogether unsavory, or else seasoned with the
salt of others: and whether think you it more shame that you should show to
have of your own, or that she should know you filche from others? You know
Caesar was a brave Gentleman, but yet he was a Scholar, but yet he wrote
Books, but yet he came in print. Marcus Aurelius was an Emperor, but he was
learned, and set forth learned works. Therefore (Gentlemen) never deny your
selves to be Scholars, never be ashamed to show your learning, confess it,
profess it, embrace it, honor it: for it is it which honors you, it is only
it which makes you men, it is only it which makes you Gentlemen: And mark
this when you will, if there be any in any place, which seeks to come up, or
benefit him self by flattery, by briberie, by slavery, by vallanie, I dare
warrant you he is altogether unlearned: for having no good parts, no good
gifts in him which may prefer him, he flies to those sinister shyftes as
his surest stays: whereby you see that it is Learning which accomplisheth a
Gentleman, and the want of it which blemisheth him: and that neither comeliness
of personage, neither gayness of garments, neither any exterior Ornaments
are to be compared to the lineamentes o^ Learning, without which, though a man
shake the feather after the best fashion, and take upon him never so bygly* he
shall never be accounted of amongst the wise, nor never be filed on the roale
of right and sufficient Gentlemen. And this I hope will satisfy those which
mislyke that Gentlemen should publishe the fruits of their study, especially
seeing thereby Learning is advanced, and a great number pleasured and
profited: and seeing the only way to win immortality, is either to do things
worth the writing, or to write things worthy the readyng? And if they
obiecte that that seeking of immortality, is a sign of vain glory: to
answer them plainly and humanely, I am flat of this mind, that they which
pass not of praise, will never do any thing worthy praise. There are some
others yet who will set light by my labors, because I write in Englysh: and
those are some nice Trauaylours, who return home with such quaesie stomachs,
that nothing will down with them but French, Italian, or Spanishe, and though
a work be but meanly written in one of those tongues, and finely translated
into our Language, yet they will not stick far to prefer the Original
before the Translation: the cause is partly, for that they cannot so soon
epsy faults in a foreign Tongue as in their own, which makes them think
that to be curraunt, which is but course, and partly for that strange things
do more delyght them, then that which they are daily used to: but they
consider not the profit which comes by readyng things in their own Tongue,
whereby they shall be able to conceive the matter much sooner, and bear it
away far better, then if they read it in a strange Tongue, whereby also they
shall be enabled to speak, to discourse, to write, to indite, properly, fitly,
finely, and wisely, but the woorst is, they think that impossible to be done
in our Tongue: for they count it barren, they count it barbarous, they count it
unworthy to be accounted of: and, which is worse, as I my self have heard
some of them, they report abroad, that our Country is barbarous, our manners
rude, and our people uncivil: and when I have stood with them in the
comparison between other Countries and ours, and poynted with my finger to
many gross abuses, used in the places where we have been, when by no reason
they have been able to defend them, they have shronke in their neck, and told
me that it was the fashyon of the Country: not considering that the manners and
fashions of each Country, are the only thing that make it counted barbarous or
civil, good or bad. But for our Country, I am persuaded that those which know
it, and love it, will report it for the ciuilest Country in the world: and if
it be thought to be otherwise by strangers, the disorders of those traueylers
abroad are the chief cause of it. And to speak but of the lyghtest, their
envying one another, their deprauing one another, their flowing one another,
their falling out one with another, their fighting one with another in the open
street (as with blushyng I have often beheld in Paris) their contemning of
their Country fashions, their apish imitation of every outlandish Ass in
their gestures, behauour, and apparel, are the only causes that make Strangers
count our Country and our people barbarous: for at home it is well known that
we live in laws as orderly, in manners as decently, in apparel as co^^ly, in
diet as delicately, in lodging as curiously, in buildinges as sumptuously, in
all things as abundantly, and every way as ciuilly, as any Nation under
Heaven. For the barbarousnesse of our tongue, I must likewise say that it is
much the worse for them, and some such curious f^llovves as they are* (...) if
one (...) to derive any word from the Latin, which is insolent to their
ears (as perchance they will take that phrase to be) they foorthvvith make a
jest at it, and term it an lukehorne term. And ^^ough for my part I use those
vv^ords as little as any* ^et I know no reason why I should not use them, and I
find it a fault in myself that I do not use them: for it is in deed the r^^dy
way to (...) our tongue, and make it copious, and it is the way which all
tongues have taken to enrich them selves: For take the Latin words from the
Spanish tongue, and it shall be as barren as most part of their Country: take
them from the Italian, and you take away in a manner the whole tongue: take
them from the French, and you mar the grace of it: yea take from the Latin
it self the words derived from the Greek, and it shall not be so flowing
and flourishing as it is. Wherefore I marvel how our english tongue has
crack it credit, that it may not borrow of the Latin as well as other
tongues: and if it have broken, it is but of late, for it is not unknown to
all men how many words we have fetched from thence within these fevve
years, which if they should be all counted inkepot terms, I know not how
we should speak any thing without blacking our mouths with ink: for what
word can be more plain then this word plain, and yet what can come more
near to the Latin? What more manifest, then manifest? and yet in a manner
Latin: What more commune then rare, or less rare then commune, and yet both
of them coming of the Latin? But you will say, long use has made these
words curraunt: and why may not use do as much for these words which we
shall now derive? Why should not we do as much for the posterity, as we
have received of the antiquity? and yet if a thing be of it self ill, I see
not how the oldnesse of it can make it good, and if it be of it self good, I
see not how the nevvnesse of it can make it naught: Whereupon I infer, that
those words which your selves confess by use to be made good, are good the
first time they are uttered, and therefore not to be iested at, nor to be
misliked. But how hardly soever you deal with your tongue, how barbarous
soever you count it, how little soever you esteem it, I durst my self
undertake (if I were furnished with Learning otherwise) to write in it as
copiouslye for variety, as compendiously for brevity, ^s choycely for ^oordes
as pithily for sentences* as pleasauntly for figu^^* and every way as
eloquently, as any writer should do in any vu^gar tongue whatsoever. Thus
having (as I hope) satisfied my curious enemies, I am to ^craue ^he good will
of my courteous friends desiring ^ou (gentle Reader) to accept in good part
these my labors, which ^f they shall l^ke you, I shall count my gay^^ great
if not, yet must I needs count my l^sse but light, in that the doing of it,
kept me from idleness^ a thing so dangerous to young Gentlemen, that I wish
you al, above al things to avoid it: And so fare you well, from my Lodgeing
near Paul's.

Yours to employ George Petty.
GEntle Readers, I have supplied diverse things out of the Italian original,
which were left out by the French translator, with what judgment. I refer to
your judgment* I have included the places within two stars* as you may see
throughout the Book. I have not published the fourth Book, for that it
contains much triflyng matter in it. Farewell.



The first book of Civil Conversation, by Master Steven Guazzo. Containing
in general, the fruits that may be reaped by conversation, and teaching how
to know good company from ill.
PROEME.
I Went the last year to Saluce to do my duty to the most famous and
excellent Lord Jews Gonzaga Duke of Neuers, my old master and friend,
being very glad that he was come into Italy, Lieuetenant general of the most
Christian king Charles the ix. A degree which no doubt was due unto him: for
were it so, that he had not heretofore won it by means of his own valor
and service done to the king for the space of xxii. years, and namely, the
day wherein fighting valiantly, being but xix. years old, he was taken
prisoner at the battle of S. Quintance, yet it might suffice to make him
worthy of a charge so great as that, the blood which he has shed, not eight
months since at his return into France amongst the enemies of the
Catholic faith, and the wounds which yet at this day put us in some doubt of
his life and recovery. Now to return to my purpose, I found there the
gentleman my brother William, who seemed to me to be altogether changed (and
yet I had seen him not past two years before in France) he was become so
weak, lean, and fallen away, by the hard handling of a very long quartane
Ague, and of other great distemperatures of his body: which as he bewailed and
bewraied unto me, I could not for my life (seeing him in such piteous case,
and hearing him draw out his words so softly and so weakly) keep the tears
out of my eyes. For I not only love him as a younger brother, but honor him as
if he were the eldest: but that my pity might not make him think worse of
himself, I forthwith withstood my self, and with a more courageous
countenance, I began to put him in hope that he might recover his health, so
soon as he should see his friends and parents, who did earnestly look for
him, and so soon as he might have the advice and counsel of some good
Physician of that City there. Whither not long after the Duke being come to
see the most excellent Princes Leonor of Austria his cosen, and understanding
the just desire he had to see again our house, he was content with his
departure, and to let him be here for the space of six days. Thereupon we
thinking good to assemble the most excellent Physicians of this City, he
feeling himself by this time weery of the purgations he had already taken, and
besides the Winter approaching, thought best to defer this cure until the
Spring time, what time he hoped to be in Italy, with his Masters leave: not
only to seek remedy for his sickness, and to preserve himself from greater
evil, but also to pass the rest of his life in quietness. While he was in
this deliberation, in comes Master Anniball Magnoca^alli our neighbor,
as well in house as in heart, who besides the name he has gotten of an
excellent Philosopher and Physician, for the diversity of Arts wherewith he is
endued, is counted in the number of those which are called Generals, and by his
good behavior makes himself so acceptable, that I marvel nothing at all if
in so little time which he remained with the Gentleman, he stirred up in his
heart by his delightful devise, an extreme desire to enjoy longer time his
pleasant company. Neither was master Anniball less glad to have found my
brother according to his mind: Whereupon drawn by a soden and mutual
affection, they gave occasion each to other to visit one another so often as
conveniently they might. And so great was the courtesy of the Physician, that
not suffering my brother to take the pains to visit him, he came the next
day, and found him at the Table, but new dyned. After that, withdrawing
themselves into a little closet, where I use to have a few small books,
rather for a show then for study, they there passed a great part of the day
(which they continued the three next days following) with many notable
discourses, which my brother to pleasure took recount unto me in the evening
following: and for that I thought them so well seasoned, that they might long
time be preserved to the profit of posterity, ever since my brothers
departure, until this present, I have been gathering together their discourses,
which in effect were like to these which follow here.

Guazzo. Anniball.
I Greatly give GOD thanks (Master Annibal) for that having visited me with
a long, and perchance a curelesse disease, to cleanse my wretched soul of
some wicked humor, he ministers also means unto me, sometimes whereby I may
pass away my evil with less annoy, as this day I doubt not but I shall have
by means of your acceptable presence, whereof I receive more assistance and
contentment than I am able to express.

Annib. I have cause (Master Guazzo) to think well of you, for many causes,
but chiefly I feel my self forced thereto, for that I see you take your
sickness of the hands of God (most good and full of power, from whom all
things proceed) and to show a Christian modesty in laying the fault on your
self: that certesse is a thought suitable to the cross you bear on your
breast. But I will not heerefore commend you so much, but that I must
reprehende you a little (and bear with me if I speak plainly unto you) for
that you call this your disease, in a manner curelesse, and seem to distrust,
that he which has sent it you cannot likewise rid you of it. Touching the
opinion you have of my presence, I will neither blame you nor praise you for it:
But you may assure your self, that in steed of those signs of good will
which I cannot show outwardly, I bear you an inward affection in my heart,
ready pressed to do you service. But I pray you make not strange to let me
understand your state, not as a Physician (for that as now would stand you in
small steed) but as a friend, from whom you ought not to hide your mishaps.


Guaz. My brother has already promised me of you, all that may be looked for
of a skillful Physician, and singular friend. But for that I am to return
into Italy, at a season more convenient for the cure of those which are sick, I
meant to have stayed till then to open unto you my wounds, and amongst the
rest, those of the heart, which I feel oppressed with so great melancholy,
that in my fancy, I had good reason to say, that my evil is perhaps incurable,
seeing it has weeried to no purpose almost all the Physicians of Paris and
France.


Annib. Touching the infirmity of the body, in deed it is requisite of
necessity to stay till the Winter be past, to heal it, if urgent necessity
constrain you not to use more speedy remedy: but to the malady of ye mind,
you ought at al times to apply apt remedies, indeuouring so much as you may
possibly, to be meerie, and to tread under foot al irksome thoughts which
molest you.


Guaz. I do verily, as you advise me, willingly employ all the time my bounden
service will spare me, and all the leisure I can get, in some honest pleasure:
but for all that, I cannot forget nor drive away my troublesome thoughts.


Annib. One that is sick, ought chiefly to consider the things that help him,
and the things that hurt him, to the end to eschew the one, and ensue the
other. And therefore I should think it good, you should call to your
remembrance such things as you have found by long experience to have
increased or diminished this your anguish of mind, or melancholy, as you
please to term it.


Guaz. I remember I have plainly noted, that the company of many is grievous
unto me, and that contrariwise, solitariness is a great comfort and ease of my
travels. And though for the service of my Prince, I must of force be
conversant not only with other Gentlemen his servants, but also in the Cour, to
discourse and deal with diverse persons of diverse countries and nations, yet I
do it against the heart, and I go to it as the Torteise to the inchauntment:
for I feel it a great travel to my mind, to understand other men's talk, to
frame fit answers thereto, and to observe such circumstances, as the quality
of the persons, and mine own honor require: which is nothing else but pain and
subjection. But when I withdraw my self into my lodging either to read or
write, or to repose my self: then I recover my liberty, and let loose the
raines thereof, in such sort, that having not to yield account of it self to
any, it is altogether applied to my pleasure and comfort.


Annib. Do you think to recover your health in continuing long that solitary
life?


Guaz. I dare not say so.


Annib. It is now that I begin to fear least this malady be perchance
incurable.


Guaz. And I now begin to know by your words that you are that plain fellow
you told me you were. But if those which should put heart into me, discourage
me, how shall I be able to comfort my self?


Annib. Go too Gentleman, take heart at grass, for your evil is easy to be
cured.


Guaz. You have in your hands the weapons of Achilles, with the which you both
wou^d and heal: but it must needs be, that of these two contrary
propositions, the one be false.


Annib. Both the one and the other is true. For all the Physicians not only of
France, but of all Europe no not Esculapius himself, by any medicine, either
simple or co^pound, can without great difficulty, give you the least help in
the world, so long as you cease not (as I see you do not) to proceed in your
doings contrary to their prescription and mind. On the other side, I can
assure you as well by that you have told me, as by certain signs which I begin
to discrie in you, that your evil is easy to be cured: for that the medicine
is in your own hands, whereby in short time you may be restored to your
health. And to speak hereof more plainly, I must needs tell you, that to
exempt your self out of this evil, you must first give your self to cut of
the cause and original thereof.


Guaz. How shall I cut it of, if I know it not?


Annib. I will let you know it: your evil comes of the false imagination you
have, by means whereof, like unto the fly which flies about the candle, with
pleasure, you purchase your death, and in steed of consuming and staruing your
evil, you give it nourishment. For thinking to receive solace by means of a
solitary life, you fill your self full of ill humors, which take root in you,
and there lie in wait ready to search out secret and solitary places
conformable to their nature, and to fly all mirth and company: and as hidden
flames by force kept down are most ardent, so these corrupt humors, covertly
lurking, with more force consume, and destroy the fair palace of your mind.
And therefore I would wish that, leaving that wrong opinion, whereby hitherunto
you went about, clean contrary, to redress your evil, you should change your
order of proceeding, and to account solitariness for poison, and company, for
an Antidote, and the foundation of life: and to frame your self to cast of
solitariness as a concubine, and to take company into your favor, as a
lawful spouse.


Guaz. Yet I have heard many famous Physicians of this opinion (which
experience also shows) that to have health of body, it is necessary to have
contentment of mind.


Annib. It is true, now what will you infer of that?


Guaz. Mary if that be true, it shall follow likewise, that solitarines is good
for the body, because it recreates the mind: what say you now?


Annib. I have already showed you, that the pleasure of solitariness
(considering your comple^ion) is counterfeite, I now further prove it to you.
For the true pleasure (to speak humanly) is that which naturally gives
pleasure to al persons in general. And therefore, though solitariness be
agreeable to melancholic persons, yet it is unpleasant to all other, which you
shall better understand, if you mark how some women with child long to eat
things which al other folk abhor: and yet for all that we must not say that
such meats are convenient, for though they please some women, yet commonly they
are displeasant to al. And when the melancholic person, and the woman with
child shall be rid, the one of his false imagination, and the other of her
altered taste, they will have in hate the things above said.


Guaz. You make me now doubt least I be in worse case then I am aware of: for
you mean by your words to include me in the number of the melancholic, which
have their wit so breeched, that they cannot discern sweet from sour. But if
I flatter not my self, I have a whole mind within my crasy body, and my
pleasure is common to other men of good taste: and though company pleases
some, yet I know many of great valor and deep understanding, which cannot
away with company, and love solitariness so well, as fishes do the water: so
that either I am besides my self, or else the definition which you have
assigned to pleasure is besides the truth: considering that not only
conversation, but diverse other pleasures, are acceptable to some, and irksome
to other some. As it falls out of games, of feasts, of Music, and other
delights, from which a great many men fly, and more willingly lean to grave
matters, and these are for the most part me^ of good calling, and not of the
common sort.


Annib. God grant that I may never have more occasion to doubt that your brain
is distempered, then it ever entered into my thought to say it, and if I should
say it, rather I (the^ you) might be thought scarce well in my wits: your
reasons make nothing against the definition which I assigned to pleasure, but
rather confirm it. For those which like not of games, music, Feasts, and
companies, have either by long study, and great conte^plation, or by some other
accident, got an habit and custom to be melancholik. And though in the world
there be found a greater number of these the^ of ye other, yet in this they
make no number, for that in these pleasures before said, they have lost their
taste by chance, not by nature, whereas those pleasures do delight naturally.
By this same reason we are to set down this other ground, That man, being a
compagnable creature, loves naturally the conversation of other men, and doing
the contrary, he does offend nature her self: for which fault many have done
penance. For some by remaining enclosed in these voluntary prisons; become ill
favored, lean, forlorn, and filled full of putrified blood, by means
whereof, their life and manners come to corruption. Insomuch that some take
after the nature of savage beasts, some wax couragelesse, and stand in fear
of their own shadows. I cease to rehearse unto you what has happened to
diverse men, who by living long time in solitariness, have fallen into such
vehement and frantike fancies, that they have given occasion to be laughed at,
and pitied. Wherefore waying the things which are to be read in writers
concerning those kind of men, and the things which I my self have seen, I
think nothing at all strange that which is reported of a poor seely soul,
who thinking himself to be transfourmed into a grain of Millet, for a long
time durst not come forth of his chamber, for fear the poultrie would eat
him up. And as it is not possible without great labor and slight to take away
the false imagination from these kind of Melancholic persons, so there are
other sorts of them, that have made themselves away by the means either of
water, or fire, or sword, or by throwing themselves headlong from on high, or
else at the ending of their days, by their natural death they have given some
certain testimony of their folly. Like as the melancholic Athenian did, who
no less at his death, then in his life time, refusing the conversation of men,
left these verses upon his Tomb.

Here do I lie, ne am the same
I heretofore was wont to be:
Thou Reeder never ask my name
A wretched end God send to thee.

Guaz. I am satisfied in this point, and I yield unto you, that solitarines is
an enemy to health: but I would know on the contrary side, what pleasure I may
look for by Conversation, seeing that for one man which I meet with to my
mind, I light upon more then a hundred, which either by ignorance, either by
pride, either by folly, either by ambition, either by altercation, or by
unseemly behavior, do so vex and trouble me, that my mind and body both
receive great hurt thereby.


Anniball. I have no marvel of that, for the number of the insufficient, is
far greater then of the accomplished, yet it is your part, so much as you
may, to leave those, and lean to these: and seeing our age does so
participate with the quality of iron, that there are not any to be found of
the golden world with whom you may be conuersaunt, it is not amiss to call to
mind that c^mmon proverb amongst country men, That we must not leave to
sow corn for fear least the birds eat it up: so likewise we must not
stick to come forth of our doors, to do our business in dealing with men,
for fear of ill company. As if you were bound from Padua to Venice, you will
not let slip opportunity, for that you will not imbarke your self in a vessel
wherein there are sometime men, women, religious, seculer, Soldiers,
Courtiers, Almans, Frenchmen, Spaniards, Jews, and other of diverse nations and
qualities. And therefore we must force our will, and make it sometime content
it self with that it likes not, whereof follows a virtue of necessity.
Touching this I will tell you, that the place and time have sometime forced me
to be present (rather with my body then mind) in the company of those
persons, which I could very ill away withal, as being altogether different
from my manner of life and profession: from whom nevertheless I could not
withdraw my self, least I should be thought to take upon me, either too
much gravity, or too little courtesy. And though at the first I was in my
dumpes, yet afterward I went away well pleased and joyful: seeing that I had
so well framed my self to the humors of others, and that I had got my self
honestly away being very well thought of by the company when I was gone: so
likewise* when you shall be acquainted with the course of the world, and when
by long use, you shall be brought to abide the company of such manner of
people, you shall perceive, that if it be not good for your health, yet at least
it shall not be hurtful.


Guaz. I plainly perceive the understanding you have, as well of things
belonging to the virtue of the mind, as the health of the body: And for that
I love of life to hear such discourses, I should be very glad (if it might
so please you) we might enter into argument, which is more available to man's
state of solitarines or conversation, for I would be loath you should at any
time teach me to take a medicine which might procure health to my body, and
sickness to my mind, which I could never find in my heart to do, but had a
great deal rather end my days hardly in some desert.


Anniball. There are certain kinds of spectacles which make things show
greater then they are: so your courteous good will makes you go beyond the
truth, in the judgment of my knowledge, which comes nothing near to that
you speak of, and yet it is not so little, but it knows that the Gentleman
which warns and summoneth me to this combat, is very well appointed of
weapons and courage. Yet notwithstanding, without loosing any more time in
excusing my ignorance, I am ready to hear most willingly whereupon your
opinion is grounded, which seems to incline to solitariness, to the intent
to answer you, not learnedly, but according to the ability of my weak
capacity.


Guaz. Think not, I beseech you, that I enter into the lystes against you,
like a subtle Logitian, for I never learned the places from whence arguments
are drawn, and that which I say, is rather of mine own opinion, then by any
judgment or learning: but my desire is to give you occasion to give me some
light of knowledge, being willing rather to understand, then to withstand:
for when you make answer to my demaundes, I take so great pleasure in it, that
I may say with the Poet Dant.

Your resolutions, do me content so well,
That I delight as much to ask, as if my self could tell.

Annib. I attribute all that to your courtesy. Now I will tell you touching
this matter, that if we will do our diligent endeavor to search out the
effects of solitariness and Conversation, how many sorts there are of them,
and how they are to be understood, we shall soon be agreed, and we shall not
need to employ much time in reasoning of the matter. Whereupon I would have us
differ, and a little suspend these several points, and first entreat of this
matter in general, that thereby I may have occasion to enjoy longer your
delightful and discreet communication. But I will not forget (as one that
tendreth your health) to put you in remembrance, that it is not good for your
sickly body to occupy your mind over earnestly, in considering the matter
over deeply: for oftentimes the desire of gainsaying and to have the upper
hand in reasoning, does inflame, distemper, and distroy the body: And thereof
come oftentimes reumes which deceive many Physicians, and make them judge that
they proceed of contrary causes. Wherefore I advise you for your health, and
mine also, not to be too earnest in this discourse, and so I shall with more
ease be able to answer you.


Guaz. I am not (sir) any of those vainglorious persons, which contend
earnestly* to the intent to be counted more brave fellows then other: I will
utter plainly those things which I remember to have heard heretofore of the
learned, and which shall be put into my head by the spirit of reason,
referring afterward the whole to your sound and perfect judgment.


Annib. I am very glad our discourses are rather familiar and pleasant, then
affected and grave: and I protest for my part, many times (as occasion shall
serve) to let you hear Proverbs, which very Artificers have in their mouth,
and comptes, which are used to be ^old by the fire side, both for that I
naturally live by such food, and also to give you occasion to do the like,
and thereby to have an eye as well to the health of the body, as the mind.


Guaz. I promise to imitate you so much as I may, and to fall now to the
skirmishe: I say first, that to climb to the true service of God, and the
enjoying of those heavenly incomprehensible and eternal benefits which he
has promised to his faithful, the desartes, al by places and solitary, are
the right ladders. And contrariwise, companies are naught else but hooks and
tongues, which withdrawing us by force out of the course of our good thoughts,
set us in the way of destruction: for that this life being full of suspicions,
deceites, lasciviousness, periuries, detractions, envy, oppressions,
violences, and other innumerable mischiefs, a man can not turn his eyes
aside, but that he shall be forced to behold some evil thing or other, which
enters and insinuates it self by a broad way unto the heart, where
afterward are planted those venomous graftes, which grow to the destruction
of the soul. The which never happens to the solitary, who being safe from
all inticements, intanglinges, and surprises, being altogether out of love with
the world, is wholly raised up to the contemplation of his original and
happy state. Likewise, whosoever will obtain Gods assistance by his prayers,
must abandon companies, and withdraw him self to his chamber (for so God
expressly commands) and therefore it is no meruell if he were so well
pleased with the devout works wrought especially in the wilderness by the
first fathers, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses, Helias, and Jeremy, neither ought
the example of our first father to way any lesser with us, who was as happy
while he lived in solitariness, as he was after miserable and griefefull
when he was in company. I could here rehearse unto you many persons, who
knowing that the vanities of the world, and Conversation amongst men, were
impediments to the service of God, and their own salvation, have joyfully left
their proud Palaces, their great riches, their high degrees, the company of
their family, friends, and parents, to cloister up them selves in poor
Monasteries, there, to end their life in holiness and patience. But if the
examples already recited be of no force with you, look upon the doings of
Christ, who being to make his prayers unto GOD his Father, went up to the
mountain: being too fast, kept him self solitary, and got into deserts at
the death of John Baptist. Now if we will consider, besides the service of God,
how much the solitary life avails to our instruction and happy life, we
can not but curse whether it were Saturn or Mercury, or Orphey, or Amphion, or
whosoever it were, who gathered and assembled together into one body, the
people scattered abroad in Forrestes and Mountains, where they followed
nature in stead of law, not crediting the subtle persuasions of other, but
their own giltlesse conscience, and leading a loyal, simple, and innocent
life, had not yet whetted their tongues to slander their neighbors, gave not
their minds to cruelties, neither had infected and corrupted their manners
with the contagion of vices, which began to grow hot in the Cities and
assemblies of men. And for that cause you see that naturally all persons endued
with knowledge and virtue (to avoid the common sort which delights in
company) withdraw them selves with great pleasure into by-places, and distant
from the people, to have leisure for their goodly and laudable contemplations.
And if this be true, as no doubt it is, that the Philosophers excel all other
men so far as light does darkness, it is a plain case, that to sail
surely in the deep sea of divine Philosophy, we ought to take wary heed to
fly, more then Scylla and Cha^ibdis, the Conversation of men, as they did: not
only getting themselves out of the prease of people, but setting light by, and
refusing the government of commonweals, and those chief honors and offices
which ambitious men go all day long with great labor and are canuassing and
craving for. And though it shall seem perchance unto you, that Conversation
and company is naturally desired of all men, yet remember your self of the
sentence which once you brought against me, which, if you be an indifferent
judge, ought to have place against your self in the same case: which is, that
a man must not make reckoning or account of the multitude of people, which
either for the desire of some vain pleasure, or vile gain, or fickle and
transitory promotions, are always in company and Conversation: and herein
we ought to follow the opinion of the Philosopher, who at his return from the
Bathes, being asked whether there were in them any great number of men,
answered, no: and a little after, as one asked him if there were good store of
people, answered, yea. Wherefore you must agree with me, that if Conversation
yield pleasure or profit, it is for the most part to the ignorant and
careless, to whom solitariness is a kind of torment: for that being alone
they are good for nothing but to count the clock, which they think goes too
slowly. Whereupon rises the saying, That leisure without learning, is a death
and sepultary of a live man, which never happens to the learned, who then
only live, when being sequestered from others (not men if I may lawfully say it)
they get themselves into this earthly Paradise of solitariness, where they
feed their minds with the most pleasant A pleasant liquour fained to be the
drink of the Gods.
Necter of lerning. Neither is it any thing ridiculous, which Diogenes merrily
and mistically did, who going to the church door, as the people went out,
thrust into the midst of them, and at length got into the Church, saying, it
was the part of such as he was, to be always contrary to the multitude: which
was to show, that we ought according to the saying of the Poet, To follow the
fewer sort, and not the common crew. And that meant Pythagoras when he said, He
kept not to pass by the common way. I could allege unto you many other things
in praise of the solitary life, which is by good right and reason singular,
for that it is alone the right life acceptable to God, and godly men, a friend
to virtue an enemy to vice, the true ^nstitution and form of life. So that for
my part most commonly I remain solitary, and say always in my heart (as that
holy man said) The City is to me a prison, and solitariness a Paradise. But
I will here stay to hear your opinion of these my reasons.


Annib. You have swarued nothing at all in this discourse from the duty of a
perfect Courtier, whose property it is to do all things with careful
diligence, and skillful art: mary yet so that the art is hidden, and the whole
seems to be done by chance, that he may thereby be had in more admiration.
And so taking that course, you have here commended solitariness, partly by
reasons derived from your own good wit, and partly by ye doctirine you have
learned of some famous writers, and specially of Petrarch and Vida, of whose
name and authority you have made no mention, because you would hide that
glorious doctrine, which some yt are learned use to discover, in having always
in their mouth the name, as soon of some Philosopher, as soon of some Poet,
as soon of some Orator. But yet you could not in such sort cover this cunning,
but that I perceived it, and was thereby occasioned greatly to commend your
discrete judgment. Now for that I am of a contrary opinion to yours, it
stands me upon to answer from point to point, to the reasons which you have
brought: whereof the first (if I be not deceived) is grounded upon the service
of God and our salvation, whereto in your opinion Conversation is an hinderance:
which truly I will not stick to grant you, if you be able to prove me that
the service of God is only performed by the means of solitariness. But I am
sure you will not deny me, that he has left us many commandments by his
own mouth, for the execution whereof, Conversation is necessary. For you
cannot go to visit the sick, to relieve the poor, to correct and admonish
your brother, to comfort the afflicted, if you remain always mewed up. And
therefore if you will have solitariness serve to appease the wrath of GOD, and
to obtain favor at his hands, you should say that it is profitable and
necessary only for the time appointed for prayer. But for all that, I will not
grant you that it is a matter of necessity, that we should be ever alone
when we pray, for where our Lord said we should enter into our chamber to
make our prayers, it was spoken only to reprehend hypocrites, which used to
kneel praying openly at the ends of streets, and with their solemn and
counterfeite devotion, to make the people return to behold them, to admire
them, and to repute them for men of a holy life. For we see that GOD has
appointed the Church for Christians to assemble in. And albeit in all places
devout and earnest prayers are acceptable unto him, yet we are bound to go
seek him in the holy Church ordained to that end: where, either by reason of
the most holy Sacraments, which are there often celebrated, either by reason
of the devout prayers of others, we are stirred up to prayer with more fervent
zeal and affection. Besides, we see that the religious do not make their
prayers apart, but by the ordinances of the Church they assemble together in
one Quire: where joining their voices together, they make as it were of many
minds one only. framing a harmony of divine praises and devout prayers, for
the peace of GOD, for the salvation of mankind. And that congregation does
not only call men daily from their worldly works to divine service, but
besides, has great power, and is very acceptable in the sight of God.
Whereupon some have said, that it is impossible, the prayers made by many
together should not be granted. Neither does it any thing remove me out
of my settled opinion, the example which you propose of many, who of fleshly are
become spiritual, of wealthy are willingly entered into misery, and from
their stately Palaces, have vowed themselves to beggarly monasteries: for these
same though they have the name of solitary, for that they are severed from us
in this temporal life, yet they are gathered and assembled together in their
Couents, where they not only live and pray together amongst themselves, but
also use conversation with us, in preaching, teaching, and doing other things
which apperteine to the profit of our souls. On the other side, we secular
men which have more inticements to do amiss, must consider, that God has
given, is Roses beset with thorns, the sweet with the sower, and has given
us understanding to discern their qualities and difference. And though it were
so that (as you say) a man can neither see nor hear the thing, which makes
not the right way to salvation rugged and uneasy, yet for all that, a good
Christian ought not to stray out of it, but to have in mind this saying, That
every commodity, brings with it a discommoditie. And when he sees him
self assailed either with the temptation of pleasures, or the vexation of
troubles, then is the time to get the garland, by breaking in sunder those
hooks, and holdbacks you spoke of but now, for you know we must enter into the
kingdom of heaven through tribulations and troubles. And although he do
wisely, who, to fly the combat of the flesh against the spirit, retireth into
some obscure and solitary place, yet consider the great virtue and singular
merit of him, who being placed in the midst of pleasures, forbeareth them, and
makes a conquest of him self: and think also with your self, how curious
these solitary men are of their quiet, who will neither see nor hear the
plaintes of other, neither are partakers of our loss and hurts, neither are
subject to the injuries, the threats, the blows, the persecutions, the
outrages, dangers, and ruins, which this poor vale of misery is full of.
Neither likewise does the example of those first fathers make against me, who
were not so given to solitariness, but that they had a care over their
neighbors, which they manifested by more works then you have need to hear, or
I leisure to count. I deny not but Adam was happy, while he lived in
solitariness, but for all that, you do not perceive, that God in giving him
company, meant also to show unto us, that Conversation liked him well. The last
example of Christ co^teines in it a hidden meaning, different from the doings
of men, for in praying, fasting, and mourning in the wilderness, his meaning
was, if I be not deceived, to let a Christian know, that to reap the fruits
of those labors, it behooves him to solitary him self from sin: and calling
his wa^dring mind to this reckoning, it behooves him to keep it solitary from
al other thoughts. For if with the sadness of the countenance, the fasting of
the body, and the prayers of the mouth, the heart neither prays, fasteth, nor
mourns, Christ is not imitated, but it is the act of an hypocrite, who as the
Poet says, covers his conceits with a contrary cloak. And if besides
these works of Christ he had not been conuersable, it had not gone well with
us: for that disputing, preaching, healing the sick, making the blind to see,
raising the dead to life, he was conversant amongst us, the space of so many
years, with so many discommodities: and in the end shed his innocent blood
for our redemption. Seeing then while he lived amongst us, he left us an
example and way, which we ought to use in conversation, in my opinion you were
to blame to curse him, who first with so great discretion gathered together the
scattered people, which had not (I confess) the knowledge of vices which
reign in cities and towns, marry no more had they the knowledge of sciences,
of honest and civil behavior, of friendship, of handicrafts, of
woorkemanships, by means whereof they made themselves differ from sauadge
beasts, whom before they did resemble. And therefore it may justly be said,
that who so leaves the civil society to place himself in some solitary
desert, takes as it were the form of a beast, and in a certain manner
puts upon him self a brutishe nature. So the common saying is, that there
is no other name meet for a solitary person, but either of a beast, or a
tyrant. For that he does violence to beasts, seasing and possessing himself
of forests, of tops of mountains, of their dens, caves, and blind
abydings: Not seeing that the city and assemblies of people are made to found
the temple of justice, and to appoint a law and form to man's life, which
before was disordered, and imperfect. You add afterward, that learned men, and
those of good wits, make no account but of the solitary life, and you bring
forth the philosophers, comtemners of the multitude, and lovers of
solitariness. I might here take large scope to make you answer, but using all the briefnesse I can, I say only, that those excellent men in learning and
science love solitary places not by nature, but for lack of their like, with
whom they may be conversant: and I grant you that there is nothing more
displeasant to the learned, then the company of the ignorant: which falls
out of the great diversity and difference which is between them. But as the
learned fly the ignorant, so they willingly seek the company of other that
are learned, with whom, stirred by a certain virtuous ambition, they make
proof of their knowledge, giving and taking of the fruits which they have
gathered with long travail. You can not name me any Philosopher so hard
laced, and so rebellious against nature, who, when time and place served, had
not conversation either with his scholars to teach, or with other
Philosophers to reason, and to hear their reasons, and which was not desirous
to have others followers of his doctrine. And therefore the doing of Diogenes,
which you have rehearsed, served well to show, that a Philosopher is contrary
to the multitude, but not to disallowe conversation, which he more accounted
of then other Philosophers did. Wherefore I conclude, that if the learned and
students love solitariness for lack of their like, yet they naturally love
the company of those which are their like: In so much that many of them have
travailed far with great labor, to speak with other learned men, whose
books they had at home in their houses. And though you allege unto me, of
these, which have refused promotions, and public offices, thinking it a thing
blameworthy to bring their free mind into bondage, and to entangle it with the
affairs of the world, yet there have been other excellent Philosophers, who
by their writings (which are yet extant) have reproved the opinion of those
aforesaid, and that not without great reason: for giving themselves wholly to
the study of the sciences and contemplation, they altogether abandoned those
persons, to whom by the Law of nature they were bound to give succor, and
considered not that (man being borne not only for himself, but for his
Country, parents and friends) he seems either too far in love with him
self, or too far out of love with others, which follows not his proper
nature to benefit others, being borne thereunto. And therefore this sentence
is well worthy to be written in letters of gold, that He utterly seeks
his own shame, who only seeks his own profit. Now if all the praise of
virtue consist in doing, according to the opinion of the Philosophers, whereto
serves this dumb and idle Philosophy, whereof may be said as of faith,
that without works it is dead, and profits no body, no not so much as to
him who has gotten it? Who can not assure him self to have learned any
science, if he make it not known, and if he perceive not that others which
are learned allow of it. And thereof comes the proverb, Between treasure
buried under the ground, and wisdom kept hidden in the heart, there is no
difference at all. And it may be said that these same men resemble the
covetous, which possess treasure, but have it not: and that they are greatly
to blame, which knowing how to do well, do it not. For as Music, which is
not heard, is not had in estimation: so that Philosopher meriteth no honor,
which manifests not his knowledge. * Which Socrates knew very well, who,
though no way else he had deserved to be counted the wisest man of the world,
yet he deserved it only for this, that he was the first which brought moral
philosophy down from heaven. For seeing all the Philosophers bent to the
conte^platio^ of nature, he not only framed himself to get wisdom, to live
well, and to teach other to live, but gave himself altogether to the bringing
to perfection this part of Philosophy, which is so profitable and necessary
to our common life, and made the world to see the open folly of those, who
will rather hide a candel under a bushel, then set it on a Candlestick.
Besides you know that these which like not of company, how learned soever
they be, take them from their school points, and matters of learning, show
themselves so insufficient and such beastly fools that most commonly they give
occasion to every man to laugh at them. I have not yet forgotten many gross
follies of a Gentleman sometime my Schoolefellowe at Pad. who in learning was
not inferior to any scholar in the University, but for the rest, you would
have said, that he had been one of these Owls who stand in fear of other
byrds: in so much that his sottishness moved me to pity him, especially one
day, that having occasion to ride by hearing of the sudden death of his
father, he bought a pair of Boots, whereof the one was so strait that it
wroong his leg and foot very sore, and the other was a great way to wide:
And as we blamed him that he would suffer him self so to be coosened: he
answered, That he him self when he bought his Boots found fault that there
was such odds between them, but the shoemaker had sworn unto him that the
greatest Boot was made of such leather as would shrink in the wearing, and
the other, of a hyde that would so retch, that in less then two days it
would be easier then the other: what say you of this? Do you not think that
these men may be called wise by learning, and fools in respect of the common
people. Therefore it was rightly said of an ancient Poet, that experience is
the father of wisdom, and memory the mother, to show, that it is needeful for
him which will attain to the knowledge of humane things, not only to be
provided of books, but besides, to have undoubted experience and practice
touching the understanding of things: which being known, ought to be
received and kept in mind, thereby to be able afterward to give him self
counsel, by the trial him self has alredie made, and to guide him self
and aid other, by the events he has before noted to have followed of like
causes. And if you will know that this is true, consider that not only in the
profession of us Physicians, but in other faculties likewise, speculation
without practice is nothing certain. But we give more credit to an argument
grounded on things, which we have tried by reason, then in the simple
Doctrine of other.

And you who have eaten much salt out of your own house, are well able to
judge how wise and discreet your travail has made you, and how much you
differ from those who never heard the ringing of other belles then these here.
And therefore to show the valor and wisdom of great Ulysses, with good
reason it was said to his immortal praise, That many countries he had seen,
and in their manners well was seen.


I think I have sufficiently confuted your reasons, without I should force or
strain my self, as I could very well, to make you a more peremptory and
weighty answer, which I will leave to do, thinking you are content with
this, and that you have spoken of this matter, rather to give me to understand
your great wit, then to maintain in good earnest this opinion: For the same
which have taught you this false doctrine, have likewise taught you the true,
and I am sure you are not ignorant that Petrarch, notwithstanding all the
praises he attributes to the solitary life, was not to learn, that without
Conversation our life would be defectuous. For he has been no such enemy
to good company, but that these words have escaped forth of his mouth, Had I
been with her:


But that he has frequented Courts, and entered into amity with many Princes
and Gentlemen, I speak not of Hierosme Vida, for that not so much in respect
of the works he has written, being gotten alone by himself, as for the
learning he showed by word of mouth in public counsel: and for that he had
long time used the Court of Rome, and by his deeds given other good example to
do well, he has gotten not only the myter, under which he has a great
while governed the flock committed unto him, but besides, has won the
credit of a Prelate worthy of a higher degree. Moreover, that he exalts the
solitary life, to the intent to show his great wit, in debasing it afterward
with diverse and invincible reasons: amongst the which he affirms that all
beasts so soon as they are delivered from their damme get upon their feet, and
are able to stand a high alon, which nature would not grant to man, who, so
soon as he is borne, needs the assistance and support of others. If that
reason be not sufficient, he adds, that the same nature has given speech
to man, not to the end to speak to himself, which were to no purpose, but to
the end it might stand in steed toward other. And you see that the tongue
serves us to teach, to demand, to confer, to traffike, to counsel, to
correct, to dispute, to judge, and to express the affection of our heart:
means whereby men come to love one another, and to link themselves together.
And he concludes at the end, that a man can not attain to any science, if it
be not taught him by some other. You see then (Gentleman) that conversation is
not only profitable, but moreover necessary to the perfection of man, who must
confess that he is like the Be which cannot live alone. And therefore
according to the grave opinion of the Stoikes, we must think that as all
things upon the earth are made for the use of man, so man is created for the
use of man, to the intent that following nature as their guide and Mistres,
they have to succor one another, to communicate together common profits, in
giving and receiving, uniting and binding themselves together by arts,
occupations, and faculties: so that he may repute himself an unfortunate man,
which has not the means by conversation to purchase his own profit and
other men's: a punishment inflicted by the laws on some offenders for a kind
of torment. For there is no greater affliction then to live amongst men, and to
be deprived of the aid and company of men. And to end my talk, there is
here on earth no pleasure to be received without company, which made
Architas Tarentinus to say that if any might by Gods permission ascend to
heaven, and there behold the nature of the world, and the beauty of the
stars, that sight would be no great delight unto him, if he had not some
or other to whom he might impart it and tell what he saw. * You may perceive
then hereby, that neither air, fire, nor water, affoorde us more aid in all
our needs then conversation does. But if perchance al these things be not
sufficient to prove this matter unto you, I am ready to bring you (touching
this) many other reasons, so substantial as these already rehearsed.


Guaz. I am forced to say with the Poet.

Neither yea neither nay, can I resolve flatly to say:
For notwithstanding I feel my self greafly comforted with your gentle
discourse, yet there stick in my stomach some doubts, which make me say unto
you, that as the stepmother by extreme hatred discerns not the virtues of
her son in law, and the mother by excessive love on the contrary side knows
not the imperfections of her own son so you likewise show your self to be
surprised with the same passions, to find fault with solitariness, and commend
conversation, for so much as you have not told the good which (...) of ye
solitary life, nor the evil which comes of conversation. Wherefore to
manifest and discover that which you keep secret, I say unto you, that my
meaning was not to defend and commend those persons, who, moved either by some
sudden toy which takes them in the head or of some melancholy humor, rather
then of any good mind, do altogether withdraw themselves into solitary
places, and take no keep to know what we do in the world: but I amount
them for dead, or at least for men which are good neither for themselves nor
other: and being not willing to put in practice their virtue to their own
profit, nor to teach it to others which stand in n^ede of it, I use to
compare them to the Fox, who had rather (...) and break his tail against the
ground to (...) profit, then to give a little of it to the Ape to cover his
privy parts. Likewise I never meant to deny, but that in haunting the company
of men, a man may do works acceptable to GOD: my opinion was, and is yet,
that to the perfection of man (which if I be not deceived consists chiefly
in knowledge) solitariness is more auayleable then conversation. And for
proof thereof, you see how those which busy themselves in the affairs of
the world, are for the most part without learning, and contrariwise, those
which covet to get learning, seek it not in public places amongst a
multitude of men, but in their studies and privy Chambers. Neither is it to
purpose to say, that some learned, wax sots and fools in company, for that
this foolishness is esteemed to be so, only by the vulgar sort, who, seeing
them unskillful how to make courtesy after the new fashion, how to set the
cappe aside; how to dance in measure, and keep time with the music, and
how to stout another finely, according to the common fashion, laugheth them
to scorn and makes small reckoning of them: But for all that, they are
favored and honored amongst other learned men, who take for plainness of
manners and gentleness of mind, that which the common so^te calls
foolishness. Now let us turn the leaf, I pray you, and set one of these
scoffers in the midst of a compa^^ of learned men, and you shall see him
straightway, either to be stroke dumb to his shame, or else to speak to his
dishonor: like as he, who being by chance amongst certain learned men,
which reasoned of the excellency of Poets, pricked forward by his own
ambitious ignorance, interrupted their talk, saying, that without any more
contention, Horace was to be preferred before all other Poets: for that
Petrarch was of that opinion, and had already preferred him before Homer and
Virgil: and being required to bring forth that opinion of Petrarch, he
answered forthwith, If Virgil and Homer had seen,
Horace alone against all Tuscane:


Whereupon they fell to laughing more heartily, then the scholars your friends
did for the jest of the boots: and the laughter begun afresh after, when
being required to show the meaning of Petrarch in those verses, he added, that
he meant to say that neither Virgil nor Homer, nor all the Poets of Tuscane
were able to encounter Horace alone. Now if the scholar fell into a certain
tolerable lightness of belief, this fellow stumbled upon a corrupt
persuasion in opinion. Whereby I am induced to think that learning without
experience is more certain, then experience without learning, and I had rather
have the name of a simple scholar, then of an ignorant Courtier. Whereupon I
will infer, that whosoever will attain knowledge, and sound the depth of it,
must (as the artificers say) see to the shop, and not walk the streets all
the day long, and brave it out before the people. But put the case that many
commendable effects come of conversation, yet put the discommendable in
balance against them, and they will ouerway them a great deal. For that the
number of the good is so small and scant, that though you be never so well
given, you cannot continue so, but you shall be driven to change, and to think
with your self that he which sleeps with the dogs, must rise with the
flees. And hereof the Crerensians being assured, when they wished ill to any,
they forspake him that he should take delight in haunting ill company,
meaning, that thereby he should come to confusion. Besides that we are now
grown to this point that you can not behave your self so well, but that you
shall receive thousand injuries, if not in life (which is not it self very
safely warranted) yet at least in good name. And at this day the malice of men
is so great, that they spare not the honor of whosoever it be, whether Prince
or private person, and think smisterly and preposterously of all the good
deeds which are wrought: in such sort that if you addict your self to
devotion, and the exercise of charity, you are taken for an hypocrite. If you
be affable and courteous, you shall be called a flatterer. If you succor any
desolate widow, you shall by and by hear a voice which says: I know what
follows. If through heedlesnesse you resolute not a friend, he will speak no
more to you. If you defend one that is oppressed, take heed you be not taken
out of your house at undue time. Think not to be spared for that you make not
profession of a soldier: for now they will not stick to beat even doctors and
advocates, to hinder them from defending their clyents. But to what end go I
to loose my self in the intricate labirinth of the abuses and disorders of our
time. I will get out presently, and persuade my self, that vices should be
banished out of ye world, if conversation were taken out of it: seeing that
adulteries, robberies, violences, blasphemies, murders, and infinite other
evils, are learned by the conversation of men, and by means of the same are
committed.


Annib. You made a show at the beginning to yield unto me, and yet
nevertheless are risen against me with a second assault. But notwithstanding I
will not cease to assay with other answers, to set an end (if it be
possible) to our controversy. And for that you ground learning upon
solitariness, I must first ask you, of whom the principles of sciences and
learning are for the most part learned?


Guaz. Of Masters.


Annib. You shall be then taken in your own net, seeing by these words you
grant unto me, that the beginning and end of learning depends of
conversation. And verily as the armourer can not assure him self of the
goodness of a corselet, until such time as he has seen it proved with the
lance or harquebouse: so neither can a learned man assure him self of his
learning, until he meet with other learned men, and by discoursing and
reasoning with them, be acertained of his sufficiency. Whereby it seems to
me very clear, that conversation is the beginning and end of knowledge. But
for that you add, that men conversant in the Court and common wealth are void
of learning, I must put you in mind touching ye point, that as there are
diverse sciences, arts, and professions, so likewise is the life of men diverse,
who as it pleases god, are called some to merchandise, some to warfare, some
to physic, some to the laws. And for that all these tend to one end, to get
by these means honor and profit, you see that every one of these divides
his life into two parts: the one, to learn those things which may serve to
lead him to the end I have spoken of the other, to put them in practice. And
for example, you have alredie purposed with your self to be Secretary to a
Prince, I am not ignorant, that by reason of the good parts which are in you,
you are to look for reputation and commodity thereby, and to bethink you of
the good hap of those, who from that degree have been raised to Cardinals and
Uicars of Christ. And therefore to make your self fit for that office, you
have learned the Latin and Tuscane tongue, and so many arts as are necessary
for that purpose: and by your perfect style in writing, and great discretion in
handling matters, you have won the report and name of an excellent
Secretary. All other men do the like, amongst whom there are some, who
giving their minds either to husbandry, or to merchandise, care for no more
learning, but to read, write, and cast a count. And albeit amongst learned
men, these same are not able to discourse of Rhetorike or of Poetry, yet are
they not therefore to be blamed, neither may we say they are bereaved the
knowledge of good letters by reason of conversation, for that from the
keginning of their life they have determined not to meddle with study, and it
suffices them to be esteemed wise, and well seen in their own profession.
But a scholar is well worthy to be laughed at, and reproved, who applying him
self altogether to study, does not frame his learning to the common life,
but shows him self altogether ignorant of the affairs of the world. And I
will say unto you moreover, that it were a great error to believe, that
learning is more gotten in solitariness amongst Books, then in the company
of learned men. For this is a maxim in Philosophy, and experience shows it,
That learning is easilier gotten by the ears then by the eyes: neither should
a man need to dim his sight, and wear his fingers in turning over the
books of writers, if he might always see them present, and receive by
hearing that natural voice, which by wonderful force imprinteth it self in
the mind. Besides that, if you chance to read some hard and obscure place,
you can not entreat the book to expound it unto you, but you shall be feign
sometime to go your way from it vnco^tented, saying, If thou will not be
understood, I will not understand thee. Whereby you may know that it is much
better to talk with the living, than with the dead. Again I note this, that
the spirit of a solitary man waxes dull and lither, having none to stir it
up and awake it in demanding some question touching his learning, and in
reasoning upon it: or else he waxes hautie and proud by vain belief, for
not comparing any with himself, he attributes too much to himself. On the
contrary side, he which hears other to commend his studies, has them in more
admiration: he which is reprehended, amendeth his faults: he which is any
thing negligent, is pricked forward by his corriuals which seek to outgoe him
in glory. And as he thinks it a great shame to come behind his equals, so
does he count it a great honor to be able to go before his betters. But
above al other things the commendable controversies which arise amongst learned
men have most force to quicken the spirits. For by disputing they learn, and
that which they learn in that manner, they understand best, they expound
best, and remember best. And while they dispute by lively reasons, indeuouring
to get the upper hand each of other, the perfect knowledge of things is come by,
and thervpo^ it is commonly said that Disputation is the sifter out of the
truth. And for so much as the truth is taken from the common consent and
opinions of men, those opinions can not be known but by conversation and
company, which the Poets meant to show and infer, reporting that though
Jupiter was God omnipotent, yet he called the other gods to counsel, and
heard their opinions. But let us set fables aside, do we not know that the
weighty and wonderful institutio^s of the holy church proceed not from the
Pope only, but from the holy general counsels where they have bin discreetly
wayed, and allowed? Besides, is it not the fashion of al princes, where there
is question of the affairs of their estates, because they will do nothing of
their own heads, to assemble their counsailours, and to determine matters
according to their advise? Commonweales, Cities, yea small towns, do they not
assemble together to choose officers, and to establish orders by common
consent? Is it not the use of Magistrates to take the common advise and opinion
of their assistentes, and we physicians do we not the like in our assemblies
and Colleges, wherein we take resolution touching the healing of the sick,
by the advice and judgment of the greater part? Did not Apelles take delight
to set his pictures abroad, and to throud himself secretly near unto the^, to
hear the opinion of the beholders, and when many were of one mind in
reprehending some part, did not he mend it according to the common voices and
opinions? * And did not another painter say, that the people was the master of
whom he had learned his art? * And lastly, was it not the use of a wise
Emperor (whose name I now remember not) to send spies abroad every day, to
harke^ what was said of him, altering sometimes upon that occasion his manner of
dealings, and reforming his life from good to better, according to the reports
were made unto him? Uerily, he hazardeth too much, who reposeth himself in his
own judgment. And it is a common saying, that he does well, which cou^sayleth
himself well: For which cause counsel is esteemed for a holy thing. I am not
able sufficiently to express the great good, which comes of conversation,
and of ye knowledge which enters in by the ears and sinketh into the mind,
coming from the mouth of learned men. But I will tell and remember you of the
honorable Academies, or Uniuersities, which for that purpose have been
instituted in many cities of Ialy, amongst which we must not forget to speak
of that in Mantua, founded in the house of the most famous Lord Caesar Genzaga,
a mighty prince, and a special patron of learned men: neither that in Pauia,
which flourishes prosperously, by reason of the great number of students. But
perchance it is a thing to be meruailed at, y^ in that little city of Casal the
Academie of ye Illustrati makes so galla^t a show. But for that the time
serves not to speak of the excellency thereof, to return to the matter in
question, I say, that the fruit which is gathered by these Academies, is
inestimable, and that they know well what they do, which have any doings in
them. For knowing that one alone cannot of himself attain to many sciences,
for that an art is long, and life is short, there they may obtain whatsoever
they desire. For some discoursing of divinity, some of humanity, some of
Philosophy, some of Poetry, and other diverse matters, they partake mutually and
in common, of that which every one privately with great pain and long study
has learned: by the example of those, who being not able to live of
themselves, and make good cheer at their table, meet together with other of
their neighbors in one place, and bring every one their cates with them, and
thereof make a suptuous feast. And therefore it has bin very profondly said, yt
man is a god unto man, for that one receives so great pleasure and comfort of
another. Which self thing is represented unto us by the picture of the blind
man, carrying upon his back the lame creeple, who teaches him the way: and
thereupon well says, Almanni.

So of two halfes the whole is fitly made,
the one with eyes, the other with feet does aid.
I say then again, that conversation is the full perfection of learning, and
that it more avails a student to discourse one hour with his like, then to
study a whole day by himself in his study. Yea and in conferring with his
companions, if he have understood any thing amiss, he thereby most commonly
comes to the right meaning of the matter, and cleereth his mind of many
errors, * and begins to perceive that the judgment of one alone may be
easily darkened with the veil of ignorance, or of some passion, and that
amongst a multitude, it seldom falls out that all are blinded: and finally,
upon proof he knows that virtue and knowledge set forth in books, is
naught else then a painted virtue: and that true virtue and learning, is gotten
rather by practice then by reading. * But it is now time to answer you,
touching the inconveniences which are incurred (as you say) by conuersa^io^,
which make us turn out of ye right way, and alter our good purposes, by
acco^panying with men of lewd behavior. And though in my fancy you might
satisfy your self with some reasons already alleged, yet I will say further
yt it is true, yt as some diseases of ye body are infectious, so ye vices of
the mind take from one to another, so that a drunkard draws his companions
to love wine, a Carpet knight corrupts and effeminateth a valiant man: and so
much force has continual conversation, that often times against our wills, we
imitate the vices of others. Thereupon it is said, that the friends and
familiers of Aristotle had learned to stammer: the friends of Alexander in
discoursing, had got his roughness of speech: and dout not, but in haunting
the company of the evil, a man shall find by experience that a man is a woolfe
to a man, not a God as I said before, and y^ according to the proverb, A
friend of fools will become like unto the^, * and he which touches pitch
shall be defiled therewith. * But in like case also, and by the same reason on the
contrary side, virtue brings forth the like effect. * And as a dead coal,
laid to a lively, kindles: so a naughty person meeting in company with the
good, partaketh with their conditions. * Neither is a good air and a man's own
native soil more helpeful to the health of the body, then the conversation and
company of ye good is to diseased minds. For if the ill leave some seed of
their naughtines with those that cleave to them, by the same reason the good
leave behind of their goodness, with those that frequent them. And as from
musk there comes a sweet smell to delight the nose, so from the good there
goes a certain goodness toward those that are near the^, and most commonly
keeps it self still within them. Now for that the ground of your reasons is,
for that in conversation a man cannot do so good works, but that they shall be
taken against the hear, and wrongly interpreted, adding the dangers, hurts,
and damages whereto they are subject, which use company: I grant here unto
you, that the good order and manner of living, is in a manner quite lost, but
the fault and perverseness of other, should never make you repent your self of
doing well: and let speak who list, never take care of the censures and
reprehensions wc come from the blind communalty, which as ignorant, takes
every thing arsiuersie. But you ought to follow ye allowable sentence of ye
Epicure, when he says, I never coueted to please the people, for yt they
esteem not ye things, which I know, and for yt I know not the things which
they esteem and commend. Besides, you must consider whether being withdrawn
from company, and leading a solitary life, you shall live in security, and be
exempt from the injuries of the wicked. Nay look not for it hardly, and assure
your self, that for one ill word received in company, you shall receive a
thousand living solitarily. For some one will not stick to say (and perchance
with some little likelihood) that you have about you some filthy disease, or
that you have committed some offense, and that you fly the light like a
reeremouse: others will say, that you are an heretic, for that you eschew the
company of Christians, and they will seek to put you into the Inquisition:
others will call you an Alcumist, or a forger of money: and if all these
suspicions aforesaid fail, yet at least you shall be thought either fainte
hearted, either stately, either fantastical, either melancholic, or else a
brute beast: for that all these most commonly fly the company of men. So that
by that mean you shall find your self to be fallen (as the common proverb
is) Out of the frying pan into the fire, or out of a fever into the hot evil*
and you shall be feign in the end to return to the ordinary life, being
resolved to thrust your self forward, and to live uprightly and well in spite
of those that live ill: whose naughtiness set against your virtue and
goodness, will make it more excellent and famous, and you shall rejoice more
to your self, to see that your virtue has won the victory in the combat
and opposition, you persisting in your goodness in the midst of their
naughtiness. You must consider it deserves no great praise nor merit, to know
how to be good amongst the good, Mary it is somewhat worth to be good amongst
the ill. Also you must think, that amongst those false consterers, there will
be some upright judge and defendour of your deeds. And though all the men of
the world should fail you, yet the high judgment of God will not fail you; in
whom if you shall once repose your trust, you may be sure he will hold his
hand over you, and defend you against the malicious and slanderous, and in
spite of them will bring the truth to light, and give it the upper hand. As
I think I have fully answered you, and therefore without any farther speech, you
may know that to get wisdom to come by ^he accomplishment of learning and to
come to dignity, riches, and worldly promotions, Conversation is expedient.
For to say, that every man should have an eye only to his own affairs, is
nothing else, but to make man like to beasts. And besides, it is most certain,
that solitariness puts many evil things into our heads, and makes us
believe that which is not. Neither has it any thing in it but horror and
terror, enemies to nature. According whereto, it is daily seen that a man
being by him self is fearful, and being in company, is courageous. * Yea,
and being alone, is often tempted to commit many evils. Which, one Crates
rightly signified, who seeing a young man walk in a secret place, asked him
what he did there so alone: the young man answered, that he talked with him
self: I pray you (says he) take heed you talk not with some naughty
fellow. What shall I say more? But that the herb Helleborum may be given as
well to the solitary, as to the fool. And whosoever shall mark these reasons,
and specially the Etymology of this word Homo, (which in the Greek tongue as
some learned writers think) signifies (together) shall perceive, that a man
can not be a right man without Conversation. For he that uses not company has
no experience, he that has no experience, has no judgment, and he that has
no judgment, is no better then a beast.


Guaz. I think the Northeast wind does not so drive in sunder the clouds in
the sky, as you, clearing altogether my mind, have now driven away the
mystes which dimmed it, and made it so wandering and running, for the love it
had to solitariness. I perceive the conclusion of your gentle discourse
seems to be, that solitariness ought to be taken altogether out of the
world, and company and conversation to be chosen, as well for the health of the
mind as the body. And yet for all that, I see not how that may be granted unto
you, for that there are some times wherein solitariness is not only available,
but necessary, both to the inward and outward welfare and prosperous state of
life, so that I think it meet to make some mention hereof.


Annib. Do you not remember that I told you at the beginning of our talk,
that to make evident ye matter which hangs doubtful between us, and to
resolve our selves thoroughly of it, we must come to distinguish of solitariness
and Conversation.


Guaz. It is very true.


Annib. It is for that I would tell you now, that henceforward it was time to
leave our general discourse, and come to the particularities which we have
already proposed, that there may no confusion remain between us. I then
confess unto you, ye solitariness is not altogether to be blamed or banished,
and that it is at some time (as you say) profitable and necessary. And therefore
we must first understand, yt a man sometime has company being by himself and
in solitariness, and sometime is solitary being in company or Conversation.


Guaz. Pardon me if I interrupt you, these speeches and distinctions seem to
me to be riddles, therefore you must serve me in steed of Aedipus, to read them.


Annib. I will explane them to you, and first I say, there is one sort of
solitariness so rare and perfect, that it is always without company and
conversation, not at certain times: * whereinto it pleases some devout men to
enter, where being dead altogether to the world, chosing ye best part and
living alone (if they may be said to be alone which be with God) they end
their days most pleasantly, in a life most unpleasant. * And this ca^ no man
attain unto, without ye special gift of god, and who that otherwise hazardeth
to enter into it, exposes him self to a great danger touching his own
safeguard, and has no respect to this sentence, Woe be to the lone man, who when
he shall be fallen down, shall have none to help him up. I will make no larger
speech of this high kind of solitariness, referring my self to the long
discourses which the divines make of it, but descending to that less perfect
solitariness, which is deprived of Conversation but for a certain time. I
find thereof three kinds, to wit, solitariness of time, of place, and of the
mind. Solitariness of time, is ye stillness of the night, or the instant
wherein one speaks alone in the presence of many: and this solitariness is
(as you may judge) no les profitable then necessary to al sorts of persons, by
reason of the things which are learned by word of mouth, as well of readers as
of Preachers, and it is (as I said before) of greater force and efficacy then
the books and writings of Authors. Next, solitariness of place, is the
chamber or private dwelling which every one chooses of purpose to sequester
him self from the company and conversation of others. Here we have to
consider that men settle themselves in this solitariness of place for diverse
respects, some to the intent to raise their thoughts from worldly vanities to
the contemplation of God and his wonderful works, to the end to join
themselves to him with incredible joy and health of soul, * and to comprehend
that in mind which they cannot see with eye: * some to get with study and
speculation the fruit of learning, some to discourse with them selves public
or private affairs. Al these solitarinesses of place taken and used in due
season, have great force to stir up the spirits, and to prepare them a more
easy and sure address to the works and actions belonging to conversation. *
And if we consider diligently the fable of Prometheus, Jupiters Ambassador upon
the Mount Caucasus, and his heart torn by the Egle, we shall find that by the
Mount is figured unto us solitariness, and by the Egle co^templation, which
wounds the heart, and preyeth upon it. Neither is any thing else meant by the
conjunction of the Moon with Endymion, but that he spent many nights in the
contemplation of heavenly things, whereby he gathered the fruit of Astrology.
And the shoulders of Atlas wherewith he stayed up heaven, represent unto us
nothing else but the knowledge which he had of the superior world by means of
contemplation: * but these same notwithstanding they are solitary in respect of
ye place where they remain alone, yet they are in company in respect of the
diversity of things which they ponder in their mind. And thervpo^ Scipio
said, that he was never less alone, then when he was alone, for yt being
gotten by him self into some solitary place, he discoursed many things in his
mind, perteining to the increase of his honor. But I must tell you, that as
this solitariness is profitable and necessary for the disposition of the
mind, so very often is it hurtful to the health of the body: and it is
therefore I told you at the beginning of our talk, that you ought to avoid
it. For the finer wit a man is of, the more he beats it (being alone) about
nice and intricate points, whereby his body may be brought into diverse
dangerous diseases. Neither for all this will I affirm that this solitariness
of place is chosen of all, to bestow them selves in laudable studies, and
commendable speculations, for that there are some who having in their hands
all day long books full of naughtiness and leude examples, root and inure
them selves in this doctrine, and make an ordinary practice of it: insomuch
that these ill disposed persons may well say that they have learned more
naughtiness being by them selves, then they should have done being always
in company in public and frequented places: but God be praised, and the
providence of our ancestors, who have justly condemned to the fire, all such
works, so soon as they are published, as instruments to all leaude and
naughty purposes. I must also tell you, that there are some choose
solitariness through laziness of mind, and laziness of body, to the intent
to rid their hands of the trauelles, affairs, and works which they ought
to undertake for their own behoof and other men's. And these lurk loytringly
plunged in delicacies, wherein they conserve them selves, not as Musk in a
box, but as Swine in the mire. So that it may be said, that their soul is
given to their body in stead of salt, least they should smell. I have known
some of these idle merchauntes to withdraw them selves from company most
part of the day, taking pleasure to do nothing, unless it were to press
down their beds with the peise of their unwieldy bodies: and yet (such is
their impudency) they will make men believe that they have employed all the
time in reading some good thing or other. I never behold these fellows, but
that I excuse and hold well with the Emperor Domitian, who taking. delight to
thrust through flies with the point of his dagger, did at least some exercise,
and liked better to take pains to kill flies, then to suffer his mind to be
corrupted with idleness. And if notwithstanding he were to be blamed for
this, it was not so much for the trifling exercise, as for yt he left undone
weighty matters agreeable to his greatness, and available to the
conservation of his Empire. * And hereof we have to conclude, that even as he
which abandoneth the active life, to embrace the contemplative, meriteth
praise: so he, which being in the active life refuses company, not upon any
honest occasion, but either for the hate he bears to men, either through lazy
slothfulness, either through distrust in him self, or for some other defect,
shrinketh aside into solitariness is greatly to be reprehended. * But there is
enough said touching solitariness of place, it remains now to speak of
solitariness of mind, which is, when one is present in person amongst many
others, and yet is absent in mind and thought. Like as a Philosopher was, to
whom a babbling fool, after a long and wearisome discourse, said, Sir,
perchance I trouble you with to much talk: no verily, not a whit (says he)
for that I gave no ear to you.


Guaz. I know in deed many which have the skill with the eyes, countenance,
gesture, and other outward signs, to make men think they are very attentive
to their talk, and yet have their minds turned an other way, so that in one
instant, they are both present and absent, contenting both them selves and
other.


Annib. Albeit this discretion is common to many good wits, yet I remember that
it is specially attributed to Madame Marguerite Stanga, and that this
solitariness has been figured forth by a pleasant witted Gentleman in her
person, who for the majesty of her looks, for the excellency of her grace,
beauty, virtue, behavior, and manners, is beheld of other dames of this City,
if not with envy, at least with admiration. And although in company she shows
her self to be present with countenance, laughing and speaking, yet by the
outward shyning of her eyes, bewraying her inward affection (as it were by
shining of the cristal which shows forth whatsoever is contained in it) it is
seen that her gallant mind separated from mortal things, remains enclosed in
her self, to the intent to exercise her self in more worthy and commendable
cogitations: taking from the world al occasion of co^ceiuing any hope to win
her to vanity, and upon ye occasion y^ gentleman aforesaid deuiseth of her
these verses following.

While that these cheereful eyes
fed on the wished sight,
Of your fair sweet and beauenly face
Behold my heavy spright:
Soon saw your thoughts to swerve
from mine whereby I say,
At once you give my eyes great life
and quyte my heart do slay.
But returning to the solitariness of the mind, I would have a wise man enter
into it when he is in the company of the evil: from hearing whose talk he
ought to stop his ears, as Ulysses did against the song of the Marmaides * and
to walk amongst them (as the saying is) shood amongst the thorns. * And as
we lef not to take a journey for a little rain or snow, but make provision
so well as we may for apparel to defend us against the ill weather, so we
must not foreslow the pilgrimage of the ordinary life, for the hinderance of
the naughty, but arm our selves with an invincible mind against the evil
dispositions of other, whertoo we ought not any thing at all to yield. And
for that I told you I would make mention likewise of Diogenes, I will declare
unto you the witty answers which he made touching this purpose: amongst
others, as one reproved him for that he used the company of lewd and
naughty persons, The Sun (says he) shyneth and spreads it beams on
unclean places, and yet never defiles it self. And as another reproched him
for the like, he answered, The Physicians are all day with the sick, and yet
are not infected: and in truth ill conditions take no hold of an honest
mind, and a virtuous man wareth not worse for being in company with the
wicked * who have no power over him. For that in vain (as the Proverb says)
The net is pitched in the sight of the birds * in so much that being amongst
them, he makes account he is not there, according to the saying of the
Gentleman, to whom as Esope tells, being in his study, there came a country
fellow, who asked him how he could live so alone? To whom he answered, I began
to be alone, but even since your coming hither: Meaning to show that a
learned man is then alone, when he is amongst the ignorant, from whom he is
divided in mind. But it is now time to leave speaking of this matter, for
that you understand what manner of solitariness is profitable and necessary,
and in what manner it is sometimes to be used in company.


Guaz. I am satisfied in that point, but I would gladly have you bring to a
perfect end this imperfect discourse: for it is not enough to have made me
know ye conversation is profitable, if you go not farther, and show me what
kind of conversation is necessary for the obtaining of those commodities you
have rehearsed.


Annib. You say very true, but nevertheless when we shall have spoken of the
nature and quality of conversation, yet our discourses; being linked together,
shall not be thereby finished, for we must entreat afterward of the general
points which all men ought to observe in conversation. And that being done,
yet shall not the work be finished, for as we apply na^ one medicine to all
griefs of the eyes, so we must not use conversation with every one in one
self sort: And therefore we must afterward handle the particular kinds
which pertain to all sorts of people.

Wherefore if you will have me distinguish peecemeale, the plant, the stem,
the boughs, the leaves, the blossoms, and the fruits, from the roots of
this tree, I leave to your consideration if this may be done in one day.


Guaz. For that this is a profitable and pleasant matter, I beseech you that in
these three days which I have to stay here with you, we may employ herein
that little leisure which shall be left you from practicing on your patients: and
that you will show unto me all those things which belong to conversation, to
the end, that coming in company with any, of what calling and condition
soever, I may be sure to omit nothing whith I ought to perform.


Annib. I cannot thoroughly satisfy your desire, for many causes: and first,
for that to search out all the particular points of conversation, were a
matter, if not impossible, yet at least that would require many months
work: besides, we must consider that (as the Philosophers say) there can be no
certain and determinate science, from particular to particular. Then the
particularities of conversation being known for the most part to men of mean
understanding, I should do you wrong, and should think my self to speak
superfluously (yea, even when I should speak to those ignorant and unskillful
fellows) if I should entreat of things so ordinary and common. And therefore
it shall suffice us to entreat of those things which are principally required
in conversation, wherewith perchance we shall have occasion to mingle and join
so many other bymatters, that I doubt not but you shall rest satisfied.


Guaz. Uerily, I see by this time that as well for the diversity of matters
which occur in conversation, as for the difference of the life and manners of
men, with whom we are conversant, you shall take upon you a travel and charge
far greater than the twelve labors of Hercules, thoroughly to entreat of it.
For considering that people differ one from another in degree, in age, in
kind, in life, in manners, and in profession, it were a hard and tedious piece
of work to set down fully and absolutely the proper duties of every one of
these, and of whosoever shall frequent their company. And I am of opinion,
that when one shall have prescribed a certain form of conversation to all
those, yet he shall not then have done, for that there must be re^pect has
not only to the difference which is between one kind and another, but to that
also which is between persons of one only kind: for not only young men
differ in behavior from old, and Gentlemen from Yomen: but even young men
amongst themselves differ, as also one old man differs in behavior from
another old man, and one Gentleman from another Gentleman.


Annib. Seeing that these differences fall out in all kinds, I will briefly
set forth certain general and most needful means, whereby all of them may
be reduced to one law: Touching the form afterward required in conversation,
with persons different in state and condition, whom we have already named, to
the end you be not deceived, you shall understand, my meaning is not to
discourse formally of their duty, neither to lay before you all those moral
virtues which pertain to the perfection and happy state of life.


Guaz. Why defer you to speak of a matter so profitable.


Annib. Two special causes withholde me: the one, for that I know that not
only the Greeks and Latins, but also all other nations have filled the
world with diverse volumes full of precepts of Philosophy.


Guaz. The more books of Philosophy we have at this day, the fewer
Philosophers we have but tell me if it please you, the other cause.


Annib. The other is, that if I should make a full and perfect discourse of
Moral Philosophy, it would stand none in steed, but such as are of deep
understanding, as you are, but minding to speak in particular, of the manners
of conversation meet for all sorts of people, it behooves me to have an eye
to the common profit, weighing that the most part of men, is not only
destitute of intellectual and moral virtues, but besides, is neither in wit
apt, nor in will desirous to receive them, so that it were a vain thing (that
I may not say foolish) to go about to teach by* Art, and improper terms,
theforesaide virtues to such kind of people,


Guaz. I hold well with that you have said, and for that perchance the time
approaches, that you are to visit your patientes, it shall do well here to
make a pause, and to morrow if it please you, we will take again our matter
in hand, either here, or at your house at your choice.


Annib. If it shall not trouble you, I can stay here with you a little while
longer, and we can choose no fitter place for our purpose then this same, which
with the goodly sight of diverse pleasant pictures (wherewith it is adorned)
does meruellously recreate or minds, and ministers occasion of witty talk.


Guaz. Go forward (I pray you) hardly so far as it shall please you, for I
assure you I never heard more delightful harmony then this same.


Annib. For so much then as your question was what manner of conversation is
necessary for the attaining of that perfection which we have spoken of, I set
a part al other sorts, and propose for this purpose the civil conversation.


Guaz. What mean you by that word, Civil?


Annib. If you mean to know my meaning of it, I must first ask if you know *
any citizen which lives v^ciuilly?


Guaz. Yes mary do I, more then one.


Annib. Now let me ask you on the contrary, if you know any man of the
country which lives ciuilly.


Guaz. Yea very many *.


Annib. You see then, that we give a large sense and signification to this
word ( civil) for that we would have understood, that to live ciuilly, is
not said in respect of the city, but of the quallities of the mind: so I
understand civil conversation not having relation to the city, but
consideration to the manners and conditions which make it civil. And as laws
and civil ordinances are distributed not only to cities, but to villages,
castles, and people subject unto them, so I will that civil conversation
appertain not only to men inhabiting cities, but too all sorts of persons of
what place, or of what calling soever they are*

Too be short, my meaning is, that civil conversation is an honest
commendable and virtuous kind of living in the world.


Guaz. I know by this your exposition of this word ( Civil) the field we
have to enter into, is very wide and roomesome, and therefore I am ready to give
ear to matters no less full of variety and newenesse, than commodity and
pleasantness.


Annib. As Mariners, before all other things, learn to know the signs and
tokens of winds and storms, and the sight and place of rocks and shelues,
and al other things any way contrary or hindersome to navigations, to the end
that foreseeing the imminent dangers, they may know how to avoid them, and to
make choice of f^t times and places prosperously to sail in: so we, being
desirous to understand thoroughly which is the civil conversation, to the intent
to follow it, must principally seek to know which is the uncivil and
blameful conversation, to the intent to flee it. And truly we ought to avoid
ill company, as well for the hurt which is received thereby, by the infection
of naughty conditions, as for the judgment and opinion of others: for that
we are at length taken for such as those are with whom we keep company.
Which this common Proverb shows, Tell me with whom thou do go, and I shall
know what thou do. And it is not long since that master Frauncis Pugiella
or Academike (being no less skilled in the laws, then pleasant in company)
told me that a famous doctor of his profession, set it down as an undoubted
sentence, that much credit ought to be given to the deposition of a witness
which gives in evidence of a man's honesty or dishonesty, for that he has
seen him frequent the co^mpanie of men of a good or ill name. Now I would not
have you blame me, if in searching out which is ill company, I make here a
certain distinction of men according to mine own fancy, not according to the
common and ordinary distinction. For I consider the nature of man one way in
respect of him self, and an other way in respect of the conversation he has
wi^h others* having then only regard to conversation, I ordeine three sorts
of men, to whom we will give for the present these names. Good, Evil, and
Indifferent, until we meet with words more proper and more significant.


Guaz. Why do you think those terms not proper enough?


Annib. For that these two names, Good, and Indifferent serve not to express
fully that sort of men which I mean: and to show it you more plainly, I
will give you an instance of healthy men, which are properly those, who have the
four humors so equally tempered in them, and the simple parts which come of
them (besides the other parts which we call compounde, or isntrumental,
which are the very members of the body) so well proportioned, that one thing
exceed not another in it just measure: and this health is granted either
never, or very seldom, and that to a few persons. But for all that, we
commonly term those healthful, who though they be not of so perfect a
constitution of body, are able to live, yea, and to labor too, the most part
of their time, without any going to Physic: and (to be short) who hold more
of the whole then of the sick. So likewise when I name the good, I mean not
only that excellency of goodness, which is not any way imperfect, and which
is in a manner as rare on earth as the Phoenix: but I include in that number,
all those which are well reported and reputed of in the world, and which
approach so near as they can to that excellency before spoken of. In like
case, when I said indifferent, I meant not that they are half good, and half
evil, * neither as a certain Historian takes it, who speaking of the
Emperor Galba, terms his disposition indifferent, for that comparing his
virtues and his vices together, it was hard to judge whether he were to be
counted amongst the good or the naughty: * but I meant those, who though
sprinkled with some imperfections, yet wrie rather to the good, then the evil.


Guaz. I see well now that these names do not wholly express your meaning.


Annib. It may be that in discoursing we shall hit upon more fit terms. In
the mean while I say, that we must always follow the good, fly the ill,
and neither follow nor fly the indifferent, and were it not that I were
afraid to break the head of your Boccace, I would call the Good desirable,
and the Ill, intolerable, and the Indifferent, tolerable.


Guaz. You shall offend Boccace rather with the vnpropernes, then with the
vnusualnes of words. And for my part, I like better of these same then of the
first: whereby I find verified the Proverb, Thar the second thoughts are
ever the best: Go forward now if it please you.


Annib. I take the Intolerable and Ill, for those who for their apparent
faults are pointed at with the finger, and holden for infamous, whose company
we ought altogether to eschew. For all ye world cannot let, but that the world
will judge those which haunt their company to be like unto them.


Guaz. The abuse of the world is such, that many horrible vices, are become
familiar and common, insomuch that it is counted a fault not to have them, and
not to know how to practice them. And therefore I am of opinion, that if we
must forgo the company of the ill, we shall have but a few left to deal
withal: insomuch that we should be feign to change conversation into
solitariness, and to discende to particularities. You know how grievous the
offenses are committed against God, by the means of blasphemous oaths, which
at this day are grown to such abuse, that there are few or none which
confirm not their saiyngs with these wicked and detestable swearings, and
which think not thereby to bewtifie and set forth their speech, as an Oration
is with figures. Neither am I able to report unto you in what manner a young
Gentleman a friend of mine was mocked in the Court, for that in his greatest
chafe, he always swore by the body of a Hen. And at the end, to the end he
might be taken for a good Courtier, he was driven to leave the Hen, and to
betake himself to ye Saints. That which I say of swering, I mean likewise of
many other heinous faults, which at this day are to be found in the most part
of men. And for that they are common, I fear me, it be to no purpose that you
have prescribed to avoid the company of the naughty, seeing that (if I may say
it) Of one self pitch, we all have a touch: And that those which in show seem
innocent lambs, are in deed ravening Wolves, and worse then those who are
counted most wicked. For even infidels, and those that believe not at all in
Christ, will counterfeite holiness.


Annib. * We are in deed become more weak in virtue, and more strong in vice,
then our predecessors were, * and I see by you, you have read the sentence of
the Poet Horace, which says: From Grandsiers scarce good, our fathers
descended,
to commit evil, are readily intended:
In us their sons more mischief does dwell.
but us, our sons in vice will excel,


And therefore I marvel not, if where as in old time there were few found to
blaspheme the name of the great God, at this day there are many which will not
stick to tear him limme meal, insomuch that he is thought either a Sot, or
one of a base mind which cannot swear lustily. But if ye ask me why these
same are suffered in all companies, notwithstanding they are far worse and
far more worthy of punishment then the other of evil life, I will say unto
you, that it comes to pass, for that we make no reconing of the offenses
done to Godwarde, as a thing which touches us not, and which pertains to
God alone to revenge. But we cannot be quiet when either we our selves or our
friends are injured either in word or deed, so that therein we esteem the
creature above the Creator. For you shall see him speak ill openly, and with a
loud voice, of the name of God, who dares not in a corner (as also it is not
his part) so much as open his mouth to reprove the Prince or the Magistrates.


Guaz. I think these same offend as much, and commit no less riot, then those
which crucified Christ.


Annib. I think rather they offend more, for those thought they did well,
otherwise they had kept them selves from doing it, but these same know they
do ill, and yet desist not from it: and you know how much more heinous those
faults are which are committed of set malice, then those which are done of
blind ignorance.


Guaz. Dispatch I pray you to show me if we ought to fly the conversation of
these same, and if you put them in the number of the intolerable.


Annib. These horrible swearers, which make a profession of it, when their
blood is not stirred, for their pleasure, rather then moved with choler, or
any other occasion, ought in my judgment to be filed on the roll of the
intolerable: but for others, though as a Christian you ought to fly them, yet
as a Courtier, you cannot keep you from them: not so much for the great number
of them, as for the error of the world, which esteems them in the row of the
tolerable. To be short, we ought to consider that our name depends of the
general opinions, which have such force, that reason is of no force against
them: and therefore we must avoid those which bear a mark in their forehead,
and are openly known to be dishonest.


Guaz. What will you say if I haunt the company of such, as a Physician to
cure their infirmities, and as one gealous of their behavior?


Annib. If you shall think your self able to bring them into a better way, you
shall do a deed acceptable unto God, and the world, to use their company, *
Mary, he that coueteth to reap commodity of conversation, must seek all
that he may to be amongst those that either may be made better by him, or
else may make him better: * but these of whom I speak have made a sacrifice of
their souls unto the Devil, and have cast of all care of honor, and of other
men's opinions of them: and are so far gone, that you will rather become a
convert then a conuerter: but herein you must imitate the good Archers, who
shoot not at every bird, but only at those that are within reach to be hit.


Guaz. What men do you mean to be those which carry a mark in their
forehead, and are intolerable.


Annib. Those who for notable cause are hated of the world, as some for
suspicion of heresy, some for theft, some for usury, and other for other
misdeedes, to whom we must add ruffians, harlots, flatterers, dicers,
cooseners, and such, who for the baseness of their condition, and trade of
their life, are holden for infamous, * as Sergeants, Hangmen, Tormentours. *
Besides such as differ from us in religion as Jews, Turks, etc. And to be
short, all those which have an evil report, and who oftentimes for their
deserts are new christened, and have such reproachful names given them, that
most men eschew their company an as infectious disease, * and think it a great
shame to be seen among them. *


Guaz. But how shall I behave my self with some. whom I know far more
wicked then those whom you have spoken of, albeit by their dissembling
hypocrisy, they are accounted of every man for honest men?


Annib. It is a common saying, That he which is evil and taken to be good,
may do much mischief, and no man think him to be the worker of it.
Notwithstanding, I put these same in the number of the tolerable: for though
it trouble your conscience to come in their company, yet you give no occasion
of mislike to the world, for that they are not reputed evil, and in this
point we ought to satisfy rather others then our selves, and to give place to
the common custom.


Guaz. Doubtless custom is a great Tyrant, and I know no reason why it ought
to prevail above reason. And * as the river Po, king of rivers, being over
near unto us, for that there has been no resistance made against it, is
within this six years come so far forward, and has won so much ground
upon this City, that at length it has broken the walls, and now threatens
to overthrow them: so in like manner, the violence of custom, for that we have
too much suffered it, has at this day in manner vanquished reason, which to
be true if you mark some countries on this side the mountains, as I did at
my return out of France, you shall find them fallen to a life more ^^ee (that
I may not say licencious) then has been used heretofore: and you see
throughout the towns, some of those which are taken for Gentlemen to spend
the time openly in the market place, in carding, and dicing so freely, as men
use to do in their private houses.


Annib. You tell me no strange thing, neither ought you more to marvel to see
those same play at those games openly in the street, then to see the Frenchmen
(as I have heard they do) quaffe and carouse in Tauernes, and I am persuaded
that if some Gentleman more precise then other shall withdraw himself from this
manner of play, not vouchsefing to make one amongst them, he shall be mocked and
termed disdainful, either a wise man, or Doctor, or a Poet, or some such like.
But withal I would you should know that this new manner of life has in it
some color and excuse, for that those Countries of Piemont, which you speak
of having been for these many years, a continual receite for soldiers of
many nations, the people are not only become warriers, but have retained the
customs and rytes of war.


Guaz. Are you then of opinion that a Gentleman ought to converse with such
manner of people?


Annib. Upon this point, there present themselves unto me two contrary
reasons: For if I respect the common use of the Country, which is now become
ancient, and has taken deep root, we cannot but put them in the number of
the desirable, and we may boldly use their company. On the other side, if I
set my self to consider that this gamesome life is offensive, and of evil
example, and that in all other Countries the Gentlemen, and those which are
well borne, would count it a shame to be found in public places with cards
in their hands, some perchance would place them in the rank of the
intolerable. Notwithstanding, between these two extreme reasons, I see one
in the midst between them, which makes me of opinion that these men are to
be counted tolerable, for that though they have by use this abuse of playing,
yet you shall find that they apply it not to that end, which other gamesters
do, to make a gain of it, but for pastetime and recreation sake: and besides
we know that for the rest of their life, they are so modest and virtuous as
any other people are. And therefore I think, that that custom of playing
being judged of the world neither good nor evil, these men which use it are
not to be rejected out of honest company.


Guaz. In my opinion this is a kind of injustice, to allow that to these
which is inhibited to others: and to give them power to make of vice virtue.
Your meaning is then, as far as I gather, that as it is lawefull only for
the Cinganes to rob, so these also have privilege to play in open street.
But I would have them think that the streets and public places ought to
serve the common people for merchandise, and the Gentlemen for iustes, turnies,
shows, and such like exercises, which appertain more to good horsemanship and
warlike discipline, then cards and dice do. And therefore I am persuaded they
have nothing else to say, for defense of this their custom, but that which
Diogenes said, who being asked why he eat openly in the street, answered
because he was a hungered in the street: so they play there, because being
there, there comes upon them a desire to play.


Annib. There is no help in it, but you must settle your self to like of such
men with their imperfections, and to think that every Nation, land, and
Country, by the nature of the place, the climate of the heaven, and the
influence of the stars has certain virtues, and certain vices, which are
proper, natural, and perpetual unto it. And as good and sharp wits
flourishe where the air is pure and subtle, so there are found dull and
gross heads where the air is foggie and thick. And touching conditions you
know that the Greeks though singular in learning and eloquence, yet are they
disloyal and faythles, and therefore it is prouerbially said, The Greekish
faith. Moreover, there are other people who by natural virtue are given to the
industry and discipline of war, and by natural vice are driven to
haughtiness and drunkenness, some are able easily to sustain and stoutly to
bear out pain, watching and travail, who on the other side are vainglorious
and braggers. To some, stout hardiness, and devout holiness, have been
always proper and natural, who nevertheless are worldlings and unconstant. I
am sure also you make no doubt of it, but that we Italians have likewise some
vices and virtues natural, and that we do no less exceed in the one, then
excel in the other. But if it seem no marvel unto you to see these diverse
fashions and customs, according to the diversity * and great distance of
Countries, do but consider how much we differ only within the circuit of
Italy, in the Roman, Tuscane, Lombardie, and other parts of it: then behold
one of those parts apart, and cast your imagination on the center or point of
Montferrat, and you shall find, how only the river Po and Tanar make
Countries to differ in language, apparel, life, and manners, which are no
further distant one from another, then from one side or bank of the river to
the other. Whereupon you will grant me, that all Countries have their
natural faults together with their virtues: whereby you may be assured, that
if other people have not used to play at cards and dice openly, yet perchance
they have brought in ure both publicly and privately vices far more
pernicious then this. Now to lose no more time about this point, I say unto
you, that it is not inconvenient, but necessary, to follow the diversity of
manners and customs, according to the diversity of the Countries, * and to
imitate Alcibiades, to whom it was counted a praise, that he had so ready a
wit to frame himself to the diversity of the life and manners of other
Countries, * and according to the saying, When one is at Rome, to live as they
do at Rome.


Guaz. I should think good that we should now come to the general points
perteining to the conversation of the tolerable.


Annib. It is better in my mind to dispatch other things which now come in my
head touching the intolerable. And though this matter be so ample, that a man
cannot sufficiently speak of it, yet we ought not with scilence to pass over
the vice of the slanderous, who with the falsenesse of their tongues, seek to
blemishe the brightness of others names.


Guaz. That fault is at this day common throughout the world, and therefore
we must spite of our teeth bear with ill tongues, which swarm in greater
number then Bees do in July: neither is it possible for a man to escape their
stinging, do the best he can. For now adays men take such pleasure in this
vice, that many which are free almost from all other faults, yet are they not
able to bridle their blasphemous tongues.


Annib. * I have by long experience noted, that commonly the idle the ignorant,
the unfortunate, and bankerupts, which have no good success in their own
affairs, are they which seek to deprave the doings of other men, and give
themselves to speak evil, for that they know not how to do any thing well. *
But though this fault be common to many, and grateful to the world, yet for all
that it is hateful to the world* and whosoever shall look througly into it,
will grant me that the fault of him which speaks ill of his neighbor, to
the intent to bring him into hatred, is greater then of him who pulls the
bread out of the mouth of the poor. For as the soul is more precious then the
body, so is it a greater offense to take away ones good name, which refreshes
the soul, then to defraud one of food, which sustaineth the body.


Guaz. It seems to me that in these words is implied some contrariety,
where you say, that to speak ill of others, is both grateful to the world,
and hateful to the world.


Annib. No truly, for our nature draws us to desire to understand the
imperfections of other, and we count it the greatest pleasure that may be:
and as we like well to hear others ill spoken of, so we cannot abide to be
ill spoken of our selves, whether it be rightfully or wrongfully.


Guaz. I count it nothing strange, that we like not to be found fault
withal our selves: but what think you is the cause that we are so glad to
hear others ill spoken of?


Annib. I think that comes to pass by means of two mighty enemies, which
we keep in our own house, that is, Ennie, and Ambition, which in our selves,
conspiring against our selves, force us to be grieved that others should be
counted good, and make us desire that only we our selves may seem good. But I
will tell you a thing which will make you marvel in deed* and which you will
think against all reason.


Guaz. What is that I pray you?


Annib. Mary that there are two principal sorts of these evil tongued: the
one ill, which you ought to ^lie: the other far worse, whose company you
ought not to avoid. I mean by Ill, those who without fear* without shame;
without any respect or difference, whet their tongues to rent a sunder, and
impair in all their talk both public and private, the good name of others,
sparing none, either present or absent. But these same, while they recount
other men's faults, do many times more offend the minds of the hearers, then
those who do commit them. And though they have a mark on their forehead, and
are known for infamous persons, yet for so much as they utter their venom
openly and flatly, they ought, in respect of the worser sort, rather to be
pitied then blamed: for that they show plainly, that their evil speaking is
derived from their own corrupt nature, not from the parties of whom they
speak ill: By reason whereof, their words are not much credited, and in my
opinion they do nothing else but raise a dust to do out their own eyes: for
in accusing others, they condemn themselves, and where they would have men
think them to be Catoes, they show them selves Momes, Beasts, and not to
be borne withal. But what shall we say of those Curre dogs, which without
barking bite us privily? who must be admitted into conversation,
notwithstanding they are far worse then the other.


Guaz. Which do you take them to be?


Annib. Those are of diverse sorts, who nevertheless shoot all at one mark.
Some of them I call Maskers, some Rethoricians, some Poets, some Hypocrites,
some Scorpions, some Traitors, some Forgers, some Biters, some Mockers, and
some unknown.


Guaz. You make me laugh with your pleasant and strange distinctions: but whom
call you maskers?


Annib. There are certain glorious fellows, who at shrouetide go with maskes
on their face, and yet would feign be known what they are: so likewise
certain naughty tongued fellows under the mask of modesty, say they will
not name him whom they reprehende, and yet they set him out so evidently, that
all the hearers know whom he means. By the example of the Countrieman, who
telling the hunter that the Fore was not gone that way, pointed notwithstanding
to the place where he was hidden. Some of these maskers use also speeches with
a certain outward show of commendation, which nevertheless are full of
reproach and mockery. And to say what is of it* they are those who according
to the Proverb, Have Honey in their mouth, and a knife in their hand.


Guaz. Now who are the Rethoricians?


Annib. They are those who with a certain figure* called by the Masters of
Eloquence Occupatio, make as though they would not speak evil, and yet do
it, and worse too. And touching this point, no longer ago then yesterday I
chanced to be in company, where one amongst the rest complaining of another
that had iniuryed him in words, says, I will not rehearse the lewd part he
played with a poor maid (whom he named) neither the stripes he caused to
be given one night to another, neither the contractes of usury, which he
has made with certain poor men of such a place, which I perfectly know, but
I will speak nothing hereof, least men count me to be as ill tongued as he.
Next after these, come ye blasphemous Poets, who using the figure Antiphrasis,
and speaking by contraries, will give in mockage, the name of fair to a woman
that is foul, and of honest, to one that is an harlot, and will commend the
eyes of one which looks a squint. Let us now come to ill tongued Hypocrites,
who under the color of grief and compassion, to be the better believed,
lamentably rehearse the ill haps of other: which vice, though it be common to
many, yet it is most familiar with certain women, who meeting with other of
their Gossips, after the first greetings, they forthwith break into these
speeches, Have you not heard the hard hap of my unfortunate neighbor: and
thereupon making the story, they rehearse how the husband by means of his
servant, took her tardie in her hasty business. Then they tell the wall, and
the way whereby her lover got down: next, how cruelly her husband beat her,
and her maid, and think not that they leave any thing behind untold, but
rather will put too somewhat of their own devise. After this, another
begins to say, And I will quite your tale with the like chance that
happened within this six days in our street, but I pray you in any wise let
it go no further. Now I leave to you to think how in recounting these goodly
nouels, they pass from one street to another, to recite the doings of others.


Guaz. The last year ye Duchess was driven to part with one of her chief
women, for this very cause: she had continually her hours devoutly in her
hands, and was long time taken for a woman of a most godly life, by reason
whereof she was grown into great favor with her highness: notwithstanding in
process of time she was detected to be one of a naughty slanderous tongue:
whereby she went about to bring into the disgrace of the Duchess al y^ Ladies
of the Court. Before she fell to the matter, she used some such insinuation,
Madame I would not have your grace any whit offended or troubled for any thing
that befalls to your Gentlewomen, for you ought to think that we are borne
sinners, and that there is nothing in this world more frail then our flesh.
Consider with your self, how much she inflamed the Duchess by these words,
with desire to understand the rest. And as she was earnest with her to go on
with her tale, the naughty queen humbly requested her not to enforce her to
speak of such inconveniences. And after she had abidden three or four
assaults, at length, as it were forced thereto, rubbing dry her eyes, which
for very grief stood full of tears, she began to make relation of the
slipper prankes of the Dutchesses Gentlewomen, and had never done with her
reproachful reports. But I expect now your speech of the ill tongued Scorpions.


Annib. Those be they which will utter these or such like speeches of you or
any other: I think not possible to find a more courteous and honorable
Gentleman then Master Guazzo, whom I should far more account of, if he had
not one great fault. You know how afterward he begins in manner of a
Scorpion to sting you with his tail, in speaking ill of you. Others will
handle the matter more artificially saying, A mischief take those ill tongues
which cease not to molest those which are good and honest, and will not so much
as spare the good name of our Master Guazzo, of whom (notwithstanding he is
the flower of courtesy and virtue) yet they stick not to say, that he is
proud and malicious, and that corrupted with money he has done and said such
and such things: and so tell all, and more too.


Guaz. I understand you. These same may go hand in hand with those who always
accompany their (yea) with (but.) What say you now of ill tongued traitors?


Annib. If perchance you have received some hard intreatment at your Princes
hand, and * as it were to ease your stomach * you make complaint thereof to
some one, upon trust that you repose in him, and he go and discover it to
your Prince, will you not judge him to be an ill tongued traitor, and one that
seeks your spoil?


Guaz. Yes truly, and yet that fault is rise in Courts, and oftentimes Princes,
being desirous to try out the truth, have granted their servants the combat
one against the other. And I know when upon like occasion certain Gentlemen
have conuayed themselves into some close place, where because the one would not
live with the name of an evil speaker, and the other of a false accuser, they
have made an end of their lives and their quarrels both together.


Annib. I comprehend also under this withered branch, all talebearers, and al
spies, all coyners and sowers of discord, and al those which bewray other men's
secrets: leaving to your report how greatly they do offend.


Guaz. The least punishment that they deserve is, to have their tongues pulled
out, as Jupiter served a certain nymph, who bewrayed his secret loves to Juno:
but I marvel nothing though many fall into this falt, for that we naturally
run upon things which are forbidden us. Whereupon a certain wise man used to
say, that it was more easy to hold a burning coal, then a secret word in ones
mouth. Wherefore I hold him for a very fool, which discovers his secrets to
another, if necessity force him not. For according to the saying, He brings
him self in subjection to another, which tells his secret to him who knew
it not. I remember me to this purpose, of a pleasant part of a serving man, to
whom his master gave certain garments: which he no sooner had, but he gave
them forthwith to a friend of his, and as his master blamed him for it, he
made answer, why would you have me keep them, when you your self could
not keep them? A man may shape us the like answer in revealing our secrets,
which we our selves could not keep hidden in our hearts. And we ought to hold
it for a ground, that things committed to the ears, are for ye most part
proclaimed in the streets. But as it is a great falt to disclose ye secrets of
other: so contrariwise, it is a notable virtue to know how to hold ones peace,
and to bridle his tongue. And if we be bound to keep close the secrets of a
friend: how much more ought we secretaries to co^ceale the secrets of our
master, who gives us wages to the end we should be secret? and that we should
imitate the Greek, who as one told him his mouth stunke, answered, that the
cause of it was the many secrets which he suffered to mould and vinew within it.
Which may be understood not only of other men's secrets, but of our own also.
And in very deed he that will keep his thoughts secret, let him not unfold
them to any other, but let him be his own secretary. But me thinks I am
strayed out of our way, and therefore it were better we returned to the
distinction of the ill tongued.


Annib. Nay rather, your brief and sententious discourse came well to the
purpose, and I willingly gave ear to it, as matter not proceeding from a
Secretary employed in triffles. Let us now speak of ill tongued forgers, whose
naughtiness is such, that they will accuse you to have done or said that which
you never thought. Wherein you oftentimes receive injury of two persons: to
wit, of the false accuser, who according to the proverb, speaks reprochful
words to one that is deaf, which is, to backbite the absent: and of him who
before he understand the matter, gives credit to those false surmises. This
questionless is an over great fault, and in the number of these forgers I put
those, who if you shall speak any thing unto them soberly and sagely, make a
false and perverse interpretation of it, and wrest it to some evil meaning.
The ill tongued byters follow next, out of whose mouth proceed certain short
nips, which pearce our hearts more then sharp arrows: And though they quippe
and scoff oftentimes according to the truth, yet they are not clear from
gilt, for that they do it with a spyteful mind: whereby they incur blame and
ill will: Yea they are so indiscreet and insolent, that they had rather forgo
a faithful friend, then a scoffing speech. Neither can they so cover their
words under the cloak of pleasantness or gravity, but that their
maliciousness is discyphered. But as they are blame worthy, who with such
tauntes stir up men's choler, so those are to be borne withal, who being
provoked, return one scoff with an other: and those answers ever are worth
two of those which are made unprovoked. Whereof we have a thousand examples:
amongst others, this is known to most men, which was made to the Emperor
Augustus, who meeting by chance with a stranger which resembled him very
much in favor, asked him if his mother had at any time been at Rome,
insinuating thereby in flouting manner, that he might be his fathers bastard
son. But the stranger answered him no less boldly then merrily, my mother
was never there, but my father has.


Guaz. It is very true, that he which says what pleases him, hears that
which displeases him.


Annib. After these same, come mockers and flouters, who without any comely
grace, deride every man, and more easily persuade them selves that they are
pleasant and merry conceited fellows, then perceive them selves to be ignorant
and indiscreet fools.


Guaz. A Gentleman will hardly away withal, to be mocked by one of these
glorious Asses, neither will he easily digest such an injury.


Annib. I think so, but he must use patience, and follow the Philosopher, who
as it was told him that certain mocked him: answered, It may be they mock at
me, but I am not mocked. * And no doubt he is greatly deceived, which thinks
it lawful for him to despise or mock any, but those which are evil. There
remain now the evil tongued unknown, who work their feate two manner of
ways, either by writing, or by figure. The first, by slanderous Lybels
impair the honor of others, and these same for the most part in manner of
lightning, which scorcheth the tops of Towers and high Palaces, cast forth
their renoume against Princes and great Lords. The other, with tablets and
pictures use to represent men and women in some infamous and dishonest act.


Guaz. I remember that in a famous City there was by night set upon the door
of his house, the most natural and resemblant picture of a Gentleman with two
horns on his forehead.


Annib. Such deeds are blameable; yea, and deserve punishment rather then
blame. * Now you have heard how many sorts there are of the ill tongued in the
world, and how grievous their fault is: which is moreover more shameful when
it is committed against the dead, for that the evil speaker shows thereby
manifestly his base and abject mind, in offending those who can not defend
them selves, against whom while they were alive, they durst not perchance once
open their lips. And of these, this saying rose, That the Lion being dead,
the very Hares triumph over him. * But it is now high time to set an end to
this discourse, and I fear me you will count me ill tongued, to speak so
much ill of the ill tongued. Wherefore all these kind of evil speakers
gathered together, I say, that though they are had in hatred, yet commonly they
are not excluded from the company of others: for that they are not marked on
the forhead, by reason whereof we cannot refuse their company, but must away
with them so well as we may.


Guaz. Seeing your mind is not, that we shall fly the Conversation of such
manner of pestiferous people, in my opinion it were expedient and necessary,
to teach some trick how we may be preserved from the venom of their
serpentine tongues.


Annib. Your request is very reasonable, whereto I briefly answer, saying unto
you, That like as certain beasts, having to encounter with Serpents, have
first recourse to certain simples, which, being eaten, have power to repress
and mortify their venom: so having often to encounter with the evil tongued,
we ought to be armed with some preservative. And for my part, I find no
presenter remedy, when in our presence a foul mouthed railer fileth his tongue
to touch someone, then to abase our eyes, and not to seem to take pleasure in
his railing speech. For when he perceives we delight not in his words, he will
forbear to speak evil. You know that arrows will not stick in stones, so
neither will their rotten roots stick fast, but where they find ye ground soft
and apt to receive them. And I say thus much unto you further, that if we will
seek diligently which is the greater fault, either to give ear to an evil
speaker, or to speak ill of others, we shall confess in the end, (as others
have done) that we are not able to give any determinate judgment of it. And to
say the truth, whosoever gives hearing to a slanderous detractor, gives him
occasion to offend: and it is so great chance, but that he him self is one
of the same stamp. So that he which speaks, thinks he commits no fault,
or at least if he do, that he parts it in the middle, giving one half to
the hearer, and taking the other unto him self. Whereby it comes to pass,
that like two blind men which lead one an other, they fall both into one
ditch. Let us then stop our ears, against the words of such manner of
people, and so doing we shall repress their unbridled tongues, and get great
honor and credit with the wise. And as it is well done to bear no part in
the ill report of others, so is it a deed deserving commendation, to make no
account of the slanders which others raise of us. And we ought to prepare our
selves to have our ears as readily at our command, as they have their
tongues. By the example of Alexander the great, who making war against an
other King, and hearing one of his soldiers speak ill of him, rebuked him
sharply, saying, I give thee pay to fight against mine enemy, not to rail
against him. The same Alexander understanding that some misreported him, went
not about any way to revenge it, but answered sagely, and with a Princely
modesty, that it belonged to a King to do well, and hear ill. * Ad heereto,
the saying of Augustus, who hearing that Tiberius was very sorry that he bare
him self so modestly and patiently toward those that spoke ill of him, wrote
unto him these words, Do not (my Tiberius) herein follow your youthful
fancy, and take it in such skorne that there are some which speak ill of us,
for that is sufficient if we be in that case that none can do us harm* Also
he said to another touching this matter, that in a free ^itie men ought to
have free speeches.


Guaz. But all princes have not the courage of Alexander or Augustus.


Annib. Truly if it be ill done to blemish the renoume of private persons, it
is much worse to misreport princes ^pecially our natural and liege Lords,
and those which do it are to be detested of all men, for that in speaking ill
of them, they provoke them to wrath, and oftentimes give the^ occasion to alter
their conditions, and of gentle and courteous, to become rough and cruel.
Neither can they excuse themselves by saying that there are naughty princes
and tyrants, for so much as they have received a commandment from God to
obey their rulers, what soever they are^ in confirmation whereof it is said,
if Nero be thy prince rebel not against him.


Guaz. Now that we have done with those pricking and thorny tongues, have you
any other sort of persons which are at least to be borne withal and
tolerated in our conversation, though they be not to be desired?


Annib. A certain Philosopher, being asked what beast in the world he thought
to be worst, answered, of wild ones the evil tounged, of tame ones, the
flatterer: and therefore I think we shall proceed in our discourses very
orderly* if having spoken already of those wild beasts we, shall now
entreat of these tame ones, whose breath is so venomous, yt it poisoneth the
hearts of those yt give ear unto the^.


Guaz. And in what row I pray you put you these?


Annib. There are of them two sorts, the one open^ the other secret. The open
flatterers are those, who constrained through need and hunger, rather then any
thing else, get them to the houses of great personages, and there play their
part so well that they make them believe, according to the Proverb, that gloe
Worms are lanternes, and that the Moon is made of a green Cheese. Or at
least they will be sure to say or do some thing that shall be acceptable unto
them: And these get the name, not only of slatterers, but also of Parasites
and iesters. Like as one Nicesias, who seeing the flies bit as soon the
hands, as soon the face of Alexander, said, O how much better are these flies
then other, which have the favor to taste of your royal blood. * And another
seeing Dionisius (standing a good way of out of his hearing) to laugh with
certain of his familiers, he fell to laughing to: and as Dionisius asked him
why he laughed: he answered, For that I know al your words to be so full of
witty pleasantness, that they will make any man laugh * You see likewise the
comedies, both of the time past, and of the present, furnished with these
flatterers and Gnathoes, whom for that they have been pointed at, as they go
in the streets, and openly noted for infamous persons, we ought too avoid as
intolerable, and men of vile condition, and of no valor, and who often like
slaves are well and truly beaten for their scurrilous and broad jesting. And
as the Ape which is not fit to guard the house as the mastiffe, neither to
bear a burden as the Ass or horse, neither to ear the ground as the Ox,
gives himself to make us laugh with his mops and mowes, and to endure a
thousand villainies: so these flatterers, having no honest or profitable trade
to commend themselves by, frame themselves to delight the eyes and ears of
others, to their own great shame and reproach. Next after these, follow the
secret flatterers, who under the color of friendship and good will, cunningly
and artificially insinuate them selves into other men's favor, and by their
subtle devises and false persuasions, make them fall into many errors.


Guaz. You put these same as I think in the number of the tolerable.


Annib. Just.


Guaz. And I would hold rather that they should be put in the number of the
desirable,


Annib. Why so?


Guaz. For, that though all reproo^e flattery in word, yet every one
commends it in heart: and I promise you, that among so many cities,
countries, and nations as I have traveled, I never yet found man so fierce and
savage which has not suffered him self to be coyed and clawed with the
tickling of flattery: and by long experience, I have noted that all persons of
great valor, and of the best wits take a singular pleasure no less to flatter
others, then to be flattered them selves. You are not ignorant that if you,
minding to extol me, came and told me that I were a strong wrastler, or an
excellent musition, I should think you mocked me because no part of those
parts are in me, but when you shall commend me for writing a fair hand, or a
pure style, or for any thing else concerning my profession, I shall for manner
and modesty sake make some courtesy to accept your commendation, but in my
mind I shall be well apaide of it: as well for that I persuade my self, that
all which you shall say of me touching those matters, is most true, as for that
naturally I am desirous of praise and commendation* And I remember I have read,
that Themistocles being asked what words uttered on the stage, pleased him
best, answered, those which recount my praises. And this desire is common to al
men, who are so licourous of honor * that only to hear themselves exalted,
makes them besides the^ selves for joy. Like as Demosthenes did, who passing
before two waterbearers and hearing the^ say softly one to another* this is ye
famous Orator Demosthenes, turned back, and stood a tiptoe to make himself the
better seen, as who say, I am even he. But what speak I of Demosthenes? How
many are there * who without measuring their merit, or considering whether they
be praised rightly or without cause, suffer themselves willingly to be
deceived, and take in good part these praises *. And on the contrary how many
do we see (and perhaps I my self am one of them) that take it heuily, and in
a manner angerly, if they be not magnified ** Yea I will say more unto you,
that if one of these Gnatoes, of whom you have made mention, should fall to
commending me, and bend him self to set me forth in the best colors he
could, undoubtedly I should become a very Thraso, and I should willingly
listen unto him, making my self believe, that though he used to flatter
others, yet he dealt plainly with me. Yea, I should can him thank for it, and
wish that all my friends* and kinsfolk were present to hear it.

Tush Master Annib. Flattery is the way to make friends, and win
preferment: and I am persuaded, that he which knows not how to gloss and
flatter, knows not how to behave himself in company. I heard once a
French Lord say to his friends, flatter me, and ye do me the greatest
pleasure in the world. * And there is no man but knows, that as bitter
reprehension is the beginning of enmity, so gentle adulation is an entry to
amity. * But if you think that flattery does often make men do amiss, I am
of the contrary opinion: for as he, which is worthily commended, is thereby
the more encouraged to goodness, so he that sees himself praised without
desert, acknowledges to himself his unworthiness, and indeuoureth by his
deeds to become worthy of such praise. And if flattery were a fault,
discreet fathers and schoolemaisters would not use it toward young children,
who notwithstanding they do not speak, read, write, sing or dance, or any
such like, exactly and perfectly, yet their fathers or masters cease not
greatly to extol that which they do, to the end to encourage them to go
forward from good to better. You see also, that nature has planted a certain
kind of fawning flattery, even in the hearts of little infants, who run and
embrace, and kiss their parents and friends, when they would obtain any
thing at their hands: yea and has taught it unto beggars, who to have our
a^mes, importune and flatter us with fair words, and pitiful speeches.
Moreover, consider these sine Orators what glauering speeches they use, and
how they teach men to insinuate, and by colored words to creep into men's
boosomes, and to win the favor of Princes and Magistrates. Neither will I
omit the example of politic lovers, who to win the good will of their
beloved, term her both in talk and letters, sometime Mistress, sometime the
heart of their life, sometime their soul, sometime their hope with such like
flattering names. Yea, they will not stick to send her to Paradise, giving
her the title of a Goddess, and calling her beauty Angelical and divine: her
teeth Perles, her lips Coral, her hands Iuory, and as the Poet says, Her
heirs are glistering Gold,
Her face the driven snow:
Her lids are of Hebene tree,
Her eyes two Stars do show.


The world (to make it short,) is full of flattery, and is maintained by
flattery, and at this day it is more in fashion then picked beardes, or great
ruffes. You see how all persons, to the intent to avoid contention, and to
be acceptable in company, sooth one an other, not only by speaking, but by
holding their peace, and seeming to consent to other men's sayings. In deeds
likewise double diligence is often used, as, though we see the garments of
our master or friend very clean without spot or mote, yet to pick us a
thank, we will not stick to rub and wype them with the lap of our
cloak, as if there were dust or dirt upon them. Again, there are some who
while others speak, though they give no care at all unto them, yet they nodde
their heads, and abase their eyes, and with signs seem to hold up their
yeas and nayes, which is nothing else but mere flattery. You know also that
we naturally hate cauillers and Sophists, who at every word will overthwart
us, and as they say, seek knottes in Bulrushes: and how on the other side
those, which seem to consent to our sayings, either in words or iesture, we
repute them for our friends, we bear them great affection, and love to be
in their company, taking their flattery in steed of courtesy and good will.
In so much that we count him either envious or proud, which does not sooth
us in all things: and so great is our vaineglorie, that when men commend us,
though we think it far above our desert, yet we attribute it rather to the
great abundance of good will, then to the fraud of flattery. You shall never
hear any give the lie to an other for praises, which he shall wrongly and
falsely slander him withal, but being puffed up with pride and vainglorie,
with a merry look, he makes answer, The good will, which you bear me,
causes you to say so. Therefore not without reason, a certain Flatterer
(being advised to speak the truth) answered in deed, A man ought to speak the
truth to him that will hear it: but who is he? But nevertheless take this
with you, that as truth gets hatred, so flattery wins love, and
breeds good blood, in so much that he, which should take flattery out of the
world, should take away al humanity and courtesy, For then we should not
salute him whom we take to be our enemy, whereas now we see, that he bids us
good morrow with his mouth, which wishes us much sorrow in his heart. But
what will you have a man do? * We must by their example give them merry looks,
and fleer in their faces: we must play the Fox with Foxes, and delude art,
with art. * And as it is a fault stiffly to stand in contention with ones friend,
so is it a virtue to know how to give place and yield in giving him the upper
hand. Like as the wyly Anichin did in Boccace, who suffering a Gentlewoman to
mate him at chests, thereby made him self her mate at better sport. * By these
reasons therefore I conclude, that to win favor, and happily to atchiue our
purposes, we must always have praising and pleasing words in our mouth, * and
we must count it commendable to extol both by words and signs the dooinges
of others, and to give them tha^ which every one gapeth after.


Annib. You have very wittily commended and set forth flattery, but for that I
am altogether different in opinion from you, because I will not be thought a
Flatterer, I will oppose my self against the reasons which you have alleged. And
first I say unto you, that men for the most part, are Flatterers of themselves,
making themselves believe they are that, which they are not. * With which folly
Princes are often times blinded, like as Domitian was, who was neither afeard nor
ashamed to cause him self to be called Lord and God. Of whom a flatterer
writes these words to his glory, but to his own shame, The Edict of our
Lord and God. Likewise Alexander suffering this madness to enter into his
head, thought it not enough to be a man and a King, and to have the title of
great: but he would on Gods name, be called the son of Jupiter, neither was
he well pleased with those which did not sooth him in it. Whereof his mother
complained, saying, He would bring her into disgrace with Juno, for making
her a Cucqueane. But at this divinity a certain Philosopher, who had no skill
in flattering, made a scoff, who seeing his Physician in his sickness prepare
for the recovery of his health a certain supping or broth, said, Our God has
put the hope of his health in a mess of broth: so that those which love them
selves, so without measure, * willingly give ear to flatterers, of whom they
think they are praised, when in truth they are but flattered. And therefore
no marvel though flatterers are so acceptable. Yet notwithstanding, men of
discretion, which know them selves and their deserts, though naturally they
are desirous of praise, yet they love not to be flattered, or praised without
cause: for so much as false praise is naught else but mockery, and therefore I
think you not so greedy of glory, that if in the recital of your praises I
should intermedle any thing which were not true, you would can me any great
thank for it, but would blame me either in words openly, or in your heart
secretly.


Guaz. See how you are wounded with your own weapon, for in commending me for
one who like not to be commended above my deserving, you attribute a virtue
unto me which is not in me, and show your self a flatterer, and a flouter.


Annib. You are deceived, and it is you your self that have received the
wound: for having already said, that if a flatterer praise you, you will not
take him for a flatterer toward you, and now not allowing me to attribute
unto you a virtue, which you deem your self to have, you are contrary to your
self, and make me appear a true dealer, and no flatterer. Besides that, when
I say, I take you to be such a one that seeks not praise without desert, this
is no commendation, but rather a good opinion that I have of you: This were a
commendation, if I did affirm absolutely that you were such a one as would
give no ear to flatterers. Wherefore my words having no signification of
praise, they can not receive any interpretation or suspicion of flattery. Now
following our purpose, I say again, That a wise man does never agree to the
false praises of flatterers, who resemble altogether the Fish Polypus: for as
that Fish changes color according to the object that it incountreth, so
they alter their opinions according to the appetie of the hearers: and they are
termed by an ancient Author enemylike friends, for under their pleasant
sugared words, they keep hidden a bitter venomous meaning, * in like manner
as the hook is hidden under the bayte, or the Serpent amongst the flowers:
Neither are they unlike the Butcher who claweth the Hog with his hand, to
the intent to come conveniently to lay his Beetle upon his pate. Neither is
it to be said, that flattery woorketh any good, for that a man commended
without cause, indeuoureth to deserve it: for a cunning flatterer, sets the
garments so artificially upon the back of him whom he disguiseth withal,
that the seames shall not be seen: and betaketh him self in such sort to
things like to be true, that he makes them taken for true in deed. And
albeit some famous writers have entreated of the means to discern a friend
from a flatterer, yet is it in my opinion very hard (that I may not say
impossible) to attain to that knowledge, as well for that the world is full
of these tame beasts, as also for that it is hard to discern the evil which
resembles the good. And therefore it was well said of a wise man, That as the
Woolfe is like to the Dog, so is the flatterer to the friend: and that we
must take heed to mistake, least thinking to set our selves in the keeping of
Dogs, we fall into the devouring of Wolves. But be it so, that you feel the
smell of false praise, yet notwithstanding you shall not feel in your self
that remorse and desire of deserte, which you speak of: for this false praise
has a show of truth, and is bestowed upon you as due and deserved. I come
now to the example of parents, who as you say, flatter their children, to
encourage them to virtue, and of children, who on the other side flatter their
parents, to wring some thing from them: and I say unto you, That these two
cases differ. The first is not in truth flattery, for that there is no deceit
in it.


Guaz. Do you not deceive a child, when he has lept but a little way, and you
tell him he has leapt excellently well?


Annib. It is a good kind of deceit which tends to a good end, and which is
profitable to the party deceived, as we Physicians deceive sometime our
Patients, in giving them the juice of Pomegranates in steed of wine.


Guaz. Descend to the other example of children, which flatter their parents
to get money, or something else.


Annib. That if I be not deceived, requires more deep consideration: and we
must first understand, that some to get favor, use to uphold and extol
whatsoever others shall say, without gainsaying any thing: some on the
contrary, fall to contention continually, and cross other men's sayings, and
these two extreemes are naught, between which thereto lies a way, which those
keep, who * will neither altogether sooth, neither altogether thwart, but * in
an honest sort know how to allow, or disallowe the sayings of others in
time and place, as it becomes an honest man to do. Next, we must note, that
those who hold up every ones yeas and nayes, only to the intent to delight,
ought to be called iesters, but when they do it for their advantage, they are
without question flatterers. And according to this distinction, children, which
embrace their parents to get something from them, are to be termed flatterers:
but in this case, we have further to consider, that children can not give
praise, or show love to their parents, that may surmount their natural and
bounden duty, or that may be more then their parents think they have
merited.


Guaz. Yea mary, but it is a common saying, That he which makes more of thee
then he was wont, either has coosoned thee already, or else goes about to
coosen thee. And parents are not so blind, but that they see in this case the
subtletie and craft of their children.


Annib. They do not only perceive it, but also conceive well of it, and do
not count it craft as you do, but rather a thing commendable, for that they
see their children therein to follow nature as their Mistress, which teaches
us to humble our selves in our need, and to crave of others by deeds sounding
forth their praise, and setting forth our affection toward them, and to
know that he which will have, must ask, and he which will enter into the house,
must first knock at the gate. And albeit we ought at all times to give praises
to our heavenly father, yet we are most stirred theretoo, both with tongue and
heart, when we are desirous to obtain any thing at his hands. And to
appease his wrath, we call him not just, but make mention of his clemency and
mercy, whereof we stand in need. Whereof, according to this consideration,
we may rightly conclude, that such manner of deeds ought not to run under
the name of flattery, and that infantes, no nor children of discretion, can
not (though they would) use flattery toward their parents. Which Pittacus
one of the seven wise men of Greece plainly showed, saying, Never be afeard to
be counted a flatterer of thy father. And touching the example of the poor
which beg alms with glauering words. I answer, that necessity has no
law: and if to avoid hunger, in some countries theft be suffered, much more
ought flattery to be borne withal. And besides, I think that it is not
properly to be called flattery: for that a Flatterer does not use openly to
show his need, but cunningly labors to move men to extend their
liberality toward him. And by the self same reason, I maintain the cause
of the Orator, who craves openly of the Prince or Judge, that which he
desires to obtain: neither ought he any more to be blamed, then he which
says, take heed to thy self, for I mean to strike thee. For as this same
manifests his intent, and gives his adversary leisure to prepare to defend
himself: so the Orator enters not into the field, but that the judge first
knows the request he is to make, and bethinketh him of the means which
shall be used to sound his opinion. There remains now no more but the last
example of lovers, who I am content to confess unto you, are in deed no
better then flatterers. For a greater man then my self confesses as much,
writing, that if their beloved be flat nosed, they term her amiable: if
hauked, they call her Princely: if she be brown, they count her manly: if
white, heavenly. But this is not to be marvelled at, seeing lovers are both
lawless, and witless, and that in their hearts as our Poet says: The senses
bear the sway, and reason is subdued.


And as the lover flattereth his Mistress, so she flattereth her self, for
that there is no woman so deformed, who hearing herself called bewtiful,
believes it not, or at least thinks not to be esteemed for such of her
lover. And as the Crow to give credit and consent to the praises which the
Fox gave him, let the pray fall forth of his mouth: so many unfortunate women
have felt the evil which comes of flattery, for that by the breath of
praises, as a Feather in the wind, they have suffered themselves to be lifted
so high, that being not able there to sustain them selves, they have fallen to
the ground, and in the fall have given their honor such a foil, that of
Mistresses, they have become servants. Now touching that point of civility
and courtesy, where you say we salute those who are our enemies, I say that
this sentence is most true; that we must not take for Doves all that say Peace
be unto you, but those ought to be termed dissemblers, rather then flatterers.


Guaz. In my mind, you give diverse names to one self thing, for so much as
flattery is never without faigning.


Annib. There is as much difference between those two, as between the
general and the special. For it is true that he which flattereth, faigneth:
but not on the contrary. And to explane it unto you, behold a fencer, who
making at his enemies head, strikes him on the leg, or some where else: you
may well say that this fellow dissembleth, but not that he flattereth. And
valiant Captains also, do they not deceive the enemy, when they make a show
to go one way, and then take another? and are not victories won as well by
Stratagemes and policies of war, as by force of arms? which kind of
counterfeiting is not blameable, but rather commendable. And not only amongst
enemies, but amongst friends and acquaintance, colorable dealing is
tolerable, in things which are not prejudicial unto them. As if I be
requested to go see some Comedy, or some Play, or some such like thing, and
that I have no mind to go thither, I will make as though I were ill at ease:
or if I would not be known by night, I will disguyse my self in some sort.
You see then, that dissembling stretches to many things, and to diverse ends,
and that flattery is more strict, and contained under dissimulacion, as the
special under his general. Wherefore I conclude, that as it is not lawefull
to dissemble in flattering, for that it is not hurtful to him toward whom it
is used, so is it permitted (neither can it be said to be a fault) to
dissemble without harm, and without intent to hurt another. I grant well,
that he which makes a show to love one, to the intent to deceive him, or do
him wrong, is much too blame, and that the Philosopher counts him worse then
a forger of money, for that there can be no friendship, where there is
counterfeiting. But if for civility and good manner sake, I salute one whom I
am acquainted withal, without showing any affection toward him, I ought not
therefore to be called a dissembler* for that I am moved to do him honor,
rather in way of courtesy, then of good will. Besides, you know that the world
is full of naughty men, whom we justly hate for their imperfections: but it
is not good to give them to understand what ill will we bear them. And
bethink your self herein, that many are beloved which are not honored, as
children, who are loved, not honored of their parents: and contrariwise many
are honored, which are not loved, as some Princes, not well liked of their
subjects, or some Magistrates, which are honored, but not loved of the people:
And therefore we cannot oftentimes; nor ought not to fail in civility and
courtesy, in respect only of our own duty. For we are bound to * resalute
those which salute us, be they our inferiors or equals: If they be princes or
magistrates, or our superiors, we ought to do them honor for the reverence
due to their estate, if not for affection. I think I have sufficiently showed
the difference between faining, and flattering. Now I say again, returning to
flatterers, that they are men of most vile and naughty nature. And though it
be a hard matter, as we have said already, to discern a friend from a
flatterer, yet we must note, that commonly the greater are flattered by the
lesser, and the more they are in prosperity, the more they are beset with
flattterers: who always make their repair thither where profit is to be
reaped. Whereof it comes that Princes are ever besieged by these evil
spirits: whereupon Carneades used to say, that Princes sons never learn to
do any thing well, but only to ride, for that their governors and teachers
seek to please them, and make them believe they are sufficiently seen in
things whereof they have no skill at all, which happens not in ryding their
horses, for the horse, which is no flatterer, and which makes no more account
of the great then of the small. throws them to the ground, if they cannot
sit fast in the sadle. And therefore we must beware of such persons, both for
yt they are hurtful to us, and because god is displeased with the^. And I am in
doubt whether be the greater offense of him that slanderously reproves the
good, or of him that flatteringly commends the evil. I remember I have
learned long since, that God is grievously offended to hear one either like to
himself discommended, or unlike, commended: and no doubt, but it is a great
fault, through flattery to commend for one thing, for which he ought of
right to be reproved: which is signified unto us by the sentence. Woe be unto
you which call the evil good: These flatterers are resembled to those which
put a pillow under our heads, and delicate and soft Feathers under our bodies
to make us sleep. Likewise those are in great fault which flatter of purpose
to hurt, like as Judas did. And therefore it is written, That it is better to
be beaten of ones friend, then kissed of his eninimie, to wit, a flatterer:
and for the conclusion, to commend that in one which is evil, is the deed of
a deceiuer, and a very kind of treason. * And therefore the Emperor Sigismund
is worthy commendation, who hearing a certain shameless fellow call him
God, up with his fist, and gave him a box on the ear, and when he said, why
do thou strike me Emperor? He answered, why do thou bite me
flatterer? *


Guaz. For so much as you have plainly showed unto me how hateful and
hurtful these flatterers are, I think good they were scored up amongst the
Intolerable.


* Annib. Nay, let us set them even cheek by cheek by the evil tongued, upon
the seat of the tolerable: and taking both of the^ as friends, let us take
heed of them as enemies: and put upon our head a Helmet to defend our ears
from their perilous speeches, remembering that he which willingly listeneth to
flatterers, is like to the sheep yt gives the woolf suck: or to him which
leads by the hand another, who sets his foot before him to give him a
fall. And when you perceive these glosing merchants to praise you, and extol
you to the skies, desire them of courtesy to let you remain on earth, saying
unto them, that if you stand in need of praise, you will praise your self: or
else do as a certain Gentleman my friend did, who having a great while, and
with great patience given ear, to a flatterer which had commended him above
the Moon, said unto him in the end, I know not what to do with these
praises, for if I reject them, I shall accuse you of flattery, and if I accept
them, I shall show my self desirous of vain glory: therefore like good
fellows let us part them, give me the one half, take the other to your self.


Guaz. But in discretion the Gentleman ought not to have taken half, but to
have forsaken all.


Annib. Nay by your leave, he showed great discretion in it, for flattery
being always mixed with some part of truth, he was wise to accept the
truth, and leave the lies to the flatterer.


* Guaz. I like your opinion well touching the repulse we ought to give to
such counterfaite praises, but in this point there comes to my mind a
doubt, if I, moved by the good will I bear you, and having fit occasion
ministered, give unto you in your presence true and due praise, which you have
worthily deserved for some deed of yours, whether it shall be your part to
reject it, or pass it over with silence.


Annib. For that silence would be a sign of disdainfulnesse or lightness. I
either with Christian humility would answer you, in referring those praises
to God as occasion of all good, or else with a Moral modesty, I would seek
somewhat to extenuate my glory, and make you or some other partaker of those
praises. In like manner, as Pyrrhus that great Captain did, who being
returned from war with speedy and prosperous victory, and hearing his
soldiers call him a courageous eagle: answered, If I be an eagle, you are the
cause of it, for that with your arms and weapons as it were with feathers you
have vpholden and sustained me. * But it is time to go out of the
conversation of flatterers, and to conclude, that he is happy, which neither
flattereth other, nor suffers himself to be flattered by others: which
deceives not, nor is deceived: which neither does ill, nor suffers ill to
be done to him.


Guaz. For so much as the friend, and the flatterer have so great conformity
together, that hardly one can be known from the other, I would gladly have
you instruct me how I ought to behave my self not to be reputed a flatterer.


Annib. You must observe therein two things: the one, never to praise a man in
his presence, a fault that few can take heed of, not remembering the saying of
the Greek Poet: He which speaks ill of me behind my back, does me no
wrong, he which speaks well of me before my face, reprocheth me. But for
that there are some which will think you either proud or envious, if you
praise them not, the other thing to be observed, you must take with them
another course, which is, to imitate the dog of Egypt, which drinks at the
river of Nyle, and then runs his way: so you must seem to acknowledge their
deserts, and that you will not utter their praises in their presence, for fear
to be thought to flatter them, leaving nevertheless this little Sugar in
their mouth.


Guaz. Have you any other persons of the rank of the tolerable, which are
neither to be desired nor avoided.


Annib. I have said unto you already, that to the vice of flattery,
gainesaying is opposed, and therefore I think good we speak of these
contentious fellows, which obstinately withstand the opinions of other, and
will never leave till they have the last word, not waying the dislyking or
displeasure of others.


Guaz. Albeit I cannot abide the qualities and company of such manner of men,
yet I remember I have heard a virtuous and noble Gentleman to make good
account of them, saying, That those are endued with excellent wits, which can
maintain their private opinions against the common opinion of all: and that
we hearken unto them with more attention and admiration. And in good sooth, if
you should with a long discourse prove unto me that the Sun is clear and
hot, you would make me have no great list to listen unto you, for that you
should tell me nothing, but that which I know before: but if you will make
good that it is obscure and cold, O how you would stir up my spirits, and
make me attentive to hear you. It was therefore, that a certain Philosopher
hearing that there was one preparing himself to make a speech, in the praise
of Hercules, answered, Why? who discommendeth him? Behold on the contrary,
with how great pleasure and admiration we read the Paradoxes of diverse
witty and learned writers, specially the pleasant pamphlets made in praise of
the plague, and of the French pox. And if you reply, that this belongs
rather to a fantastical Poet, then to a grave author, I would have you
consider, in what estimation the Philosopher Fauorine is, only for the fame
he has woone, for extolling, with many and singular praises, the quarterne
Ague: which notwithstanding the Frenchmen wish to their enemies, as the
greatest evil which may befall them. And therefore I am of opinion, that in
things of most difficulty, consists most excellency and admiration. And I
see you Philosophers dispute and argue one against another, and hold singular
opinions far from the truth: so that the Gentleman of whom I spoke even now,
would place these men rather amongst the desirable, then the tolerable.


Annib. I think good that whom you have now named, should be put in the row
of the desirable and commendable, which deserve not the name of contentious:
for though they swerve from the truth, yet they have some show of reason in
their talk, and besides, they do not think what they say, doing it to no
other end, but to show their sharp and good wit, not that they have
conceived any such opinion in themselves* so that it were great folly to think
that Fauorine was desirous to have the quarterne Ague, and those other writers
the Plague. But those whom I call contentious and ouerthwarters, are for the
most part gross headed fellows: and it is an old saying, that the vice of
contradiction is proper to men of small discretion: who oppugn the truth,
either of ignorance, or of obstinacy: and they are like to Heretics, who
being convicted by invincible reasons, yet will yield nothing at all, but
reply still to the contrary. Moreover, these contentious companions love to
be doing with every one, and yet still go by the worse: and when they are
able to maintain Argument no longer by any reason, they enter into a chafe,
and seek to get the upper hand by outcries, swearing, threatening, and
arrogant demeanor. And some time it happens that they meet with men of like
nature, whereby even for very trifles they fall to dyre debate and strife.
Touching that you allege afterward of Philosophers, I answers you, that it
is not only laweful and meet for them to dispute, but also for all other men,
when they enter into reasoning amongst themselves, and are of contrary
opinions: and he deserves greatest praise, which defends the hardest part,
and though they disagree in words, yet they disagree not in love and mutual
goodwill, but seek with one accord the truth: not unlike to those which make
Cords, who though they wind and twist one contrary to the other, yet they
thereby accomplish the work they take in hand. But yet disputations have
their bounds and limits prescribed, which it is not lawful to pass without
loosing the name of a Disputer, and getting the title of contentious caueling
Sophisters, who many times thereby come to mischief, and by being too earnest
in contrarying, have been distraught of their right understanding. And as
things, by making them too thin and fine, are soon broken, so by too much
contention, the truth is made intricate and doubtful. And therefore those are
to be called contencious, who not of purpose to dispute or exercise their wit,
but of a contemptuous arrogancy, hold arguments not only repugnant to the
truth, but altogether dissonant from reason.


Guaz. What do you take to be the occasion of this fault?


Annib. Marry a mother with her two children, to wit, ignorance with self
love, and vain persuasion: whereof it comes, that those which know nothing,
think they know all things, and hold their ignorance for wisdom.


Guaz. In deed the first Chapter of fools, is to esteem themselves wise.


Annib. You know it is the easiest thing in the world, for a man to deceive
himself: but the wise man admonishes us, not to be wise in our own
conceit, for that such wisdom is called devilish: and verily he which
knows most, takes upon him least, and yields to reason. And therefore no
marvel though the ignorant people be full of contention. We will then
conclude, that to reason without reason, is to take pains to make himself
evil thought of, and that these caueling quarellous merchantes are greatly to
be blamed, notwithstanding we must be feign to bear with them.


Guaz. As you have showed the way how we may defend our selves against
slaunderers and flatterers, so I would have you show your mind how we should
behave ourselves with these overthwart persons.


Annib. When you perceive your self to prevail nothing by reasoning with your
friend, and that there is doubt of some disorder, you ought rather to bow
then to break, feeding his humor, if it be not in such a case as silence may
breed greater offense. For when a man forsakes reason, and suffers himself
to be overcome with anger, it is our parts wisely to bear with his
imperfection, according to the Proverb, Cut not the fire with the iron: and we
must permit sometimes prudencie, to give place to timeritie.


Guaz. I know a Gentleman, who if he chance to fall in company with one of
these obstinate fellows, rather then he will stand in contention with him,
uses to say: Sir we will never strive about the matter, I am content it
shall be as you say. And as one of them asked him, which eye of the right, or of
the left, was able to discern a thing furthest: to take from him all occasion
of contention, he answered forthwith, which it shall please you.


Annib. Such answers, if they be made in gentle manner, without scoffing, they
are very convenient, and they are of force to make the obstinate acknoweledge
his fault.


Guaz. Do you not think we have spoken enough of these manner of men?


Annib. I think we may couple with these, some other troublesome fellows,
who offend, not by ignorance, but sharpen their wits only to provoke others,
who upon every word will make a Comentarie, and lie in wait to take others in
a trippe in that they shall say: This fault is peculiar to certain
schoolemaisters, and other professors of learning, who will often times shape
very new found answers, and now and then propose such doubtful doubts,
that are enough to make a dog run a mile without looking behind him. But
sometime they meet with mates that dress them in their kind, and yield them
the honor which is due unto them. Like as a poor crafty clown served his
son, who about every word, would be arguing with him, for having one day
nothing but four eggs upon the table for their dinner. The young gentleman
(forsooth) to show his wit, would needs undertake to prove that there were
vii. for that the iii. is contained in the number of four, and iiij. and iij.
make vij. The father, to avoid strife, took the iiij. eggs, saying: I will
eat these, and take you ye other iij.


Guaz. What rests now to be spoken of?


Annib. We have now to speak of liars, who swerve from the truth, for another
purpose, and in other sort then the contentious do. And first and foremost,
liars are flatterers, dissemblers, boasters, and vain glorious, never ceassing
to set forth their own praises, enterlacing lies amongst them: a fault
though not great, yet which greatly misliketh us. For there is nothing spites
us more, then to hear a man commend himself.


Guaz. Those are termed household witnesses, who perhaps praise themselves, for
lack of good neighbors.


Annib. They should do better to spend that time, which they employ in
praising, or (to say more truly) in blaming themselves, in getting, by their
commendable deeds, true praise, which only proceeds from praise worthy
persons. But they are so far in love with themselves, that they are nothing
set by of others: forgetting the saying, That he which washes his mouth with
his own praise, soyleth himself with the suddes that come of it: and, that
praise in a man's own mouth, is spilt. But as the fault of these vain speakers
is light, when it hurts no body, so it is grievous and heinous, when it is
prejudicial to others. And amongst many examples which might be alleged, the
wickedness of those is not to be concealed, which make boast of their worthy
conquestes in love matters, bewraying the frailenesse of some women, to whom
they have promised secrecy by a thousand false oaths.

Which afterward the winds, disperse amid the air*

Guaz. The oaths of lovers, carry as much credit as the vows of Mariners. But
what think you of others, who falsely make their vaunt to have had the use of
that woman, to whom they never in their lives spoke word: and seek to spot
her with reproach, in such sort, as in old time false the accuserers of innocent
Susanna did.


Annib. Those which blow forth such blastes, deserve to have their wind
stopped with a halter: and those deserve little less, which will lightly believe
such lewd tales, and report the^ again, in such sort, that in short space a
most honest woman shall be most wrongfully taken of the people for a common
harlot, I leave it unto you to think what a hearts grief it is to her to be so
unjustly slaundered. Let us therefore conclude, that all lies, which turn to
the hurt or dishonor of others, are devilish and detestable.


Guaz. I cannot for my part away with the company of those other liars, which
at no time tell truth, though it turn not to the hurt of any.


Annib. You have reason, for as he, which plainly tells the truth, shows
himself to be an honest man, and of noble condition: so he which lies, does
the act of a slave, and of a disloyal, unjust, and indiscreet person. * And
therefore wise men ought to print in their heart the saying of Pithagoras, who
being demanded when men did any thing which might make them like to God:
answered, when they tell the truth. * And if you mark well the nature of
liars, you shall find them to be impudent, and without shame, and therefore
well said the Philosopher, That justice resembled a pure virgin, for that the
purity thereof is spotted by leasings. And though lying be unseemly for every
man, yet is it more tolerable in one of base calling, and who is driven
thereto of necessity: And therefore in holy Scripture, a rich man being a
liar is greatly reproved.


Guaz. There are diverse which think to get the name of pleasant conceited
fellows, by telling some monstrous strange tale, to make the hearers merry, or
cause them to marvel, and crave the Poets privilege, to use the figure
Hyperbole at their pleasure. Like as he, which told that going a hunting, he
found a Boore so old, that he was become stark blind, and that another
young Boore for very compassion, put his tail into the old ones mouth, and so
lead him out to feed: Now he shooting at them, cut of the young Boores tail,
which hung still in the old Boores mouth, and running quickly, took the tail
in his hand, and brought the poor Boore by a long way even unto the City,
thinking still that his fellow had lead him.


Annib. I think it troubled him more to tell this tale, then to lead the
Boore?


Guaz. These fellows persuade themselves so earnestly to believe a lie, that
they would have you believe it too, and if you do not, they think you misuse
them.


Annib. It is well done not to believe them, but they do us wrong to force us
to believe that which is false, which is nothing else but to give us a gudgin,
and floute us like credulous fools, but in the end they do penance for their
fault, for being once known for cogging and lying mates, they are never after
credited, though they tell the truth, which this saying shows.

The Liar never is believed, although an oath he take,
the honest ever is believed, although a lie he make.
I deny not, but that it is commendable to coin a lie at sometime, and in
some place, so that it tend to some honest end.


Guaz. There comes to my mind, touching these kinds of lies, a pleasant
example, happened in the Court, where I knew a Princes son, being about
twelve years old, who in behavior and good conditions surpassed al other his
equals in the Court, but he had one childishe fault, which neither by
admonishing, neither by reprehending, neither by threatening, he could be
made to leave. Which was this, He would through negligence suffer his nose
always to be sneueled, and took no care to wype it: while his gouerner took
pains to amend this fault, there comes on a time to this child, to crave his
devotion, a poor old man, whose nose by some infirmity was become meruellous
great, deformed, full of pimples, precious, and monstrous: the child with a
certain fear mixed with compassion, was much moved at it, whereupon his
discrete governor began to say unto him, that he had known that poor man a
long time, and remembered he had seen him in his youth with a little nose,
well fashioned and sound, but that afterward the sneuil and filth for want of
wyping and making it clean had brought it into that case. The child was put
into such a fear by these words, that he began forthwith to spit, and to
blow and wype his nose in such sort, that he never after needed to be put in
mind of it. And therefore this lie was profitable to the Prince, and
commendable for the governor.


Annib. It is very true: and as such liars are to be praised, so the other
are to be blamed, and to be registered amongst those which are neither to be
desired nor avoided. Besides, there are certain curious fellows to be
discommended, which trouble every one in using always this word Wherefore,
being desirous to enter too far into other men's matters, which is perchance
a fault greater then it is taken for: for there is never any curious person,
but he is likewise malicious, and besides, over talkatiue, playing the tale
bearer from one to another, and therefore the Poet blames him which is
inquisitiue of that he has nothing to do withal.


Guaz. As I remember I have read of one, who carrying a present under his cloak,
and being asked what he carried there: answered, Do you not see how it is of
purpose covered, for fear least you should know it?


Annib. I remember I have read the same, and another like thing of king
Antigonus, who passing by his army, entered the Tent of Antagoras the Poet,
and having found him seethyng certain fi^hes, said unto him: Do you think
that Homer meddled with the seething of fishes while he wrote the deeds of
Agamemnon? To whom the Poet answered, Think you that Agamemnon, buzied about
the execution of his enterprises, was curious to know whether there were any
sodde fish in his Camp? But if curiosity be blameable in worldly affairs,
it is detestable in matters of religion: and therefore we are admonished not
to seek to know things which belong not to us to know. Now as the curious
are neither to be desired nor avoided, so ought we to account of the
ambitions.


Guaz. Your opinion is then, as far as I see, that ambition brings forth
evil effects?


Annib. Why, who knows not that.


Guaz. Mary, I for my part see not how it works other then good: for that it
wakeneth drowsy spirits, drives away slothfulness, and fearfulness,
styrreth up the mind to the understanding of commendable things, and to the
executing of courageous enterprises, and heaueth those that follow it, to the
high degree of dignity and honor.


Annib So long as a man passes not those bounds, he ought not to be termed
ambitious, but courageous, for so much as these same are works commendable, and
virtues: but that can not be said of those which proceed naturally of
ambition, which altogether bereaueth them of rest, which set no stay to their
restless desires: which fills them full of pensive care, blinds their
understanding, rayseth them aloft, to the intent to throw them down headlong,
to break their necks, and bring them to destruction. And thereupon it is
said, that Lucifer through pride and ambition fell from heaven, desiring
rather to command, then obey. And it is said by an other, That ambition is
the cross and torment of the ambitious. And therefore when I said that
ambition is the cause of many abuses, I meant not those men, which knowing their
own valor, aspire to high enterprises and honors, which by the instinct of
nature we all covet: for that honor is the reward of virtue, and counted a
divine thing. But my meaning is of the ambitious, who without taking any pain,
without doing any thing meet for a noble mind, and without any foundation of
deserte, seek in company to go before others, and to be placed above others.


Guaz. Those in truth are to be detested, and I know some of them, who * at
the entering in at the door, or at the sitting down at the table, make have to
set their foot before others, and are very sorry when others usurp over them
that foolish preeminence: not knowing that the place neither gives nor takes
away virtue.


Annib. Those which do so, perceive them selves little accounted of, and
perchance know very well that no body will say unto them, I pray you sir,
go before. But it is great glory, and a sign of great desert, when that
honor is done to one without striving for it, and it is most certain, that he
which setting aside all ambition, humbles him self beneath others, is of best
estimation, and of best education. But women fall chiefly into this vanity,
and heerevpon there often arises amongst them the best sport in the worlds,
for none of them being willing to give place, and every one of them being
ready to take place, they occupy the way and the upper rooms as it were by
force: and withal, you shall often hear amongst them one say, my husband is a
Doctor, an other, mine is a Gentleman, an other, I am descended from the
Troyans, an other makes vaunt of her dowry and her jewels, wherewith she
boasts her self to be able to buy the other out of house and home, in such
sort, that if the husbands fall to deal in these quarrelles, they will never
be decided or determined without blows.


Guaz. And what think you of the ambition of those men who are never merry, nor
in any countenance, but when they have a great train of serving men at their
tail: and if they chance to want them, such is their folly, (their fancy I
should say) that they will not stir forth of their doors.


Annib. That kind of ambition is common to Asses, who in like case will not
go before, if they have none to follow them. Of the number of the ambitious,
are the haughty and proud, whose company is wonderful hateful, and
contrary to our nature, whereto humanity and courtesy is most agreeable. And
in my fancy, such people may be resembled to tyrants, which care not though
they be hated, so that they may be feared. And therefore this sort of persons
never love to humble them selves, fearing that if they should show them
selves good fellows, and become mates for every man, they should grow into
contempt, so that their reputation thereby might be diminished. But though
these fellows take bigly upon them, and are puffed up with pride, yet assure
your self, that their hearts are filled full rather with wind then
worthiness.


Guaz. O how these glorious fellows are hated of the Frenchmen. Which belike
is the cause that they can not brook the Spaniardes, who are counted very
proud and lofty, especially of those who are not thoroughly acquainted with
them. Which I speak, for that I have been in company with some of the^, who in
show have seemed very lofty, and yet in deed have been very lowly.


Annib. It may be, that the Spaniardes likewise will not like of the Frenchmen,
for their easy acquaintance and sudden familiarity. And in my opinion,
between these two extremities, our nation keeps the mean, where you shall
commonly see joined together, a grave kind of courtesy, and a courteous kind
of gravity, but those whom I term proud and high minded, offend both in
show and in their doings, and they stand always upon their Pantofles,
despising every one, and desiring to be honored of every one. Neither must
we look to live familiarly with them, but humbly to do honor unto them, and
to offer up incense unto them, as it were to the hallowed Alters: so yt it is no
marvel if they be odious to all men. Which kind of men, a pleasant writer
scoffing at, says, That that meat is unpleasant in taste, which smells of
the smoke. But what say I, odious to men, seeing God him self has them in
hate, who withstandeth the proud, and shows mercy to the meek and humble in
heart.


Guaz. It may be well said of such men, that which the Poet writes.

He falls most low, who seeks to climb most high.

Annib. Our discourse would be too long, and perchance superfluous, if we
should search out one after an other, all which are spotted with this fault,
and entreat of the nature and quality of them: And therefore I think good,
that we set an end to our discourse in this point.


Guaz. There is somewhat yet that sticks in my stomach, for your mind is,
that we should fly only the infamous, and those which are notoriously naught,
and tolerate the ill, which we have here made mention of: by means whereof,
in my opinion, you slack the bridle too much to this Conversation.


Annib. I might well answer you, according to the rules of the Ciuilians, that
we ought to restrain things which are evil, and set at large things
commendable, in which number we presuppose Conversation to be: but I say unto
you, that according as I have handled the matter, it is rather restrained then
otherwise. For though I have permitted you to tolerate, to wit, neither to
seek, neither to shun the above named, who are numberless, yet I gave you not
liberty to seek or crave the company of other then the good, who are but
few. And whosoever shall observe that order, well he may accompany with many
by chance, but with few by choice. And your self, though by reason of your
affairs or other accident, you shall have to deal with diverse persons, yet
you will like much better, and desire more willingly, the company of one or
two, to whom you shall be affectioned for the good parts you know to be in
them. Whereby I conclude, that the company which we come into by chance,
consists of many persons, but that which is voluntary, which we ought to
covet, contains but few folk in it.


Guaz. For one doubt which you clear me of, not unlike the Hyders head, there
arise seven in that place, and according to that saying, At every step, in
steppeth a new thought.


Now tell me a little, if a Harlot or a Baude, or some such defamed person,
shall come in the open street, or in some other public place, to talk with
me, will you that without suffering him to meet me, I run away from him,
as if he were excommunicated, or had the plague.


Annib. It were not meet for you, who are a private person, to give ear unto
his words, but for a Magistrate it were not amiss.


Guaz. Then he which gives ear unto him, does not fly from him, which is
repugnant to your first order. And he which flies not from him, bears him
self indifferently toward the intolerable, and the tolerable: which is
likewise contrary to your distinction.


Annib. If a Harlot, Ruffian, or other infamous person, should go to the Duke
your master, to crave justice, or put up some other honest request, would he
drive him out of his presence?


Guaz. No.


Annib. If he came before him, to talk familiarly with him, would he send him
packing out of his sight?


Guaz. There is no doubt of it.


Annib. By this diversity then you may know, that the intolerable is
sometimes tolerable, not in respect of him self, but of the occasion which
brings him into company.


Guaz. I understand you, but yet there arise other doubts, for so much as
amongst these tolerable, which we have named, there is found great
difference in their imperfections. For the faul^e of a vaineglorious boaster,
or a contentious ouerthwarter, is far less then that of a pernicious
flatterer, or a malicious sclaunderer: and yet you put them all in one
predicament. Besides, I think it impossible, that he should incline rather
to good then to evil, who has one of these faults. For that one of these is
of force, to obscure and deface all the good parts which shall be in him.
And therefore in my opinion they are to be put in the number of the
intolerable.


Annib. We have already concluded, if you remember it, that we ought to
admit into our company all those which are not marked in the fare, and which
are not commonly holden for defamed, nor excluded out of good and honest
company, notwithstanding they be sprinkled with some imperfection.

But to satisfy you, let me ask you if you knew, in the court of France,
men of diverse nations, as I remember you have already said?


Guaz. I know there besides Frenchmen, Spaniardes, Englishmen, Fleminges,
Almanes, Scotts, and Italians.


Annib. With with of al these were you most often, and most willingly conversant.


Guaz. You may well think, that by my will I always got my self into the
company of Italians.


Annib. But which Italians?


Guaz. The Lombardes.


Annib. And amongst the Lombardes, which made you your choice of?


Guaz. Of those of mine own country.


Annib. And of those same, which liked you best?


Guaz. Those whom I knew most agreeable to my mind, for that as the saying is,
like will to like.


Annib. It is even so, like as also it is true, that we naturally abhor
things, which differ from our nature. Whereof it comes, that one which is
merrily disposed, can not, away with one which is heauyly given. One that is dull
headed, cannot abide one that is sharp witted: and contrariwise, the merry like
of the merry, and the sad of the sad. And therefore we have to consider, that
nature has put upon us two persons, whereof the one is common to all men, in
so much as they are partakers of reason, and more excellent then beasts: the
other is proper to every one, touching the difference which is seen in the
countenance and iesture of the body and in the diversity of the minds, whereof
every one tends and inclines not only to some good, but also to some evil.
And by yt means you see ye one offends by arrogancy, another by obstinacy,
another by misreporting, another by flatering, another by covetousness, another
by vainegloriousnes, and you must think that there is not any, in whom there is
not some fault or imperfection, either greater or lesser then that wc is in our
selves. But for so much as at this day we can not find either friends or
parents, which are in all points agreeable to our disposition and nature, we
must frame our selves to bear with the imperfections of others and according
to the saying, we must love a friend with his imperfection. And for that
perfect and virtuous men are rare in the world, with whom we might live to our
hearts desire, we ought not to reject the company of any, so that he have
in him any show of virtue and goodness. * But to be acceptable in company,
we must put of as it were our own fashions and manners, and cloth our selves
with the conditions of others, and imitate them so far as reason will permit.
And in some, touching the respect of honesty and virtue, we ought to be
always one and the same. But touching the diversity of the persons with whom
we shall be conuersaunt, we must alter our selves into an other: according to
that old saying, The heart altogether unlike, and the face altogether like to
the people. And he, which shall not frame him self to do this, * shall be
driven to curse Conversation, and to pray unto God with the snayle (as it is in
the Fable) that to avoid ill neighbors and naughty company, he will give
him the grace to be able to carry his house about with him. Neither ought any
to persuade him self that he is without fault, for I am sure if I should
refuse the company of a cauilling contentious fellow, he would perhaps
refuse mine for some greater imperfection. And therefore I an^ of opinion, that
without looking too precisely upon one fault, we ought to admit the company
of all those, who in the rest of their works and actions walk uprightly. And
it is lawful likewise, sometime to make as though we see not their faults,
and that we have a good opinion of them.

Touching this point, I remember the doings of the Duke of Neuers, who making
a feast in this City, committed the charge of inuyting the Gentlewomen, to a
young man, that was reputed to be very vicious and naught: whereat the Citizens
meruailed not a little, forsomuche as his excellency was advertised long before
of the qualities of this fellow: and heerevpon some of the Ladies being in
familiar talk, fell to a kind of play, by the privilege whereof, one of
them was enjoined to demand of the Duke, why, being so many young Gentlemen in
the City of great wisdom and good behavior, he caused the Gentlewomen to
be bidden to the feast, by a dishonest and ill disposed person: to whom he
answered, that he was sure the good and he should always well agree
together, and therefore he thought it needful by some means to win the
good will of the ill.


Guaz. I understand you, he meant to imitate him which light his candell
before the image of the Devil. Yet in my opinion to favor the ill, is to
offend the good: and I marvel how a Prince of so discreet judgment,
could make so indiscreet a choice. But I think he did it, as he, who
having not long time to soiourne there, sought by all means, to make every one
think well of him, after his departure: and like unto the Sun, he would
spread the beams of his bounty upon all sorts of persons. But you may
assure your self, he would not have made such a choice in his own Country,
where he is not to learn to put a difference between the qualities of his
subjects, to lift up the good, and throw down the evil.


Annib. I think verily that it is requisite so to do, but I do not think he
had any such meaning as you speak of. For wise men of good judgment, his
likes take no care to be beloved of the ill, but know that when they are well
accounted of by the ill, they are ill thought of by the good.


Guazzo. I am verily persuaded, that all men of understanding, bestow great
labor to get the good will, yea even of the most wicked: and for my part, by my
will, I would not have the ill will of any, whether good or bad. And I pray God
to give me the grace to be able to satisfy thoroughly all sorts of persons.


Annib. You should then have a special privilege above all other men. But
call to mind the old proverb, that Jupiter himself pleases not all. I never
yet hitherunto knew man so good and virtuous, which has not been subject to
the malice and slanders of some one: and I say resolutely unto you, that as
not caring to know^ what report goes of you, nor to content any, you shall
play but an arrogaunte and proud part: so will you become too scrupulous,
and will never be healed of your sickness, if you think to stop every
ones mouth: Which were to eat up your heart, as they say. Take heed only to
content the good, and never take care what the evil say or think of you: For
their injuries can not hurt virtue and innocence. And know you, that the
divine Philosopher wills us to take no care for that, which the multitude
reports of us, but only for that, which a wise and discreet man gives
out.


Guaz. Do you not see, that when a strange Gentleman comes to visit us at
our house, how careful we are to provide that his servants be well
entreated? That is for nothing else but for fear least afterward they make
some ill report of us: where we are sure, the masters will content them
selves with the entertainment we give them.


Annib. I think that servants, being naturally blabbes and full of tongue,
we do it rather in hope that they will set forth our courtesy, then for
fear that they should find fault with our covetousness: and, besides, our
good will and courtesy can not be fully showed of us, nor gratefully accepted
of the head, if it extend not to the members. You know also, that there are
certain masters of that nature, that they love in a manner better the ease
and good usage of their servants, then of them selves: And therefore all the
good cheer bestowed on them, is in respect of their masters. But howesoeuer
it be, I am resolute in this, that we ought to do well for the love of
virtue, and not for the fear of evil report.


Guaz. There are some which do well, not for the love of virtue, nor yet for
the fear of infamy, but upon a bravery: like as those who at faires and
markets use great liberality, in bestowing fayrings on Gentlewomen, and then
pinch for it, when they come home in their own houses, and perchance keep
from the poor servants their wages.


Annib. That liberality is like the match of a Candle, which must needs fail
forthwith, and therefore their renown lasts no longer then the fair. And
they may well be compared to certain little beasts called Ephemeres, which are
bred near the river of Hyppan in Scithia, whose life lasts only one day.
And me thinks those men make profession to loose their credit at home, to get
it abroad: Notwithstanding, when the stinking breath comes from the stomach,
it booteth not much to put some sweet thing in the mouth, to leave there a
pleasant smell: for at length the ill savor surmounteth, and it is not
possible but the taste of the vessel must be felt. Therefore these may think
themselves well enough dealt withal, to be put in the row of the other
tolerable. But Gentleman, I have suffered my self to be so far carried away
with the pleasantness of your speech, that I never thought how some of that
time is slipped away, which I ought to have bestowed in visiting my patients.
Seeing then, that we see, that conversation is profitable and necessary, that
men of evil life are to be eschewed, ye those who wrie rather to the good,
the^ the evil, are to be tolerated, and that the good and virtuous are to be
desired: I will for this time take my leave of you, and to morrow I will
return hither, if it please you, to discourse another hour of the civil and
commendable manners of conversation, according to our determination.


Guaz. Your return shall be more grateful unto me, then your departure, and I
assure you, this little space between, will seem passing long unto me: go in
Gods name, and return after, to redouble my comfort.


Annib. The comfort will be mutual, for that our love is mutual. Farewell.


An end of the first Book.
The second Book of civil conversation, written by M. Steven Guazzo.
Wherein is discoursed, first of the manner of conversation, meet for all
persons, which shall come in any company, out of their own houses, and then of
the particular points, which ought to be observed in company between young
men, and old, gentlemen, and yomen, Princes and private persons, learned, and
unlearned, citizens, and strangers, religious, and secular, men, and women.

Guazzo. I Am not able fully to express (M. Annibal) how long the time of
your absence has seemed unto me, nor how earnestly I have longed for the
comfort of your return, by reason of the profitable and pleasant discourses,
which this day I hope for at your hands. For me thinks I see * the hand of so
great a Philosopher as you are, * to cast a golden net into the large sea of
moral Philosophy, to enclose therein, in short time, all the divine precepts
which appertain to our life.


Annib. Nay look not I pray you for that, for therein you shall but do as the
country fellow did, who attended in vain that the river should finish his
course, that he might have gone over it. I neither can, neither ought in these
discourses to follow the steps of the ancient Philosophers, for albeit their
reasons be at this day the same, that they were a thousand year since, yet
neither the times, the men, nor the manners are like. I deny not but that
there have been amongst us, unjustly brought in, many corrupt customs,
repugnant to the laws of Philosophy, but they have by this time taken so
deep footing and root, that it is impossible to root them out. For that the
world is come to this pass, that it counts any thing to be lawefull, which
is delightful. Wherefore if I should endeavor, by precepts and reasons, to
reform the abuse of the world, and to reduce it to the virtuous and ancient
custom, I should not only loose my labor, but be laughed at for my labor.
Now as there are some things, which by reason of the abuse they are grown
to, are not to be followed, though they were at first taught us by good and
wise masters: so there are many things which of themselves being
tolerable, yet either by the necessity of the time, or by the sincerity of
our Religion, they are not to be allowed* As for example, we do not any more
forbid children wine, before they arrive to the age of eighteen years: and
the necessity of the time will not let us to let men from marrying until they
be six and thirty years old, and maids until they be eighteen: and to
fulfill Gods commandments, after that man and woman are once joined together
by the bond of marriage, they can not any way be loosed, or seek divorce
upon every light occasion, as in old time they did, by the consent of the
Philosophers: who if they were living at this day, would in many things
refourme their wrytings, and conform them to the customs of the present time.
And for these reasons we must tread out of the ancient path, and take the
way which is beaten at this day. Wherefore you must not marvel, nor lay it to
me as a deadly sin, if in the discourse of civil conversation, I entreat
rather of matters, which in my opinion are necessary for the present time,
then of matters written in Books, and used in time past, and if I speak
rather like a mere Citizen, then a Philosopher, without taking any care to get
by my discourses those praises and tytles which you have given me, which I
neither will nor ought to accept, being altogether unfit for me.


Guazzo. The humility which you show in this respect does exault you higher:
yet I dare say this much, that you do your self wrong, to debase in such
sort, the great learning wherewith you are endued, assuring you this, that if
I were so little inferior to you in learning, as I know my self to be a
great deal, I should exault my self much more then you do.


Annib. If you were so much inferior to me, as I know you to be greater,
you should commit a greater fault then I, to attribute so much to your self.
For considering that I come nothing near to that which you think to be in
me, you shall offend in arrogancy and vaineglorie.


Guaz. But in my mind, making your self meaner then you are, you offend in a
certain abiectnesse of mind, or in a kind of dissembling, rather courtlike,
then Philosopher like. I think you will not commend those, who having much
understanding, stand little or nothing upon it, or being known for worthy
men, seek to imbase themselves * by bearing false witness against themselves.
*


Annib. Truly I cannot but blame them: for to disprayse ones self too much,
shows either some secret ambition, or some manifest baseness of mind. And I
count no less worthy reprehension, those, who on the contrary, exalting
themselves too much, touch (as they say) the firmament with their finger. But I
am sure, that in speaking at this present of my self, I have measured my
forces, neither have I swarued one jot from the truth.


Guazzo. Seeing we are fallen upon this matter, tell me I pray you, if you
have any sure remedy, whereby a man may govern and keep himself in the
midway, so that he suffer not himself to be hoysed up into the air, like a
ball full of wind, neither to fall deadly to the ground, as a body without
breath.


Annib. To find then the skill of Dedalus, and to keep the mid way, you must
search out the cause of the faulty extreemes, and that being once known, you
shall soon have the remedy you require. Those faults then grow for the most
part of solitariness, and for want of experience in the affairs of the world.
Which causes, that into a base mind, there enters the distrust of his own
doings, and the fear of other men's judgment. Contrariwise, that in a noble
mind there grows an over great presumption, which transporteth him with an
ouerweening of himself, and a course account of others. And therefore if these
manner of men frequented the company of those who are wise and learned, there
is no doubt but that the doings of other men would serve, to the one of them
for a spur, and to the other for a bridle.


Guaz. There are some doubtless worthy great blame and mockery, who suffer
those good parts, which be in them to be drowned in their cold and timorous
hearts, in like sort as stones are in the water. And I could name certain
eloquent personages, who having to speak in the presence of many, become quite
dumb. Some others I have known in like case ready to fall into a sown.
Whereby I judge them meruaylous unfortunate, that cannot help themselves with
those qualities they are endued withal, at such time as they stand in most
need of them, and better it were in a manner to be altogether without them.


Annib. It cannot be denied, but that those men are unfortunate, but let us
now consider the arrogancy of those, who being full of presumption, and
blinded with the love of themselves, see not their own imperfections, and
never care to know what opinion the world has of them: Which is a sign not
only of presumpteous arrogance, but also of senseless brutishness, whereof
ensue many inconveniences, for so much as according to the saying of a wise
fellow.

Great evil is caused by that ignorance,
which seems to it self sapience.

Guaz. It is a small fault in my fancy, to desire to be taken to be wise, but
the worst is, that we will make our selves also believe that we are so.


Annib. Therefore it is said, that it is the easiest thing of all other, for
one to deceive himself: and I remember I have read in the life of Esope, that
a great personage passing through a street where were three slaves to be
sold, the one a Gramarian, the other a Musician, and the third Esope: first
he asked the Gramarian what he could do, who answered, all things: then he
asked the Musician the like question, who answered as the other did: but
coming to Esope, he asked him what he could do, who answered, nothing at
all. How happens that, says the Gentleman? marie says Esope, these two
here being able to do all things, have left nothing for me to do. Whereby
we may see, that those who will not presume to be able to do any thing,
know how to do most things, and those who take upon them to know all
things, are those which commonly know nothing at all. For so much then as we
know, that for want of knowing and being experienced by means of
conversation, in the natures, manners, and doings of others, we offend
either by arrogancy, or by distrust, you may consequently perceive, that the
remedy which you seek to fly those extreemes, and to follow the mean, is
civil conversation, and that chiefly which is practiced out of the house,
haunting many and diverse persons, whereof we have to speak this day.


Guaz. I would have thought by those matters we spoke of but now, that you
had been far of, from those we are to entreat to day, but I see you have
brought me thither before I thought of it: whereat I marvel the more, and I
am gladder of it. But before you begin this discourse, I would know whether
your meaning be, to propose one form and manner of conversation, which all
indifferently should use, or at the least to assign diverse sorts, according
to the diversity of persons.


Annib. As far as I remember, I told you yesterday, and now I tell you
again, that I mean to prescribe particularly to every one: For if in
conversation all of us should behave our selves in one sort toward all, we
should soon come to the chief point of our purpose. It is very true, there
are some general things which every one ought to observe toward every one
indifferently, whereof also we will use some speech, but my desire is chiefly,
that we come to consider the diverse means which we ought to use, in using
company, according to the diversity of persons. Whereby we shall know, that
it is not so easy to find one manner of entertainment common to all men, as
it is to find a fashion for a Sadle to fit any Horse. And thereby we shall
perceive, that as a man of good judgment, such as your self, writes not in
one self manner and words to his betters, equals, and inferiors, so we in
our conversation ought to proceed with the same judgment, to put difference
between causes and parties which are not equal.


Guaz. If then civil conversation ought to vary according to the variety of
the persons, I doubt me least the rules, which you shall set down, will be long
and hard: for that we are driven by diverse accidents to have to deal with
diverse persons, differing in sex, in age, in degree, in conditions, in
country, and in nation.


Annib. You see in organes diverse pipes, whereof every one gives a diverse
sown, yet they are all proportioned together, and make one only body: in
like sort, albeit there be diverse kinds of entertainemente and conversation,
yet in the end we shall perceive that they agree together in such sort, that
they seem in a manner one only sort, and perchance more easy then we think
for. Wherefore to make the matter more easy, we will divide conversation into
public, which is abroad with strangers: and private, which is at home in the
house. And for that both is more then we can dispatch to day, I think it shall
suffice for this time to discourse only of public conversation, and the other
we will reserve for to morrow.


Guaz. I looked that you would first have spoken of this latter, for that by
order of nature we begin conversation in the house with those that be of
household with us, and after, we learn to converse abroad with others.


Annib. When in our yesterdayes discourse I proposed unto you conversation,
as well for the health of the mind, as the body, I meant of public
conversation, out of which especially the fruits and perfection we have
spoken of are gathered, and therefore to day we will speak of that, which
concerns our principal purpose. Returning then to my discourse, I make good,
that by means of civil conversation, a man may not only clear himself of
cowardly abiection, and vain presumption, but besides, cloth himself with
the knowledge of himself. For if you consider it well, the judgment which we
have to know our selves, is not ours, but we borrow it of others: for so much
as when we are by diverse persons advertised, blamed, reproved, or by signs
made more advised for some fault, which we commit either in word or deed, at
ye length we are content to submit our selves to the common opinion of al men,
and come to acknowledge in our selves some imperfection, which we endeavor to
correct after other men's judgment. And though it be hard to find one that
will tell us flatly the truethe, yet there is not any (at the least being a
private person) so blinded in him self, but if he be faulty any way, by
frequenting the company of others, he shall either have occasion offered him
to examine his own conscience, and so of him self to find his own fault, or
else at one time or another, there shall be one or other, which if not in way
of good will, yet in manner of mockery, or of scorn, or of spyte, or by one
way or another, will make him to understand his fault. And as these same as it
were against their wills are driven to amend their manners and life, so you
see many of good judgment, and less ouerseene in themselves, who, without
tarying until they be reproved of others, are moved of their own proper
will, to waygh diligently the sayings, the doings, and the behavior of
others. And as they learn to eschew those things which they see to be
unseemly in any, so they endeavor to follow and appropriate to themselves
those things which are commendable in others, so that by Conversation they
become markers and imitatours of wise men, and such as are patterns to be
practiced by. To be short, they frame themselves to do, to leave, to
change, to correct many things according to the judgment of others. But
seeing we have already at large discoursed, of the great force, which
universal opinions have for the amendment of our life, I will stand no
longer upon that point, and seeing we are assured that our judgments, and
the knowledge of our selves, depends of the judgment and conversation of
many, I will enter to speak of the manner of conversation abroad: wherein,
for the reasons and respects we alleged yesterday, I will have regard to
the common profit, and specially of those of small understanding, minding not
to search thoroughly the moral virtues which every one can not comprehend,
but to set forth only the principal points, which are required in this
conversation. Neither will I in any wise mount to the top of trees, but
satisfying in some part so learned a man as you are, for the rest, I make
account to speak to persons of weak capacity, and therefore I will endeavor
to present them with such things as are not out of their reach.


Guaz. Your discourses shall so much the better content me, by how much the
more they shall be familiar, and such as are meet for the weakness of my
understanding.


Annib. It is but your modesty to say so. Now coming first to the general
points, I am persuaded that the knowledge and contemplation of nature is
imperfect in man, if actions be not thereto adjoined. And therefore if to
students which live in contemplation, conversation be necessary, it is no
doubt much more necessary to those which have no learning at all: Who, that
they may not remain as brute beasts, but be known to differ from them,
ought to endeavor to learn that at the mouth of another, which by their own
study they can not attain unto. Like as then it is reported, that certain
people used to dress and heal those that were sick openly in the streets,
and being careful of their health, demanded of those which passed by, if
they knew any remedy for their diseases: so the solitary man, who is in very
deed sick, and bereft of the knowledge which is gotten by the proof of
other men's judgment, has need to seek remedy abroad out of the house. And
though perchance he meet with some more sick then himself, and with others
perhaps incurable, yet let him not cease to go forward, until such time he
find such as are in health to comfort him, and Physicians to heal him.
Having respect to the sentence of him which said, Of the wise thou shall
learn to make thy self better, of fools, to make thy self more advised.


Guaz. Though men were not induced to go forth of their house and frequent
the company of others, for the causes by you alleged, yet I warrant you there
want not other spurs, which prick them forward into company, and make them
press into places where they see the greatest throng of people: for the desire
to maintain and increase their wealth, and to mende their estate, will not
suffer men to stand idle with their hands at their gyrdels, which you shall
plainly see, if you once set your foot in the Court of some Prince, where you
shall see an infinite number of Courtiers assemble together, to talk and
devise of many matters, to understand the news of the death or confiscation
of the goods of some one, to seek to obtain of the Prince, either promotions,
goods, pardons, exemption, or privilege for them selves or others: and before
they will crave such things, to proceed thereto by means, and to practice
the favor of the Secretaries, and other Officers. And you shall have there
besides, other good fellows, conspyring together, and secretly devising how
to bring some Officer into the disfavor of his Prince, that he may be put
from his office, and some other placed in his room. And if this be not enough
to give you to understand the pleasure which is received by these companies,
behold the preasse of people which heapeth together at the judgment place,
as oftentimes it has been my hap to see in the great Palace of the
Parliament of Paris, which sounding with an infinite number of voices, while
the plaintif^e and the defendant plead, seems to be shaken, as it were with
an earthquake. But why allege I foreign examples, let us pass only through
the midst of this City, and we shall see not only on days appointed for
travail, but on those also which are consecrated to the honor and service of
God, a numberless multitude walking up and down in every place, keeping a
continual mercate, where there is no other talk but of buying and selling, of
chopping and changing, of letting and taking money to interest, and in sum,
there is bargayning for all things, which are fit to heal the diseases of
poverty, and to get the health of riches. And therefore there needs not
much labor to persuade men to love conversation, whereto they are naturally
so given.


Annib. By this your speech, you have brought to my remembrance a place of
Pythagoras, where he said that this world was nothing else but a very
mercate, where there meet three sorts of men, the one to buy, the other to
sell, and the third to look on, who (he said) were the Philosophers, whom
he counted the happiest of them all.


Guaz. In Pythagoras time belyke there were no cut-purses which used the
mercates, otherwise he would have put them in amongst the other.


Annib. Another used likewise to say, that this world was a stage, we the
players which present the Comedy, and the gods, the lookers on, amongst whom
belike he comprehended the Philosophers. But for that at this day there are
few divine lookers on, and that we which are the players, are in a manner
all of us given to play those parts which you have spoken of, I will propose
unto you a kind of conversation, not to stand us chiefly in steed in
markets, Comedies, and other outward things subject to fortune, but to the
end we may thereby learn good manners and conditions, by means whereof, the
gifts of fortune are distributed and conserved, and the favor and good will
of others obtained.


Guaz. It is your part then to show, how those virtues and conditions may be
learned.


Annib. Being so, that the solitary person is sick, I prescribe for his
health this medicine, that for a long time, he endeavor by conversation to
bring to pass, that the revenues of his house be far greater then the
expense.


Guaz. Marie most men do so: but me thinks in company those which spend
freely, are better thought of then those which spare niggardly. And if you call
to remembrance, the doings used of old time in Rome, you shall perceive that
to gratify, and give to many persons, was a mean whereby the love and good
will of the people was gotten, and it served as a ladder, to climb to the
highest dignities and promotions.


Annib. A wise man being asked, why nature has given us two ears, and but
one tongue: to that end (answered he) that we should hear much, and
speak little. That answer gave me occasion, to attribute to the ears, the
reuenewe, and to the tongue, the expense. And to the end I may be better
understood, I say, that in conversation, the use of two things is chiefly
requisite, that is, of our tongue, and of our behavior: wherefore let us
consider of those two parts.


Guaz. Why will you restrain your self only to those two parts?


Annib. For that if you mark it well, we win chiefly the friendship and
good will of other, by the manner of our speech, and by the quality of our
conditions: yea I might in a certain manner reduce al conversation, to that
point of manners and behavior, wherein are likewise co^prysed our words and
speech. But for so much as some part of our talk does not wholly depend of
manners and behavior, I will speak distinctly of those two points. And to
enter into the matter, I say, that like as those which are sick in body, love
and lust after those things, which according to the saying of the Poet, Are
toothsome to the taste, but hindersome to health.


So the ignorant man of weak understanding, which has need to keep silence,
is meruaylously delighted to hear him self speak: and such force has this
fault, that always those which know least, covet to speak most. Seeing then
to stay the tongue, and use the ear, are the hardest things that may be* it
behooves our patient to frame him self too bridle his appetyte, withstanding
his own will, and inuring himself by little and little, to keep the mouth
more shut, and the ears more open. Which he shall no sooner do, but he
shall perceive that in company he shall get the good will and favor of
others, as well by giving ear courteously, as by speaking pleasantly. For we
think, they think well of us, which are attentive to our talk, and we see
our pleasant speech serves us to no purpose, if it be not heard of others.
Besides, our sick man shall begin by holding his peace, to recover his
health, and to be well thought of, of the wise. It was therefore that
Pithagoras bound his scholars to keep silence, for the space of three
years, considering that by their diligent giving ear unto him, they should
be advertised of their own ignorance, and printing in their hearts the
profoundnesse and gravity of his sentences, they should feel the profit of
their patience: according to the old saying, That to a diseased mind, the
witty words of others serve for a Physician: and in the end they should
know, that it is no less admirable, to know how to hold ones peace, then to
know how to speak. For, as words well uttered, show eloquence and learning,
so silence well kept, shows prudence and gravity.


Guaz. I remember I have heard tell, that one being asked, whether ignorance
was the cause of his silence: answered, That it was incide^t always to the
ignorant, not to know how to be silent.


Annib. And therefore men of mean wit are the more to be commended, if they
speak not much: Whereupon it is said, That it is a piece of wisdom for a man
to hide his folly, by holding his tongue: and it is likewise said, That he
knows enough, who knows nothing, if he know how to hold his peace. We
will then conclude, * that he who knows not how to hold his peace, knows
not how to speak, * and he that will learn to speak advisedly, must give
ear to those which know how to do it, remembering that as hunger and thirst
is an emptiness of the body, so is ignorance an emptiness of the mind: and
as the body is filled with food, so the mind is fed with understanding:
which as we said yesterday, is sooner gotten by hearing one speak, then by
reading of books. And therefore he ought to count it no labor to listen to
others, nor shame to ask that which he is ignorant in: but he ought rather
to imitate that worthy personage, who used to say, I question with every man,
but I answer no man, for that I know not how to frame a fit answer to
anything.


Guaz. I am not ignorant that it behooves one without learning, to speak
little, and hear much, and I know that by long observation of the sentences
and discourses of others, he must needs learn many things: but now you have
taught him the profit he is to make by brydling his tongue, I look you
should set him down the charges he is to be at, in speaking.


Annib. As money well employed, turns both to the commodity of him that
receives it, and likewise of him that disburseth it: so words well
considered, bring prefite to the hearer, and praise to the speaker. And as out
of one purse are drawn diverse kinds of coin, as of gold, silver, and baser
metal: so out of the mouth proceed sentences and words of different value.
But as it is not lawefull to forge or pay out naughty money, so neither is it
lawefull to invent, or speak that thing which may turn to the prejudice or
reproach of others: For by such forgerie a man not only shameth himself, but
besides, puts his own life in danger, which together with his death, is in
the power of the tongue. Moreover, it is written that * the tongue is a little
fire, which kindles great matters, * and that he which keeps and represseth
his tongue. keeps his own soul. Wherefore we have to conclude, that he
which wishes to be well spoken of by others, must take heed he speak not
ill of others. Therefore let him who has his tongue in his mouth, be at this
point, that though he can not utter grave and delightful speeches, like unto
Philosophers and Orators, who are very scant in the world, yet he speak
honestly and plainly, as an honest and Christian man ought to do, *
remembering always that is better to slip with the foot, then with the tongue.
*


Guaz. As I think, I have read that a king of Egypt, to prove the judgment
of Solon, sent him a beast to sacrifice, inioyning him to choose out that part
of the beast which he judged best, and that which he judged worst, to send
back unto him. Solon to accomplish the kings hestes, sent him only the tongue.


Annib. And therefore the tongue is rightly compared to the stern of a ship,
which being the least part of it, yet is it of force to save or sink the
ship. But of those which put the ship in danger of drowning, and which by
the venom of their mischievous tongues procure hurt to others, and blame to
themselves, we spoke yesterday sufficiently, in so much that we have already
excluded them out of the number of the good and desirable: wherefore those
which aspire to the degree of virtue, and which will show themselves worthy
to be admitted into civil conversation, ought above all things to have
regard that they offend no man with their tongue. But they shall not be
quite discharged of their debt, if besides that, they do not with their
words, seek to profit and delight their hearers both together, to the end
they may reap all the fruit which the tongue can yield: For that the tongue
by instructing, conferring, disputing, and discoursing, does gather, assemble,
and join men together with a certain natural bond. He then that will
behave himself well in civil conversation, must consider that the tongue is
the mirror, and (as it were) the image of his mind. And that like as we
know goodness or naughtiness of money, by the sound of it: so by the sound
of words, we gather the inward qualities and conditions of the man. And for
that we are so much the more esteemed of, by how much our Civility
differs from the nature and fashions of the vulgar sort, it is requisite
that we enforce our tongue to make manifest that difference in two principal
things: in the pleasant grace, and the profounde gravity of words.


Guaz. I understand you, your meaning is, that as the poor people spend
nothing but liards, and other such like small monye, so he whom you speak of,
should use no other money but gold, which is the fairest in show, and best in
substance. Yet (if I be not deceived) you are contrary to your self, for you
told me not long since, that it was enough to use plain and simple speech,
and now you will have him speak with eloquence and wisdom. But seeing you
have said that there are amongst us but few Orators and Philosophers, how
shall I, and such as I am do, that have no gold to spend, and who can not in
company be either Demosthenes or Plato. Is it your mind we shall return to
the school, to learn Rhetorike and Philosophy?


Annib. I will never unsay, that I have once said, but I make good, that a man
ought to proceed in common talk simply and plainly, according as the truth of
the matter shall require: notwithstanding, if you consider how in Uillages,
Hamlets, and fields, you shall find many men, who though they lead their life
far distant from the graces and Muses (as the proverb is) and come stamping
in with their high clouted shoes, yet are of good understanding, whereof they
give sufficient testimony by their wise and discreet talk: you cannot deny,
but that nature has given and sowed in us certain seeds of Rhetorike and
Philosophy. But for that the more those good parts appear in a man, the
better he is accepted in all companies, I would have him aid nature with a
little art, and seek to furnish himself with such good gifts, that he make
himself place, be desired, honored, and esteemed in any honest company he
shall come in.


Guaz. Yea Sir, but take heed least eloquence be not counted natural, by
diverse worthy persons, yea and it is much misliked of, when it swarueth from
the common phrase and form of speech, which we use with wife, children,
servants and friends. For that we ought to be content to express our mind
without affectation, without pain, and without any pomp: For if any of those
be added, it is besides the truth, and shows a superfluity of words,
whose proper office ought to be only to utter our conceived meaning. And in
truth, wherefore serve so many perephrases and circumlocutions, so many
translations and figures, being able to set forth matters, and touch them
briefly, in proper and plain terms. In my mind it may be said, that these
professors of eloquence, under the color of an Orator, play the part of a
Poet: and by the feigning of words, show the little plain dealing that is
in them.


Annib. To make you answer, I must ask you this question, whether you think
the men of old time to have spoken better, or these of our time?


Guaz. These of this age in my fancy, for that it is easy to bewtifie and
amplify things, when they are once brought in.


Annib. I am of your mind, for that in times paste they had not such rules to
direct them in speaking, as now adays are set down: they had not such Art and
Method, nor such mean to help them selves with Proemes, or by disposing and
dividing of their matters, or by proouing them by places and arguments: but
for all this, you must not think but that our manner of speaking is as
natural as theirs was.


Guaz. I count it natural, for so much as the rude speech of the country
Clown, is as natural to him, as the fine and polished, is to the Citizen and
Gentleman.


Annib. You see then every thing to be natural, which nature consents to
have made better and more perfect: and therefore as it is a thing unseemly and
unnatural in talk to straie to far from fit and usual matters, so it can
not but be commended and said to be natural, when in ones talk to
necessary things some what is added, whereby the matter is amended. And for
so much as all men naturally endeavor them selves in speech, to persuade and
to move, it is certain that a sentence has so much the more or less force
and vigor, according to the difference of persons from whom it comes, and of
the words by which it is uttered. So that our chief labor must be to move
the hearts of the hearers: and we must weigh this, that nothing can enter
into their hearts, which is not currantly spoken, and without offense to the
ears: and therefore we must labor to have (as Bias said) a comely grace in
holding our peace, and a lively force in speaking.


Guaz. If then your meaning be we should move affections, and persuade men's
minds with the tongue, you can not choose but you must have recourse to the
precepts of Rhethorike, which are not for every man's capacity.


Annib. I think it neither necessary nor convenient in this place to speak of
those precepts, because I will not seem desirous to take the pen out of the
hand of those which write of eloquence, which were nothing else but to seek to
take the lightning from Jupiter.


Guaz. He which can speak by art, as you can, much more easily shall he be
able to discourse of art when need^ shall require.


Annib. But being not in me to discourse of art, I shall less be able to
speak by art. But admit I could do both the one and the other, we have
already agreed, not to meddle with those matters which every one can not
understand* Wherefore touching that point, I will do no otherwise then discrate
Physicians are accustomed to do, who having respect to the poverty of some of
their Patientes, heal them not with Rubarbe, Manna, or other costly medicines,
but in steed thereof, work their cure with herbs and simples, and such
remedies as without pain or charge are commonly to be found in every field,
house, and Gardeine. So likewise, the most part of men being sick, and so
deprived of understanding, that they are not able to atteine to those high and
profound secrets, which are as it were in the marow and pith of the
institutions of Rethorike, we will lay before them those things, which at the
least grow about the Bark. For though they be not of great price, yet
nevertheless they shall be of great profit to the diseased. I say then, that
our tongue shall bring forth words which shall have force to stir up men's
minds, and in goodlinesse and goodness, both they shall represent that gold
whereof we have made mention, so that there be a little labor bestowed in the
action, iesture, and pronouncing of the words, which has great force and
power in speech. And albeit the orations of Demosthenes are ^ull of eloquence
and wit, yet it is said, That in Demosthenes there lacks the greatest part
of Demosthenes: for that they are not lively pronounced, but set down to be
read in dead letters. And verily I have known many so delightful in their
discourses, notwithstanding they have been vain and to small purpose, that by
the sweet and pleasant delivery and pronouncing of their speech, they have
gotten the commendation to be able to speak very well.


Guaz. Many Courtiers carry that little piece of sugar in their mouths, and it
may be said, that their money seems to be Gold, although in the touch it
is found to be silver, or baser metal. But I am of opinion in this, that we
suffer our ears to be too much tickled, whereby we give wrong judgment of
the matter, being more attentive to the sound of the words, then to the
weight of the sentences, giving the title of Orator, to such a one as is but
a brabler, and altogether without learning.


Annib. I am fully of your mind, and thereof it comes, that many times
certain verses like us very well, and seem to be set forth with all the
pleasant vain of Poetry, when we hear some tumbler or Dauncer sing them to
the Harp, but if you come to read, them afterward, you will think the^ sottish
and vain. The like befalls to many others, who in speaking are very well
liked of, and no fault to be found in them, but let them come to writing any
thing, and they are no body. But that we have no marvel hereof, I must say
unto you, that those same persons are not in deed eloquent, but that all their
force and virtue lies in the sweet delivery of their words, which though
they be neither well placed, neither very pithie or sententious, yet they
make to the ears and the mind a most delightful Harmony, which possesses
us in such sort, that we neither search after, nor desire for any thing
besides.


Guaz. Then it is no marvel on the contrary, that many know how to use
pure and fine filed speech, and yet want the gift of pronuntiation, which is
so ill in them, that thereby their words loose their grace and authority. But
for so much as this part of action has force to make men esteemed of above
their deserts, I should be very glad if you would show me wherein
consists this virtue.


Annib. Seeing the other good parts, which are in you, are accompanied with
this same also, I can not believe but you know well enough by what means you
have gotten it.


Guaz. I know not how I may believe, that you believe so, for I know that I
never learned any precept of Rethorike.


Annib. You are the more happy to have attained to that without travail,
which others can not come to, with much study.


Guaz. Do you not know that he is not happy, which does not know him self
to be happy.


Annib. Though you are ignorant of the parts of this action, yet you know in
your self the gift of good delivery of speech, and that you possess that
gift. And for my part I confess unto you, I have not bestowed much study
about those points. But if your pleasure be, that we shall roaue at them,
perchance we shall come near the mark of the Authors of Rethorike.


Guaz. Even as it shall please you.


Annib. I consider first of all, that the first part of action consists in
the voice, which ought to measure it forces, and to moderate it self in such
sort, that though it strain it self somewhat, yet it offend not the ears by
a raw and harshe sownde, like as of stringes of instruments when they break,
or when they are ill stricken.


Guaz. To say the truth, that is the pronuntiation of the most part of our
Monferins, and much more of those of Piemount, who with the shrilnesse of
their words go through ones ears.


Annib. Yet we must take heed we speak not so softly that we can scarce be
heard.


Guaz. That is the voice of Hypocrites, and our holy Ankers, who seem to
speak with the mouth of death.


Annib. Next, we must take heed to bring forth our words distinctly, and
to separate the sillables: mary in such sort that we set not forth every
letter, as little children do when they learn to read, which is a very
unpleasant hearing.


Guaz. The people of Verona and Venice, seem to err in that.


Annib. But on the other side, it is not meet to vtterous words in such
have, that like meat, in the mouth of one almost starued, they be swallowed
down without chewing


Guaz It is used of the Genowayes and those of Cor^a.


Annib. And therefore it is necessary to use a mean, that the pronuntiation
be neither too swift nor too flow. But we must take heed above all things,
that the last sillables be heard plainly, least we fall into the fault of some,
who suffer the last letters to die between their teeth. Like as he who for
fear to say amiss, durst bring forth neither Tempum nor Tempus, but Tempt,
and therefore we must speak freely, without supping up our words, and
bringing them but half forth.


Guaz. Lovers commonly use such uncertain and broken speeches.


Annib. We must likewise take heed we speak not out of the throat, like one
that has some meat in his mouth which is too hot, or else is almost choked
with the reume.


Guaz. This is the imperfection of the Florentines and those of Luqua: who have
their throats full of aspirations.


Annib. Some others offend as much, who opening their mouth too much, fill
it with wind, and make the words resowne within, as an Echo does in Caves
and hollow places.


Guaz. As I think, that is the natural custom of those of Mantua and Cremona,
wherein those of Naples also keep them company.


Annib. Lastly, the voice must be neither fainte like one that is sick, or
like a beggar: neither shrill nor loud like a crier, or like a schoolemaister,
which does dictate or rehearse to his scholars some theme or epistle. For it
would be said, as it was said to one, If thou singest, thou singest ill, if
thou read, thou singest.


Guaz. I do not think for all that, you would have us in speaking use
always one tune and measure.


Annib. No verily, for the pleasure of speech, so well as of Music, proceeds
of the change of the voice, yea, (to end this talk) I would have you know,
that as we sometimes stand, sometimes walk, sometimes sit, without continuing
long in either of them, so the change of the voice, * like an instrument of
diverse strings, * is very acceptable, and eases both the hearer and the
speaker: and yet we must see that this change be made with discretion in time
and place, according to the quality of the words, and the diversity of the
sentences and sayings.


Guaz. As far as I see, you have nothing else to say touching this action.


Annib. No more touching the voice, but there is an other part, which
pertains to the iesture, whereof perchance it were better to say nothing,
then speak too little, for that there belong unto it so many circumstances,
that for my part I am not able to rehearse them.


Guaz. It is much in my opinion to keep a certain majesty in the iesture,
which speaks as it were by using silence, and constrains as it were by way
of commandment, the hearers to have it in admiration and reverence.


Annib. Yet herein is required such a moderation, that a man with too little be
not immovable like an image, neither with too much, too busy like an Ape: and
as the one stirring no part, thinking to get the opinion of gravity,
incurreth the suspicion of folly, and is taken for a feigned person, brought in
to speak, having of him self no life, so the other by the liberty of his
iestures, thinking to use a plausible kind of courtesy, whereby to win
favor, speaks a playerlike kind of lightness, whereby he gets
discommendation. I will not in this place advise him that speaks to hold his
head upright, to take heed of licking or biting the lips, and to see the
words agree to the iesture, as the dance does to the sown of the
instrument: neither likewise do I think it meet to admonish the hearer to
take heed of rude lowtishe looks, of wrying the body aside, of too set a
gravity in looks, of too sower a countenance, of gazing about him, of
whispering in any others ear, of laughing without occasion, of gaping too
wide, of showing him self grieved at the speakers words, and of all those
things whereby you may either amaze him that speaks, or else seem to be
weary of his talk. I will not, I say, speak of these things, for I should
but make a recital of Galatee, and those books, which the moral
Philosophers and Rhetoritians have written upon this matter. These are things
which are learned, not so much by readyng, as by using company, for when an
other speaks, we mark what likes and what disliketh, and by that we know
what we ought to avoid and what to follow: as when we our selves speak, and
that we see some of the hearers little attentive, or some other way to use some
ill behavior, we learn by his inciuilitie how we ought to behave our selves
in hearing others. It shall suffice then to say for this time, that touching
this action, we must frame all the body in such sort, that it seem neither
to be of one whole immooueable lump, neither yet to be altogether loosely
disioynted.


Guaz. That is, we must imitate those which neither Saintlike are too
ceremonious, neither Iugglerlike are too quick and too full of action.


Annib. Just. But above all, it behooves him, which by his action is willing
to move an either, to feel first some motions in him self, and to draw
forth the affections of his heart, in such sort, that the hearers seeing them
show without the eyes, may be moved by the very countenance of him that
speaks.


Guaz. This same in my judgment is one of the best and necessariest
aduertisementes which you have hythervnto given: for that the end of the
speaker, being to stir up the affections of others, he ought to take pain
in it. And it can not be that you should be sorrowful for my mishap, if while
I recount it unto you, you perceive not me to be sorrowful Neither can I
possibly wring the tears from your eyes, unless I first wipe them from mine
own. To be short, one thing can not give to an other that which it self has
not. And I say again, that this is a notable precept: whereby you put me in
mind of some persons whom I know happily endowed with this gift. And amongst
other, my Lord the most reverend Archbishop of Thurin, Seigneur Hierosme de la
Rouere, who, by his learning eloquence, good conversation and godly life, began
even from his infancy to make all men have him in admiration, and to be very
well thought of in all companies he comes in, and yet he is become so
expert in this action, which you have proposed, that not only by his sweet,
filed, grave, and distinct words: but also by the windows of his eyes, by the
clearenesse of his countenance, and by the seemelynesse of his gestures, he
does so open within his commendable affections, that on the one side, and the
other, he carries away men's hearts whither it pleases him.


Annib. You see then, that the inward action ought to Go before the outward,
so that the sound of the words, and the motions of the body, be thrust
forward by the affections of the heart. * And of all this our discourse, we
may gather this, that there is as well eloquence of body, as of mind, and that
many are counted elequent, for some or for only one part of Rethorike, which is
justified by the example of Apuleius, who was judged most eloquent, for his
countenance, gesture, and comely moving of the body, with the which good
parts, he more allured his auditors, then with copy of words. It is said
further, that Hortensius took more pains in trimming up his body, then in
framing of his speech: so that it was doubtful whether men ran rather to
behold him, then to hear him. So great agreement is there between the words
and the countenance, and the countenance and the words. * Now for so much as
we have said, and concluded, as much as is sufficient touching the tongue,
it is requisite we come to those parts which consist in manners: and as
hitherto we have entreated of the beauty of gold, now we must consider of
the value of it.


Guaz. You have in few words so well satisfied me touching Action, that now
you make me desirous to hear some other point touching talk. And as that
which you have hither unto said, concerns only the pronuntiation of words,
and the gestures of the body, so I would be very glad it might now please you
to speak of those points, which apperteine to the ornament and bewtifiyng of
speech: which discourse will not exceed the capacity of men of mean
understanding.


Annib. I have already told you that we must not climb up that great tree,
to gather the fruits which are on the top of it, for that we shall have much
to do to get thither, and few there be that will be able to follow us: and
we ought to think our selves well, that we have reached with our hands,
those few leaves, and flowers which hang over our head. And for that the
chiefest virtue is to abstain from vice, I first admonish him, which takes
pleasure in civil conversation, to eschew all things which make the talk
less delightful to the hearers: as, to use more briefness then is
requisite, for the plain setting forth of the matter he has undertaken to
speak of, which troubles much the hearers. For as if they were iuditially to
examine an offendour, they shall be driven by continual demaundes forcibly to
wring forth of his mouth those things, which (to explane the matter thoroughly)
he ought to utter without asking. But on the other side, he must not use
superfluous words, nor be tedious to his hearers with long Prefaces, and
other impertinent circumstances besides the matter, which shows him a vain
trifler, without judgment, and makes him nothing acceptable to his Auditors.


Guaz. By many words many imperfections are discovered, and as a wise man
said, If to have the tongue still walking and iabbering were a sign of
wisdom, the Swallows might verily be said to be more sage then us.


Annib. * Thereupon it is that the lawmaker, being asked why he ordained so
few laws for the Lacedaemonians: Answered, that a few laws were enough for
those that used but few words. * But those which use variety, and entreat
of diverse matters, though they use many words, yet they weary not their
hearers, so much as those do, who according to the Proverb, Make of the fly,
an Elephant, and of a matter of nothing, along tale, * which Agesilaus finding
fault with, said he liked not of that Shoemaker, which made a great shoe for
a little foot. * There are many other imperfections of speech, which I will
not rehearse, for that he which gives attentive ear, shall be well able to
discern, and know them in him who speaks ill. I will say that amongst
other faults, there is one common to the most part of men, who by negligence
use to repeat some one word very often* and some there are, who speaking by
the mouth of another, rehearse often this (says he) which is very unseemly.
Another at the beginning of every sentence, comes in with (now Sir): and
some there are, who when they will not or can not signify things by their
proper names, in steed thereof say (what shall I call it.)


Guaz. The first fault of these last rehearsed, is very unseemly for him
which speaks, but much more for him which writes, and I have noted, that
many having some special affection to some word, or to some manner of
speech, have sowed it in a thousand places, and in every leaf of their book
could not refrain from continual repetition of the same words, or phrases
of speech. And therefore there are, which say, the writings of Bembo would
have better grace, if these words ( Paeuentenole, fortuneuole, and such like)
were not so often inserted in them, which gave occasion to the Cardinal
Farnese to say iestingly, as he beheld a house at Bologne, built with many
windows, Questa casa secundo il Bembo e molto fenestreuole.


Annib. We must in our talk take heed of those faults, and others such
like, other aduertisementes which I can at this time give, touching the
commendable points in talk, are that every one endeavor to express the
things whereof he speaks, so plainly, that he makes them seen and
touched, as it were with the finger, using words proper, significant, and of
efficacy.


Guaz. I count him most happy which has that grace, and I know some Gentlemen
so meruellous in that point, that they will force their hearers, to receive
pleasure and dolor, to laugh and weep, according to the quality of their
discourses: by the which (like Orphee and Amphion) they will draw them whither
pleases them. But I know not whether you have marked some, who on the other
side, laboring to speak plainly and effectually, become more obscure and
less delightful, whereby it comes to pass, which is said, that by too
much spurring, the horse is made dull.


Annib. That fault comes of affectation, which is above all things to be
avoided, as a thing odious and fruitless: and you know well that to those which
give ear to their own words, it happens as to those, who the more they
force themselves to behold the Sun, the more they make their eyes run on
water: And therefore it behooves every one to measure his forces, and to know
that a man ought to speak no better then he can.


Guaz. I have tried in my self that to be most true which you say, and I have
noted some, who the more they striued to show themselves, the more did they
overthrow themselves, verifiyng the saying of the Poet.

He which will climb too high,
does seek to catch a fall:
What God has given to man, let him
content himself withal.

Annib. Moreover, sometimes such matters come in talk, wherein negligent
carelessenesse in words, is more acceptable then diligent curiousness: and
now and then common and familiar words, set forth the matters which are
handled, far better then Tragical and stately words do. I maintain not for
all this, that a man need take no care how he speaks: for it is a thing as
blame worthy to speak dissolutely, as to speak difficultlie: and it is as
great a fault in common and known matters to use curious affectation, as it is
in great and weighty matters to show himself negligent, and void of
consideration. Wherefore a man of good judgment will know how to fly these
extremes, and to use in time and place, words and sentences, either more or
less grave, according to the diversity of places, times, matters, and
persons, to whom he shall speak: which likewise writers use to observe in
their works. But in any wise I advise him to bestow more pain about the
sense, then the words: for that most commonly in busiyng his brain about the
vain pomp of words, he does not conceive the matter so well, nor contriue
it in such order, as he ought to do: and with Esopes Dog, lets fall the
flesh, to catch the shadow. And we must make account, that as the guest
feeds not himself with the smoke of the meat, nor the Host pays himself
with the sown of the money, so the hearer, does not content him self only
with the smoke or sown of goodly words. To be short, goodly words without
good sense, are not words, but rather trifles.


Guaz. * I think there are few able to attain to the excellency of Focion,
who is said to use few words, containing in them much matter: as if he
should compare words to money, which is so much the more esteemed, by how
much lesser it is in quantity, and greater in value.


Annib. This is, no doubt, a rare and singular gift, but he which cannot
attain to it, ought at the least to know, that unpolished wisdom is more
commended, then flourishing filed speech, void of wit. And as in money we do
not chiefly consider the form, and the stamp, but the weight, and the matter
whereof it is made, so in speech we ought not to look so much to the grace
and finesse of it, as to the gravity and goodness of it. * And for that there
are many which are of very good devise, who in words are not able well and
readily to e^presse it, I would wish him, which in civil conversation
seeks to win favor and commodity, that having not himself learned of
Orators, the places from whence are drawn the variety and copy of words,
figures, and elocution; whereby the speech is bewtifyed and set forth* at the
least he diligently give ear to the words of others, and think with him
self, that there is not any so fond, or so barren in his speech, but that
sometime he says something worthy of memory, which ought to gather as a rose
amongst thorns, and lay it up for his own use. And albeit these same
ornaments and flowers of speech grow up chiefly in the learned, yet you see
that nature makes some of them to flourish even amongst the common sort,
unknowing unto them: and you shall see artificers, and others of low estate, to
apply fitly to their purpose in due time and place, Sentences, pleasant Iestes,
Fables, Allegories, Similitudes, Proverbs, Comptes, and other delightful
speech, varying from the common form of talk, which has no small force to
content the hearers. And therefore as we have said already, it is needful
to aid our selves with a little Art. For to set down things always in those
bare and simple (...), which our mother has taught us, and to follow ever
their plain property, does but weary the hearer, who on the contrary, is
recreated and delighted with variety, and those figurative speeches, which are
not common to every one. And though it be more then I need to do, to
illustre this, which I have spoken with examples, yet (more to satisfy my
self then you) I will rehearse one. He which in words and outward show
pretends us great good will, and in his heart wishes and works us ill, may
be signified, and set forth by us with this only word ( Dissembler) yet you
shall hear some fine head (refusing to use that common word, which very
infants understand) which will term him a wolf clothed in a sheep skin.
Another will say, that in the likeness of a Dove, he caryeth the tail of a
Scorpion: or, that he has Honey in his mouth, and a Rasor at his girdle.
Another will call him a painted Sepulcher, sugared pills, or gilted copper.
Another will say, he makes show of the cup, but gives blows of the
cudgel: or, that he weepeth over his Stepmothers grave. Some will cry,
beware your legs, or will say, that he offers you bread with one hand, and
throws a stone at you with another.


Guaz. A man may also apply unto the verse of the Poet*

That in the fairest flowers and grass,
the serpent most does lurk.

Annib. We may then thereby know, that to trim up our speech, and to go an
a^e beyond the common sort, it is good to accustom our selves to those pretty
and pleasant kind of speeches.


Guaz. We must not then blame the diligent industry of some, who like unto
Bees, gather honey of diverse flowers: and not suffering one word, sentence, or
merry jest, spoken by others, to fall to the ground, write them in their tables,
to the intent to use them themselves afterward either in speaking or writing.


Annib. I rather commend them, for that it is the way to get reputation with
little charge, and I likewise commend those, who to store themselves more
plentifully, read comedies and other posies, from which they fetch many
things to the same effect.


Guaz. Here it comes in my head to sell you, that above al (in my judgment,)
they are best liked of in company, to who^ God has given the grace to be able
to discourse well and readily of every thing. For as the spring time does
marvelously delight the eyes with the sundry sorts of flowers which it
brings forth, so these same by the diversity and variety of their
discourse, give woonderful refreshment to our minds.


Annib. * I count those, which will undertake to speak of every matter, rather
venturous then learned: and I have known some young men so greedy of knowledge,
that they have devoured all sorts of books without chewing them, and
according to the nature of cold stomakes, which desire more then they are able
to digest* have crammed in great abundance of learning, which for lack of
good disgestion yields no nourishment: and while they have gone about, being
amongst learned men to seem at one time Orators, Poets, Philosophers, and
Divines, they have scarce showed themselves sufficient Gramarians. And
therefore you must think, that though they commonly make men have them in
admiration, and take delight in their company, yet they are confused in
themselves, and altogether without order, not unlike a painters aperne, which
you shall see spotted by chance with all kind of colors. And this their
learning, more diverse then deep, may in deed (as you say) be likened to the
flowers of spring time, * for that it is not come to Automne, neither has
gathered the ripe fruits of the right sciences: every one of which will ask
the study of a man's whole life. So that it is a matter impossible for any man
to discourse perfectly of every thing, and we may say, that these men follow
the Poet in that verse.

I holding nothing fast, of all things fasten hold.
Which is likewise agreeable to the Proverb, That he is not any where, who is
every where. Yet for my part, I do not reprehend these men, but rather commend
them, as well for that they have not aspired hereto without study, or at least
without frequenting the company of the learned, as also for that * by those
their mingle mangles, * they win the liking and good opinion of a great many
that they shall come in company withal *. But I will say thus much unto you,
that is a most commendable course for a prince to take, whom perchance it
better beseems to have superficial sight in diverse languages and sciences,
then to be deeply seen in one only. For many people of diverse nations and
professions, having many important occasions of dealing with him in person, it
seems meet for his majesty (not so much for an ornament to himself, as
universal benifite) to have of all things, if it be possible, a certain
superficial knowledge. Provided always, that his principal care and study
be to govern and rule his subjects, as he ought to do: yt it may not be said
of him, as of Nero, who was very desirous (though he nothing deserved it) to be
counted an excellent musition: whereupon it was said that he was every other
thing more then a musition, and yet more a musition then a prince. But for
private persons, I am flat of this opinion, * that he which seeks to reach
the very top and type of glory, must rather get him down to the root of
some one science only, then gather here and there the fading flowers of many,
* remembering always this saying: That to ^unne over diverse things slightly,
delights: but to read over few things advisedly, profits.


Guaz. I perceive by you, you are desirous to come to other matters: yet I
beseech you to clear me of one doubt more touching the tongue, and to show
me whether you think good, that every one use the common language of his own
Country, or else affect the Tuscane tongue, as the better and finer.


Annib. You drive me to speak of a matter, wherein swaruing some what from
the opinion of others, I shall perchance purchase to my self the title of
arrogancy: nevertheless; I consider that the variety of opinions, which
have any ground of reason, cannot justly be misliked. And therefore as you
shall do me no wrong to gainesay that which I say unto you, seeing it comes
not from the Oracle of Apollo, so I think I shall not any way injury others,
if I now freely say unto you, that I have always been of opinion, that every
one speak according to the manner of his own country: which, who so leaves,
to take up any other fashion of speech, is no less to blame then they which
renounce, and refuse the Country it self. For it is to be considered, that
after the first confusion of tongues, many sorts of languages have by the
divine power of GOD remained in the world: whereby not only one Nation was
known from another, but also one Country, one City, one Uillage, and (which
is more) one street from another.


Guaz. I think verily that it cannot be said with reason, that I leave my
country, but rather that I love it, and am careful for it, deserving to be
well thought of of every one, if I endeavor in speaking to avoid the gross
rudeness of the Montferrat tongue, to reduce and conform it to the purity of
the Tuscane tongue, and to stir up others to follow me, so that it may
become our own proper language.


Annib. So long as you shall betake your self to that manner of speech, and
no man else take it up, your language shall not merit the name and title of
Country language, but rather of foreign, and you shall rather be mocked for
it, then commended. But if you alone could bring to pass (which seems to
me a matter impossible) that the amendment and refourmation by you introduced,
might be allowed and followed by others, then no doubt but you should deserve
commendation of every one. For then that language should be no longer
strange, but our own properly: whereof certain new fashions in apparel,
taken up not long since, give us an example* which coming from Spaniardes,
and other Strangers, are at this day made our own by propriety, which
falls out likewise in speech. For not only this our corrupt language of
Montferrat, but even the Tuscane tongue likewise has received certain words
(as you know better then I) both French and Pe^uenciall, and has so well
appropied them, that they are taken for Tuscane. And who knows not that by
reason of the concourse of the Mantuans hither, within this little while we
have given course to certain speeches, words, and accents come from them,
which leaping from mouth to mouth, at length are made common to every man?
Whereby like fishes coming from the river Garda or Mince, they swim in great
abundance into this river. And we shall see also hereafter, that the
diversity of people, which is come to place them selves in this City, will, by
the mixture of so many tongues, have changed in diverse words, the speech used
at this day.


Guaz. Then your meaning is, that I ought to speak after the abuse of our
country.


Annib. Yea in deed is it.


Guaz. To what end then have I bestowed labor in the Tuscane tongue?


Annib. Mary to this purpose, to set down well in writing, but your own
mind, and the will and pleasure of the Prince your Master.


Guaz. If it be lawefull for me to write Tuscane like, why shall it not be
lawful likewise for me to speak Tuscane like?


Annib. For that all men commonly delight to write, as men ought to do, and to
speak as men use to do: and though they bind them themselves to a right
order in writing, yet they are content in speaking to follow the common usage.


Guaz. If you did mark, as I have done, the delight which these Citizens
take to hear Senior Mola the President speak the right Tuscane tongue,
sweetened with the pleasant Roman tongue, I am sure, you would allow me and
other also to speak the Tuscane tongue.


Annib. That which beseems him, were unseemly for you, and in using it, you
should make your self as much misliked, as he is liked. For he has remained
in those parts long time, even from his youth, where he has learned the
language in such sort, that it cannot be said, that in his house he
speaks a strange or affected language: which would be said of you, who
having made no abode in those same Countries, you cannot excuse your self,
that by long use you cannot speak otherwise: whereby you must think that he
speaks so of necessity, where you should speak upon pleasure, to content
your own fancy, or else upon a bravery, to show your skill. And like as it
is reported, that while the Astrologer made a discourse of the mouinges of the
celestial Spheres, and course of the stars, a Philosopher interrupting him,
scoffingly demanded of him, how long it was since he came from heaven: so a
man might ask you, how long it is since you returned from Tuscane, and what is
the news of those parts.


Guaz. Seeing you will not suffer me to speak Tuscane, but think best I
should follow our own country language, I will frame my self to speak as
the common people does.


Annib. So shall you commit a fault unseemly for so wise a Gentleman as you
are, and you shall therein imitate some of our Citizens, who coveting to be
counted pleasant fellows, take delight in counterfaiting to speak clownishly,
whereof it comes to pass, that coming afterward into the company of
grave persons, they are not able to refrain those follies, and so show
themselves rusticall, and uncivil in their speech.


Guaz. If you forbid me both foreign speech, and my own natural language
also, I know not how I shall speak, me thinks by you, that you mean to
tie my tongue.


Annib. I do not prohibit you to speak in your natural and mother tongue,
but I would not have you use improper and unfit speeches.


Guaz. The more a Tuscane speaks Tuscane like, shall he not be the more
commended?


Annib. Yes mary shall he.


Guaz. By the same reason, the more I shall speak^ Montferrat like, the more
praise I shall merit.


Annib. The same reason cannot hold in things which are unlike, like as these
two tongues are. For the Tuscane is perfect, and ours imperfect: so that of
good things we ought always to choose the best, and of evil, to leave the
worst.


Guaz. If I ought to avoid the worst words in our tongue, I must be feign to
put Tuscane words in their steed, which doing, I shall make the hearers to
laugh at me, for making such a mingle mangle of Lombarde and Tuscane words
together. And for my part, I would think it better to speak one tongue,
altogether our own, or altogether Bergamasque, then to speak a language so
diverse, and mingled of the Tuscane, and our own, which joined together, have
that grace which Dan^ shows, when he says: Non credo qui per terra andasse
anchoi.



Annib. I think you have noted three sorts of garments, which are used at
this day, whereof some are of one only color, like unto Crows or Swannes,
some of diverse colors, like unto Pies or Parrets, wherein you see the colors
divided, and separated: some are of silk or wool, of diverse colors, so well
incorporated and mingled together, that it is not possible to discern the one
color from the other, like unto the feathers of Partridges, or of certain
Pigeons, whose color is so confused and chaungeable, that a man cannot say
what color they are of. The very same differences are found in speech, for
that some use simple speech, consisting of the tongue only, some compounde of
two or three diverse tongues, some mingled and changeable. And I am of this
mind, that this mingled kind of speech ought to be permitted to most men,
that simple kind to few, but that diverse kind, to none at all. Now these
only ought to use that simple kind of speech, whose language is perfect, and
polished, and all one in speaking and writing. But those ought to use the mixed
kind, whose mother tongue is rude and imperfect, like as ours is. But those
err much which speak in diverse sorts, using sometime words which are stark
naught, and sometime those which are excellent good, like as Dant did, ending
that Tuscane verse before rehearsed, with a rude word of Lombardy, which in
respect of the other words, resembles a piece of course cloth set upon a
velvet garment.


Guaz. That Poet is to be excused, for that in his time his tongue was not come
to that perfection that now it is of.


Annib. In deed in that respect he is to be excused, and besides, when the
necessity of the ryme did not drive him to it, he used oftener Hoggi, then
Anchoi. Moreover, entreating of high and weighty matters, he bent him self
rather to profit those which should read him, then to delight them. And you
may well consider that when the mind trauelleth in deep and hard matters, it
cannot be curious in the choice of words.


Guaz. You say well, but I am of this mind, that the making of rhyme, should
not make a Poet use naughty words.


Annib. Albeit it be a fault, yet it is much less then that which certain
Poets at this day commit, who take no care how the sentences hang together, so
that the ryme fall right: putting in such fond devises, so far from the
expectation of the discreet Reader, that they make him readier to laugh at
them, then to learn them. Like as an ignorant Ass some time did, who as your
brother told the other day in the Academie, ended the first verse of a Sonnet,
with this word Ersiglia, and to rhyme with that in the fourth verse, he put
Vriglia, and in the next following Striglia. And lastly, not knowing how to
rhyme up the other quaternarie, he botcht it up with vna cauiglia. Whereby
we may gather, that if the fault in words be venial, the fault in
sentence and matter is mortal.


Guaz. Seeing you neither allow my simple speech, nor diverse, but will have
me use only mingled and changeable, it is requisite, if it so please you, that
you lay before me the way to myxe this chaungeable language, in such sort,
that the division and parting of the colors be not perceived.


Annib. As in changeable silk and cloth, there is ever some one color that
shows more lively then the rest: so to fashion this mixed speech, it is
necessary that the natural language be chiefly set forth, in such discrete
sort as you do. For you dippe somewhat the Pencill of your tongue in the
fresh and clear color of the Tuscane tongue. Whereby you shadewe the stained
spots of our mother tongue, mary yet so lightly that your speech is always
known for Lombard.


Guaz. As I remember, there was a Philosopher, who speaking of the myngling,
and effects of diverse colors, says, that by mingling together white and
black, brown is made: so your meaning is belike, that I speak neither Lombard
nor Tuscane, but some hotche potche of both.


Annib. In making this brown color, you make your self show bright: and in
confounding these tongues, you show your self to be of good judgment. And
for that examples explane things more plainly, I will tell you that I have
noted how, in this mixture, you have utterly razed these words, il moizo la
feia la Sgroglia, and other such like corrupt words (which are proper not
only to some poor laborers of this Country, but also to some Citizens) and
in steed thereof, have enterlined these words, Matto, pecora, and guscio.
And as it behooves a Gentleman to speak better then a Plebeian, so the wisest
and best learned Gentleman, ought to speak better then those that are of less
learning: But always in such sort, that he seem not to set up a new
language, and be a stranger in his own house. And for conclusion, that he
have regard to this sentence, That he be endued with such knowledge as the
fewest sort have attained to, and that he use such speech as the most part
are accustomed to.


Guaz. You have handled this matter, touching speech, very profoundely, but
yet I am not thoroughly cleared of one doubt: For when I shall observe al those
things you have spoken of, I shall easyly make my self to be known for a
Lombard, but it shall be hard to discern by my speech whether I be of that
part of Lombardie called Montferrat. Whereby that which you have set down
shall take no place, that every one ought to manifest by his tongue of what
country he is, for I may as well be taken to be of Plaisance or of Verona, as
of this City,


Annib. Your doubt, makes me out of doubt, that my discourse touching this
matter is not yet finished, and therefore in few words I answer you, that as
by the books, apparel, and behavior, we give a guess of what Country a
man is, so the speech ought more manifestly to bewray it.


Guaz. The Gascons and the Frenchmen are evidently enough known from others,
by their blalsphemie and swearing.


Annib. The like is used almost in all places, but the just God will use no
difference in punishing us for it. I would also that not only in ye words, but
also in the sound, accent, and pronuntiation, we should retain some signs
and marks of our country, as well to show our selves such as we are to
strangers, as also not to grieve, by a through reformation and diversity, our
countriemen, with whom we must lead our lives: And therefore reason would we
should in some sort show our selves agreeable to them in speech and manners*
And for so much as we began this discourse of the tongue by a similitude of
money, we will end it with the same, and conclude, that as money, by mean of
the coin has a public stamp set upon it, whereby it is known where it was
made, so our speech ought to have a mark upon it, which may show the
original, and country of him that speaks.


Guaz. You may now if it please you, descend to other things, which this day
are to be spoken of.


Annib. Make account that all which has been said hythervnto, apperteineth
only to the pleasure of the ear, and is but external, and without. Now we
have to consider more deeply, such things as are convenient for education and
manners requisite in civil conversation. For Diogines used to say, That the
Mathematicians beheld the heaven and the stars, but saw not that which lay
before their feet: and that Orators study to speak well, but do it not.
Having then set down in our civil conversation ye purity of speech, we must now
consider yt that is not sufficient, without the purity and sincerity of
manners. And therefore every one ought to labor, to conform his mind and
affections to his words, yea and having not the gift of pure speech, he ought
to supply that defect, with the purity and simplicity of manners. And
thereupon that graunde Captain Marius, speaking before the people of Rome,
said, My words are not well set in order, but I waygh not that much, so that
my deeds be good. Those have need of artificial speech, who with goodly
words go about to cover dishonest deeds.


Guazzo. Your conclusion in brief is, that to be acceptable in company, a man
must endeavor to be a Grecian in words, and a Roman in deeds.


Annib. You have hit my meaning right: but for that I have already protested,
that I will not bind my self to search out all the parts of moral
Philosophy, we will give those, that are more studious, leave to turn over the
Philosophers books, to furnish their minds thoroughly with moral precepts, and
we will content our selves to speak of things most familiar, and easy to be
observed in conversation. Amongst the which (to grow now to the matter) I
would wish every one that seeks to win credit in company, to resolve
with him self above all things (which very few folk do) to follow that
excellent and divine counsel of Socrates, who being demanded which was the
readiest way for a man to win honor and renown: answered, To endeavor, to
be such a one in deed, as he desires to seem to be in show.


Guazzo. If you mean to entreat but of the easiest matters, you must let that
alone. For seeing there is almost no man that puts it in execution, it is a
sign that it is a very hard point: and you know that a very great
difficulty, and an impossibility, are taken by the laws for one self thing.


Annib. Men leave it not undone, for want of power to do it, or of knowledge
how to do it, but only for want of will: and therefore you must not judge
those things hard to be done, which consist only in our will to do, or not
to do.


Guaz. If to be learned, depended so well of my will, as to make a show as
though I were learned, I would perchance be better learned then I seem to
be, for that I should like better to be, than to seem to be: but you
know, that to attain to learning, there is not only required a will, but
study, watching, labor, and disquiet, which are irksome things, so that
according to the fashion of others, to hyde my ignorance, I force my self to
seem that I am not.


Annib. You know that the will is not showen, nor executed of it self, but is
manifested by the works that ensue: which though they be troublesome and full
of labor, yet if the will be forward (if they be such things as may be
done) they become easy to be accomplished. Whereupon it is commonly said,
that nothing is hard unto a willing heart.


Guaz. I allow that conclusion for good, but that hateful, seeming without
being, being (as you say) in company to be avoided, I think it needeful
that you show the way how we should avoid it.


Annib. You have reason to seek how to eschew this fault, for when we go
about to persuade others, that we know that which we do not, we deceive
not others, but our own selves* and at the length we are taken tardie in our
ignorance. There are then diverse ways to avoid it: the first is, that the
tongue go not before the wit. And as women before they present themselves to
the view of others, pry in their glass, and take counsel and assistance
thereof: so before we utter our words, we must have recourse to the inward
glass, that we may order and place them in such sort, that the hearers may
not judge, that they take their beginning rather from the mouth, then from the
heart, and that they are rather shot forth at all adventures rashly, then
uttered with reason advisedly. Of this premiditation this good shall come, that
no man will adventure to speak of things he knows not, as the ignorant
commonly do. For according to the opinion of a wise man, he that speaks he
knows not what, plays in a manner the part of a mad man, and falls
into the fault that Alexander the great did, who reasoning of painting in the
house of Apelles, and using speeches impertinent and contrary to that art, the
wise Painter whispered him in the ear, that he should speak no more of that
matter, or else that he should speak softly, for that his prentices laughed him
to scorn.


Guaz. I allow well of this, * wherewith also this saying agrees, That it is
no greater praise to discourse well of that one knows, then to be silent in
that he knows not, * whereof a Poet said very well.

Let Sea men speak of winds,
of bees herdes that them keep:
Let Soldiers talk of war and fight,
and sheepeheardes of their sheep.

Annib. It is not long since that a certain Gentleman (who coueted to be
counted learned) chanced to be in the company of those that were learned men
in deed, whereas there was talk of certain new and rare works which were
very shortly to be put in print: he began to speak of an uncle of his
deceased, not long before, who, in deed was a man very well learned: and
added further, that at his death he left with him a work to be published the
goodliest that might be: and being asked whereof it entreated, he answered, I
assure you it entreats of all the excellent things of the world, I can not
express unto you the great pleasure I take in reading it. But being
afterward askts whether the work were in proase or verse, the poor
Gentleman without discretion, answered, that he had forgotten that.


Guaz. You have produced a pretty example, now I pray you show me some other
way to avoid this appearance.


Annib. An other is, not to speak, while an other is in speaking, before the
time serve, and before he which speaks be thoroughly understood: for that
diverse persons, greedy of this sottishe seeming, will not suffer their
companion to end his speech, but interrupting him, and taking the word as it
were out of his mouth, will make a show that they are better learned, and
better able to go through with the matter then he, when in very deed they
little or nothing understand it. Wherein they resemble those ignorant fools,
who, whiles the Priests sing at their service, join their voices and keep
tune with them, without understanding any thing they say.


Guaz. This fault is hateful in company, and offends greatly him which
speaks. Touching this, I remember how a Gentleman began to rehearse in a
certain company, the order and solemnity of the marriage of the Duke my
master, whereat he was present: and while he was speaking, one of the
hearers almost at every word would put in his speak in the matter, thereby
to show, that he well understood the whole matter: the Gentleman having borne
long enough with this indiscreet dealing, at the length paused a little, and
said, My masters, it seems to me, that this Gentleman knows the whole
matter better then I, and therefore I will leave it to him, thoroughly to recount
it unto you. This digression, as you may imagine, made my Gentleman pull in his
horns, and to acknowledge his fault, so that without speaking a word more,
he suffered the other Gentleman to go forward, and to make an end of his
matter.


Annib. Certain it is, that we ought not to interrupt him which speaks, but
rather with a certain modesty to take sometime that which he says, for
news, though every one knew it before. But this interrupting of an other,
were but a small matter, if a greater inconvenience did not ensue of it. For
that he which has not the patience to give ear to that which is spoken,
oftentimes takes words in other sense then they are spoken. Wherein he
resembles a Dog, who hearing one knock at the door, barketh by and by,
before he know whether it be a friend or an enemy, that is there. Whereof arise
controversies without cause, and much confusion, which should not happen if the
hearer were more discreet, and would attend the end of the matter. So that we
may well say, that those which are impatient to hear, are rash to judge, and
are likewise ouerhastie Judges: who either by persuasion, or by affection are
induced to pronounce sentence, before they hear what either part can say for
them selves.


Guaz. Uerily, I can not abide how in some companies all will speak together,
interrupting one an others talk, and resembling a flock of Stares, or of
Dawes, or other birds, which when they are lighten on some tree together, make
a confused charm and noise all at once.


Annib. And you which are discreet, if you chance amongst such fellows,
because you will not show your self parciall, are feign to behold, as soon
one, as soon an other, and make a sign with your countenance to all, to show
that you give ear unto them.


Guaz. Without harkening in deed to any one of them.


Annib. Right, we will say then, according to the opinion of a Grecian, that to
covet to speak always, and never to hear others, is a kind of tyranny, so
that in talk the speaker and the hearer ought to agree to keep turns as it
were, like as they do at tennis. Besides, one that can quietly hear an other
speak, shows how he likes to have the truth evidently and quietly opened
in every matter: and that he can not away with unadvised and contentious
arguing. And thereupon it is said, That to use silence in time and place,
passes all well speaking: and that it ought to be put in the number of the
Philosophical virtues. For as the Orator is not known but only by speaking,
so the Philosopher is no less known by modest silence, then by his grave
sentences. * Therefore I would wish every one in speaking so to use the matter,
that it may seem he is rather urged to speak of necessity, then desirous to
do it voluntarily. Imitating that wise man, who is commended for three
especial virtues: the one, that he never told lie, the other, that he never
spoke ill of any, and the third, that he never spoke but upon necessary
occasion *. Whereupon I conclude, that in company every one ought to observe
two special times to speak: the one, when things come in question which he
understands perfectly well, and has at his fingers ends as it were: the
other, when such matters arise, as he must needs speak of. In these two
cases, it is better to speak then to be silent, in all other, he that shall
use silence shall choose the best way: and avoiding that vain and counterfeite
seeming, shall win greater commendation.


Guaz. Neither yet for all that, do I think it meet, for any to be hasty to
speak of all things that he understands and knows perfectly, but to go
slowly forward in them, and to weigh whether they concern his calling, or
not. For albeit, by reason of my continual sickliness, I have been driven to
bestow some time in the study of Galen, yet for that my chief profession is
not that way, I should be misliked if I should play the Physician amongst
Physicians, and enter into any deep discourse of physic.


Annib. It is no doubt an odious thing for a man to take upon him
sufficiency, and to be prattling in every matter. Whereupon it is said that
King Cleomenes, as a poor feeble Sophist reasoned in his presence of valor
and force, fell a laughing, saying, If a Swallow should speak of strength, I
should not forbear laughing, but if an Egle did it, I should hearken to him
attentively. And therefore it were not seemly for you to take occasion to
speak of Physic: and if occasion shall be given you, you may speak of it in
way of doubting, or demanding some question: manifesting by that modesty,
that you have more desire to understand that you know not, then to utter that
you know. Wherefore every one ought to consider what opinion other men have
of him, and in what matters they will willingly hear him, and easily give
credit to him, and in no wise to meddle in any other matters.


Guaz. Have you any other means to show us, whereby we may fly this fond
seeming.


Annib. Marie for that purpose, sincerity and plain dealing is especially
good, a thing very commendable and necessary, not only in deeds, but even in
words likewise. For many, to the end they may be taken for others then they
are, use to shadow the truth, and when they think to win credit, in the
end by some means or other, they bewray them selves to be liars and cogging
mates, and by their false dealing loose their credit. And though this fault
be committed in diverse sorts, yet me thinks it is too too intolerable,
when a man attributes to him self that which belongs to others. According
to the example of the Fly, which sitting upon a Carte that was driven on the
way, said, he had raised a very great dust: * or like the Emote, who sitting
on the horn of an Ox that was tilling the ground, being askte what he did
there, answered, that he went to plough. *


Guaz. I have known many of them so impudent, that they have not been ashamed
to affirm them selves to be the Authors of some things as new, and which
have befallen to them selves, which nevertheless are most stale, and found
written a thousand years ago in other men's works.


Annib. Therein they are to be punished as falsifiers and filchers, for that
they appropriate to them selves the honor that is due to others. But they
commonly do penance for this offense, like as once the Dawe did, who showing
him self at a general muster of Birds, armed in all points with the
feathers of an other foul, was at length stripped out of them, and mocked and
laughed at as a counterfaite thief. We must therefore have reverent regard of
the truth, and take heed that we violate not the virginity thereof in any
sort, nor to pull so much as one hair from her, least we sustain shame
thereby. And I will say unto you more, that the truth is a thing so tickle,
that a man may incur reprehension not only by disguising it in some part
colourably, but even by very reporting of it simply: which is, when men tell
things which are true, but yet such as few will believe to be true.


Guaz. Of that danger Dant expressly speaks in these verses.

It is not good to tell that truth,
which seems like unto a lie:
For though it be no fault in deed,
yet may a man be blamde thereby.

Annib. You understand me well, and so you see that in company we must not
only report the truth plainly and faithfully, but besides, we must be spare
in speaking of things which are not easily believed. * And therefore it is
said, that Alexander reading certain verses of a flattering Poet, wherein he
was commended for killing of Elephantes, for overthrowing of Bulls, and such
like monstrous matters, rebuked him sharply, forbidding him to set forth any
more such lies, which though they were true, yet they would be taken for
lies. But to avoid this vain appearance, it is not sufficient for a man to
report always the truth, if he do not likewise forbear to speak of him
self, and his own doings, unless some necessity require it. For though he
speak thereof truly and modestly, yet he leaves some suspicion of vanity,
and makes himself less acceptable in company: to avoid which
inconvenience, let him always have in mind that saying, that a man ought not
to speak of him self, either in praise or in disprayse: for that the one is a
deed of arrogancy, the other of folly. *


Guaz. What other ways do you add to these already rehearsed?


Annib. Like as in the night time, the more you fix your eyes on the
firmament, the greater number of stars you discover, so the more we consider
the said sentence of Socrates, the more ways we find out to avoid this
vain seeming, and to be well thought of in company. Let us say then again,
that a man ought to endeavor to be such a one, as he desires to seem to
be, and we shall thereby know that as naturally all men desire to be had in
honor and estimation, so in the most part of men, that desire is vain and
foolish, for that it is not founded upon any desert, nor any virtue worthy of
honor.


Guaz. You say very true, and I see the abuse so great, that the least worthy,
press most for praise and honor.


Annib. Yea but they miss the mark they shoot at, for it commonly falls
out contrary to their desire? for seeing others to make no account of them,
they begin to set by them selves, and stirred up with a foolish disdain,
they put on a Lions skin, and look with a stern and fierce countenance: By
means whereof they become hateful to all men. * But if according to the
Philosopher they knew that honor did consist, rather in him which honors,
then in him which is honored, they would never take upon them so bigly, nor
set them selves out so arrogantly, knowing that it is not in their power to be
honored of them selves. * Wherefore, who so seeks to be had in reputation,
either for wisdom, justice, fortitude, or temperance, must examine well him
self, whether any of these virtues be in him, otherwise his desire can not
possiblye take effect.


Guaz. If none should be had in honor, but men of valor and merit, you
should not see men even of the meanest sort, greatly esteemed of, and
favored of the people, only for the good nature and disposition which is noted
to be in them, notwithstanding they are void of learning, and of all those
parts, by the aid whereof, men attain to honor.


Annib. Those whom you speak of, are rather loved then honored, and therefore
I meant to tell you, that it is not enough for a man to be honored for some
office that he is in, or for virtue that is in him, if he purchase not also
the friendship and good will of other, which is the right and sure bond of
conversation: * and in my judgment, they may be rightly termed their own
enemies which labor not by all lawful and laudable means, to heap up to
them selves so rich a treasure.


Guaz. And how I pray you is this good will chiefly to be gotten?


Annib. It is gotten of the absent by reporting well of them behind their
backs, and of the present, by using that common mean and instrument, whereby
men's hearts are won, that is, courtesy and affability.


Guaz. Out of doubt, there is nothing that makes us swarne more from human
nature, then surlinesse, and it is plainly seen, that these austere
countenaunces, and new Catoes, are hated of all men. And where they count a
praise never to laugh, to bend the brows, to frown, to look terribly, and
to use rough speech, they make them selves known for proud and discurteous,
and with their pride are odious to the proud them selves.


Annib. I know some so haughty and uncivil, that they disdain to salute
those which salute them, which is a sign of a barbarous mind, to be neither
amiable in countenance, nor affable in words. And though they think they do
a man no wrong thereby, yet it makes men hate them as enemies.


Guaz. I can not in any wise abide that sort of men, and I hold rather with
those which commit this fault unawares, and by oversight.


Annib. The fault which is so committed by negligence or oversight is too
gross, and there is no man that will so interpret it, and therefore they must
resolve with them selves either to change their manners, and not to be so
scant of their Cappes and salutations, (which profit much without any cost)
or else to hire a man of purpose to give them notice of those which shall
salute them, that they may remember to salute them again. For these small
trifles being respected, are of force to contract friendship, and being
neglected, they may dissolve that friendship which before was contracted.
Therefore it is our parts rather to prevent our friends in salutations, and
to go beyond them in courtesy.


Guaz. There was a King of France, who as a common strumpet did reverence to
him in the street, did resalute her courteously, and as one said unto him,
that his majesty had done honor to a woman void of honesty, that did not
deserve it: he answered, that he had rather err in saluting some that are
naught, then to fail at any time to salute any that are good.


An. A saying truly fit for a king, whereby appears yt he that does look to
find courtesy, must like to show courtesy in what sort soever it be, and
he must always remember, that neither hard Wine is pleasant to the taste,
neither haughty behavior acceptable in company: which agrees with the
letters of Philip, King of Macedon: wherein is plainly showed, that gentle and
courteous speech, is the Adamant stone which draws unto it the hearts and
good wills of all men.

And albeit it be so, that this virtue be seemly and commendable in all
sorts of people, yet it shines most brightly in those which are our
Superiors, either in power or preeminence, when you receive of them courteous
speeches, in such sort, that what by their gentle words, and what by their
lively looks and cheerful countenance, you understand their affections,
wheretoo your will does easily incline. I could here allege unto you, the
example of two brothers, Gentlemen of great calling, whereof the one for his
gentle speech and pleasant looks, is greatly beloved of every one, and the
other for his terrible countenance, and stately kind of talk, is favored
but of a few: In so much, that some which fall in talk of them, say, * that
if they were to request any thing at their hands, they should remain more
pleasauntly satisfied with a denial of the first, then with a grant of the
other.


Guaz. Therevppon it is said, that a man does one part of the good turn,
when he gratiouslye denies it. *


Annib. But notwithstanding I commend this lowlye and gentle behavior, yet
would I have every one keep that majesty and state which is due to his
estate. For to be too populer and plausible, were to make largess of the
treasures of his courtesy, to abase him self, and to show a sign of folly or
flattery. Whereby a man against his will may show himself sometime to be that
he is not, and give occasion to others to insult over him, and not to respect
him so much as they ought to do. But I would wish men, so much as is
possible, to show at once the majesty of a Philosopher in the gravity of
sentences, and the humility of a Christian in the gentleness of words:
having in mind, that courteous language multiplieth friends, and mitigateth
enemies, and that according to the proverb, The meek Lamb sucketh the teates
of his own damme and of others also.


Guaz. I remember I have read a sentence, not much different from that, to
wit, that he which speaks gentelly to his neighbor, receives of him a
gentle answer, and out of the breasts where he searched milk, brings out
butter.


Annib. * Assure your self it is even so. But to be sure to reap this
commodity, it is requisite that this gentle speech come from the heart, and
that it be not intermingled with some fond iesture and behavior, which may
make it smell of flattery, and in steed of love, purchase hate. Like as some
do, who by their continual girning and showing of their teethe, make men
doubt whether they honor them, or laugh at them.


Guaz. It is a common saying, that to smile upon every man, is rather a sign
of a vain mind, then of a cheerful countenance.


Annib. Now I will join for a sister and companion to affability, an other
virtue, very necessary in Conversation, and it is that, which not only with
gentle words, but with a certain witty and ready pleasantness delights
wonderfully the hearers. And as that is a sign of courtesy, so this is a token
of wit, and is used no less in jesting merrily with others, then in taking jest
patiently of others. There are diverse sorts of this pleasantness, whereupon
both the Philosophers and Rhetoritians, seeing how available it is to
refreshe minds ouercharged with melancholy and pensive thoughts, how
acceptable in company, and how conducible to health, have at large taught us
diverse ways how to attain unto it.


Guaz. I believe well that art and study may help something in it, but in my
judgment, it is nature that must work chiefly. Which to be true,
appears by many men of great wisdom and learning, who in a pleasant matter
have no grace at all, and contrariwise, many ignorant men, even of the common
sort, will handle a pleasant matter so finely, that they will make Heraclitus
him self laugh at it.


Annib. I grant unto you, that according to the diversity of natures, the
actions of men are diverse, and that it is hard for one to move delight in
others, without a certain natural liveliness of spirit. But it is seldom
seen that a man pleasauntly conceited, is not also sharply witted. Which
Gonella notes, saying, That to play the fool well, it behooves a man first
to be wise. But notwithstanding I am of opinion, that a man solemn by nature,
may by use get the habit of pleasantness, and I am sure you will not deny
me, but that there are some in countenance and iesture very grave and
severe, who in company are pleasant and merry beyond all measure. But it is
better for a man not to alter his own nature from gravity, then to use mirth
immodestlye. For as the mean is commendable, so the extremes are detestable,
and grow either to scurrilitie in using too licentious scoffing, or else to
inciuilitie, in refusing all merry jesting. *


Guaz. Now for so much as you have shown how pleasantness in company
delights, and how gentleness in speech makes us appear what we are, and
discovers the affections of our friendly hearts, whereby we win the good
will of others, I would gladly know of you, if there be any other way
besides, which will work such laudable effects.


Annib. Albeit by affability, only there is imprinted in men's hearts a good
opinion of us, even like as is in the wax by the Seal or Signet, yet we must
put too somewhat else, whereby that print and impression may be made to
continue: whereto is very ^it and auayleable the virtue called modesty, or
rather that which we commonly call discretion.


Guaz. And wherein is that virtue to be used?


Annib. In every thing, but chiefly in finding fault with others men's
faults. And therefore it is to be presupposed that GOD has made man a
companable creature, that by means of Conversation, he may both assist
others, and be assisted him self, as need shall require. Wherefore seeing no
man on earth is endued with absolute perfection, we must not mock at other
men's imperfections, least others likewise laugh at ours.


Guaz. You say very true, but do you not know, that (as the Proverb is) we
see better a far of, then hard by us, and that at home we see no more then
Moles, but abroad as much as Argus, * and that we can spy a moate in
another eye, and not a beam in our own? * But whereof think you, this fault
proceeds?


Annib. Perchance of selfeloue, which suffers not a man to see his
imperfections.


Guaz. But me thinks such a one seems to love others better then him
self, for that he leaves to correct his own faults, to amend other men's.


Annib. He should in very deed love others better then him self, if he
were moved to seek the amendment of other men's manners upon charity and
love: but it is known too well, that he is stirred to it of a certain
presumption and desire to seem more wise then others, whereupon I think the
very occasion why we are so busy to find faults in others, is, that
contrary to the foresaid saying of Socrates) we take more pleasure to seem
then to be: and we think we show not such wit in amending our own faults,
as in reprehending other men's. But all those which will be such as they desire
to seem, will be severe reformers of them selves, and they will sooner spy
their own faults then others.


Guaz. I would gladly have you show particulerly which are the faults of
others, wherein this discretion is to be used.


Annib. There are two sorts of faults, the one, of those which are not full
ripe, the other, of those which are through rotten. I call the unripe ones,
those which one is ready to commit, and the ripe ones, those which are
already committed. We must stay the committing of the first so much as we
may, for the other, some are to be excused, some to be blamed. If then we
perceive any in reasoning, to be driven into so narowe a strait, that he can
not easily get out of it, without committing some absurdity either in words
or in matter, it shall be our part discreetely to prevent him. And (as one
that stumbling at a stone is ready to fall down) readily to take hold of him
and stay him up: not staying till he fall, to make the company fall a
laughing, and him self to be ashamed. In doing whereof, we assure him,
which speaks, of the good account we make of him, and give him to
understand how jealous we are of his honor, in such sort, that we make
him thereby very friendly affectioned toward us: whereas on the contrary,
there is nothing that sets him sooner in a rage, and makes him to alienate
his good will from us, then to think him self had in contempt, and to be
flouted at.


Guaz. This contempt in my opinion is intolerable: for that there is no man
that thinks so vilely and abiectly of himself, that he deserves to be
scorned. And in my opinion, besides that, it is no good manner to mock
another, he is also in danger to receive the like, or a greater mock
himself: For such a blow as the Ass gives against the wall, such a one
he receives him self. And if it be a fault to floute such as one knows,
it is a greater fault to deride those he knows not, which some rash and
insolent fellows use to do, who (as the saying is) judging the horses by the
sadles and furnyture, * consider not that often times under a clownishe coat, is
hidden a noble and lively understanding.


Annib. A poor Peisant of Montferrat, may be a proof thereof, who coming
into the City, accompanied with certain women, a saucie Citizen said unto
him, Thou have undertaken to bring a great many Goats to our market: Sir
(answered he) me thinks I have brought but a few, in respect of the great
number of Buckes which is there.


Guaz. I know a young man, who by his iesture and looks seems to be but a
fool, and for that cause some make them selves merry at him, but I may say to
you, he can frame his answers so fitly, and can give quip for quip so
wittily, that those which begin the skirmish with him boldly, are feign to
retire shamefully.


Annib. To conclude, it is a perilous thing to mock and scoff at others, and,
as the saying is, To anger a Waspe: And therefore it is not good to mock any
man in any manner of wise. For if he be our better, or equal, he will by no
means abide that we should abiectly esteem of him. If he be our
inferior, we make him thereby to withdraw his good will from us, which is an
ill matter: For we ought to endeavor to make every one (if it be possible)
friendly affectioned toward us. Now if it fall out that another ouershoote
himself in talk, we must consider whether it proceed of unskillful
foolishness, or of wilful naughtiness, for the first, we ought to excuse
it, or discreetely to seek to hyde it, without jesting at it, as some scoffing
merchantes, which are altogether void of wit, use to do: for as it is an ill
thing to make a scoff at that which is well done, so is it a cruel and odious
thing to scoff at that which is ill done by ignorance or oversight. But let us
come to those faults which proceed of vice, and which are to be reprehended.


Guaz. I think there is need of far more discretion in reprehending those,
then in the other.


Annib. So much the more, by how much the more danger it is too deal in
good earnest then in jest. And though it be meet for all sorts of men to
excuse or cover those light faults before spoken of, in all sorts of men,
yet is it not lawful for every one to correct and reprehende the imperfections
and faults of every man. As it is not lawful for every one either for lack
of authorite (as for a young man too reprehende an old, or for one of low
estate, one that is of high calling) or else for that he is sprinkled with
the like or with greater imperfections (as for an adulterer, to rebuke another
for lasciviousness,) or for lying. For as the Proverb is,

He that mocketh the lame, must take heed that he him self go upright.
Likewise we ought not to presume to correct any others, but those, with whom
either by consanguinitie, or by long familiarity, we have credit and
authority. To be brief, in reprehending, we must not only have respect to
the quality of the persons, but also of the places and times, and to consider
both how we ought to use reprehension, and how our friend is disposed to
receive it. And therefore it is reported that one saying to another. Art thou
not ashamed to be drunken in such sort? He answered, Art not thou ashamed to
reprehende one that is drunke^? In like case it were to no purpose, but would
rather make him worse, to rebuke a swearer, while he is in his rage, and in
the presence of others. Yet this advertisement is not enough, but to use deeper
discretion in the matter, we must use an honest kind of deceit, and
intermingle with the bitterness of reprehension, the sweetness of some
praise. Or we must blame others for those faults which are in him whom we
seek to refourme: or else reprove our selves as subject too such
imperfections. Finally, we ought to reprove our friend in such sort, that
he may take it well, and think him self beeholding too us for it. As some
Philosophers in their Moral works have taught us to do, which shall
suffice touching this point. Now touching other means pertaining to the
observation of the sentence before set down, if we look thorowely intoo it,
we shall find that all those, which love rather too be, then to seem to
be, will use that foresaid discretion in avoiding all quarrellous contentions
and obstinate arguyng in matters, whereby a man, desirous of that vain
seeming, will often times, contrary to all reason, seek to seem to have the
upper hand of others.


Guaz. In my opinion, there is nothing that makes a man worse liked of in
company then that.


Annib. And therefore if he which speaks, say the truth, we ought too
content our selves so well with his words, as if they were holy Scripture:
And if he chance too utter any untruth, rather then too stand in contention
with him (so that it no way prejudice us) we ought modestlye too bear with it:
Observing always the rule of Epictere, who said* that in company we must
yield humbly too our Superior, persuade gently with our inferior, and agree
quietly with our equal. And by that means there shall never be any falling
out.

Now I mean too tell you how a man ought too behave him self in such
ceremonies as are requisite in company.


Guaz. I should think it wisdom to use no ceremonies at all in company, for
so much as they proceed rather of curious vanity, then of faithful
affection: and in my judgment the more a man uses them, the less plain
dealing is thought to be in him. Whereas on the contrary, when you see one go
plainly to work both in words and iesture, you say by and by, that he is a
good honest meaning man. For my part I weigh it little, that my equal, having
the wall of me, should go from it to give me place: I had rather have him
bear me more goodwill, and do me less honor. And as you cannot but laugh to
see a far off a number of folk, skipping, leaping, and daunsing, you hearing
no sown of instrument: so it must needs make you merry, to see a far two
persons use diverse iestures and ceremonies of the head, the hands, the knees,
and wrying their whole body, not hearing any word they say. I will not say
unto you, that for one which has a good grace in these ceremonies, there are a
thousand whom it be comes so ill to use them, that it will make you sick at
the heart to see it: and you shall see some of them go so untowardly to
work, that coveting to be courtlike, they become plain cartlike. As I have
seen some talking with the Duke my master, and seeing him bare headed, have
taken his arm with both their hands, and made him put on his hat.


Annib. He should have put it of again, to have showed that he was not bare in
respect of them, but because of the heat.


Guaz. But there was another behaved himself somewhat better, who talking with
the Duke being uncovered, took his cap forth of his hand, and put it upon
his head. So that I say again, that I can in no way away with these
ceremonies, which are no less unseemly in worldly matters, then they are
convenient in sacred and divine things.


Annib. I see not how those things can dislike you, which commonly like all
men.


Guaz. I think you mistake, for I know many, who profess them selves mortal
enemies to those ceremonies.


Annib. Those same (and believe me) openly detest them, but secretly desire
them: and if you well consider the matter thoroughly with your self, you shall
know that ceremonies displease no body. For this is certain, that they are
done in sign of honor, and there is not he, who is not glad with all his
heart to be honored, and who ought not to be glad to honor another, for so
much as (according to the saying of the Philosopher) he which honors,
receives more honor, then he which is honored, for like unto the Sun,
the beams of honor by reflection, as it were, do shine back again upon
him. And as he which is ceremonious may be thought to be a dissembler, so
he which is not so, may be taken to be a clown, a rudesby, or a contemner
of others. I will not say that they do ill which pray you to use no
ceremonies in respect of them, but I rather commend them: For their very
saying so, is a certain kind of Ceremony and behavior, whereby they go
about to cover their ambition, and it is according to the fashion of
Physicians, who for manner sake sometime refuse money with their mouth, but
take it with their heart, and finger it with their hands. And as the sacred
Ceremonies, which are veide of superstition, are not displeasant in Gods sight,
and stir up to devotion the minds of the ignorant people, which are not
come to the perfect knoweledge of Gods word: so these worldly ceremonies
purchase us the good will of our friends and superiors, to whom they are
addressed, and make us known for civil people, and from rude country loutes.


Guaz. How then must we behave our selves in Ceremonies?


Annib. Mary in such sort, that he which uses them, bewray thereby the
affection of his heart, that the inward love may be known, as well as the
outward honor is seen, otherwise ceremonies are loathsome unto us, and show
that the heart is feigned. And on the other side, it is the part of him
which receives these outward honors, first, modestly to refuse them,
showing thereby that he looks not for them, otherwise he shall show to be
somewhat proud, which is most hurtful in conversation: And besides, you know
well that your equal does honor unto you, rather of courtesy, then of duty,
and when you shall accept those honors as due unto you, and as of your
inferior, you shall make him care but a little what reverence he shows unto
you. To be short, we must receive honor at our friends hands, rather as
offered by them, then looked for by us: and it is not amiss to follow the
example of that discrete gentleman, who, after long strife between him and
certain of his friends, who should first enter into the house, says, You may
now know well how much I am at your command, seeing I am ready to obey
you in things which turn to my dishonor: which said, he entered in without
strayning courtesy any longer.


Guaz. I allow the reasons alleged by you to maintain Ceremonies, but I
will say unto you, that they ought to be observed rather amongst strangers,
then familiar friends. For if I be not deceived, true friendship can away
neither with Ceremonious words nor deeds.


Annib. I am in deed of your mind, that from true friendship, Ceremonies
should be taken. But where at this day are those true friends to be found?
Know you not that according to the Philosopher, Perfect friendship extends
not toward diverse persons, but is restrained to the love of one alone? I
know not who is your assured friend, but I am sure that I have not yet found
mine, with whom I might use such open, simple, and free behavior as you
mean. For you must think it a hard matter to find in the world two hearts
which love perfectly. And though in token of true friendship, you call your
companion brother, perchance he shall have no mind to term you so: and to
take that custom from you, he will call you Master Guazzo. And that you may
not use too familiar speech to him, he will speak to your worship in such
sort, that you shall be feign to retire one step back, and use him rather
Ceremoniously then lovingly. Of this common course of the world I gather, that
those with whom we are conuersaunt, being rather well willers, then true
friends, it is our parts to take heed of too broad and to familiar
behavior with them, whereby we may hazzarde to loose their good will* and to
follow the example of Flies, which will not become tame amongst us, though
they daily dwell with us, and eat of our cates when we do.


Guaz. I remain satisfied of all that you have spoken. Now I consider with my
self that this your discourse comprehends general matters, and agrees to
all sorts of persons. And therefore I would be glad that you should declare
particularly the means that every one ought to observe, according to his
estate and calling.


Annib. We have already said, that it is a matter impossible to set down
particularly, what every one ought to do in company, and therefore it shall
suffice only to consider, that the things before spoken, ought to be common to
all, like as the streets, the Churches, the Fountains, and common Conduites
are. But as every one indeuoureth to get and appropriate to him, either house,
lands, or moueables, in like sort, every one in his order of life and
conversation, ought to propose unto him self special laws, and such a kind
of behavior as shall be convenient to his calling. But to reap the right
fruit of conversation, which consists chiefly in the good will of others,
it is necessary, that we know and learn not only what belongs to our
selves, but also how to behave our selves toward others, according to the
difference of their estates, for that it is our hap to come in company,
sometime with the young, sometime with the old, as soon with Gentlemen, as soon
with the baser sort, now and then with Princes, now and then with private
persons, one while with the learned, another while with the ignorant, now
with our own Countriemen, then with strangers, now with the religious, then
with the secular, now with men, then with women.


Guaz. I see now well you should enter into a Laberinth, out of which you
should not get a long time, if you would discourse particularly of all these
points.


Annib. Think hardily that every one of these points will ask a whole days
discourse.


Guaz. Seeing you are so desirous to rydde your self of this matter in so
short time, you do as those which run post, who, desirous to go much
ground, do not view, but only trauers the Countries.


Annib. I say then (as it were in passing by) that there are few to be
found, which are not sick of some of those diseases, which we have before
mentioned, but the extreemest sick of all, are young men: For whose health it
is requisite, that they shave of from their face that counterfeite bearde, I
mean that false seeming and vain persuasion: remembering themselves, that as
their faces are smooth and bare without hear, so their heads are barren of
understanding. For if it be true, that length of time brings experience, and
that wisdom grows of experience: it is most true, that young men for lack
of years and experience cannot be wise: And thereof comes the Proverb,
That the Devil is full of knowledge, because he is old. And therefore they
ought to bridle their over rash tongues, and to use chiefly silence in steed
of medicine, imprinting in their hearts this saying, That a young man should
hardly speak in his own cause, though he be in a manner urged unto it.


Guaz. It is a common saying, that a young man is to be blamed, which will
talk like an old man, and a woman which will speak like a man.


Annib. Young men ought chiefly to keep this silence when they are amongst
old men, whose company is marvelous auayleable unto them.


Guaz. It is so much behoofull to them, as it is for the most part hateful to
them, by reason of the diversity of complexions, fancies, and conditions, so
that they fly from it so much as possibly they may, that they may enjoy the
company of their equals.


Annib. Men ought to conceive so much the better opinion of those young men,
which willingly associate themselves with old men, for that they seem to
prevent age, with virtue: and beginning by time to be wise, they continewe so a
long time. Whereof it comes, that easily, and before the time, as it were,
with the good report they have won, and the good deeds they have done, they
come to honor and preferment. And therefore in my opinion, those young men
which eschew the company of old, hyde their wounds, and make them to fester
inwardly. And contrariwyse, those which follow it, lay open their
imperfections, and thereby receive guerison.


Guaz. It is much better to acknowledge our imperfections in our youth, then in
our age, for as the Poet says, In youth to do amiss, it is the less
reproach.



Annib. There is no doubt of it, but that young folk learn of old, by reason
of their authority and wisdom, to moderate their burning desires, to
acknowledge their wavering inconstancy, and to correct their other natural
imperfections. And as, having occasion of far travail into unknown
Countries, we address our selves to some one which knows the way to give
us certain instructions of it: so likewise in this pilgrimage we have to make
in this doutfull and deceitful life, we can not do better, then to be
informed of those which have happily, as it were, reached to their iournies
end, to know what ways we ought to forsake, and what to take to come safely
to the end of our voyage: which is most dangerous to young folk, as the
wiseman says, who, to the uncertain flight of the Egle in the air, of the
ship on the sea, and of the serpent on the rock, adds, as most uncertain,
the way of a young man in his first years. Young men therefore are to follow the
company of old, and to make their account, that he which frequenteth the
wise, becomes wise, and to imitate the youth of Rome, which had age in such
reverence, that every one did honor to his elder, as to his parent. And
contrariwise it was counted a thing worthy punishment, if a young man did no
reverence to an old, or a child to one at man's state. * Yea in some
Countries, it is not lawefull for a young man to bear witness against his
elder. * And in truethe it is reasonable that each one make reverent account of
those which do surmount them in age and understanding. And as they see their
youngers honor them in respect that they are more ancient, so moved by that
example, they ought to reverence those which are their elders. But after other
medicines meet for young men's health, I will for conclusion add this, that as
he ought to avoid bold presumption, so he ought in company to be endued
with such a modest shamefastness, that his cheeks may now and then be dyed
with Uermilion, which will become him, and is a token of a good nature, and a
sign that he will come to goodness.


Guaz. I could never like of a young man that is impudent. For besides that
he is ill thought of, in that he wants the virtue of modesty, which he
ought to be endued withal, it seems to prognosticate that he will come to
some ill end.


Annib. I think we have spoken sufficiently of young folk, so that I think
good that we turn our eyes from the East to the West, and consider what
belongs to old folk: even in whom there break forth many maladies, as well
of mind as of body.


Guaz. I know not how you can heal those old festred soars which are so hard
to be cured.


Annib. Old soars are in deed hardly healed, but al soars are not festred
in old folk. I count those old and festred which have taken deep roots, and
which began to grow even from youth forward, but those I count not old which
old age for the most part brings with it. As to be severe, churlish,
covetous, whining. etc. Which are diseases whereof some old folk may be cured,
by giving place to reason.


Guaz. Albeit perchance they may be cured of those diseases, yet in my fancy
it is not well done to go about it. But it is better rather to follow their
humor, like as we do to those which are past recovery, in every thing which
they demand, following the common saying, that we must not add affliction
to the afflicted.


Annib. The right old men (to wit the wise) the nearer they approach to their
end, the more delight they take in knowledge and virtue. Touching this, I
would have you call to mind the saying of him, which said that if he had
one foot within the grave, yet he would still be learning somewhat. For
that he was not ignorant that the things which we know, are but the least
part of the things we know not. Yea we may say, that a man never begins
to know, until by age we draw toward the end of our life. Which a
certain philosopher shows very well, who with lamentation complains of
nature, for giving a very long life to many reasonles creatures, using great
liberality toward them, and dealing very hardly with man, who is deprived of
life, then when he begins to live, that is, to understand, and then when he
ought to enjoy the fruits of his labors. But I mean not here to discourse
unto old folk, what is requisite for them to sustain the burden of age, and
to arrive safely at the haven and end of misery and sorrow: For that were to
persuade my self foolishly that Cato had not spoken of that matter largely and
eloquently. But I will say unto you, that many old folk complain without
cause, that their age is smally regarded or reverenced, and persuade
themselves, for that they have a white beard, for that they are bald,
bleareyed, toothlesse, crooked, trembling, and sickly, that therefore al honor
should be due unto them, and many of them see not how void they are of
understanding, virtue, and wisdom. And therefore they ought to consider, that
old age is not to be respected or reverenced for the number of their years,
but chiefly for the merit of their good conditions and Virtue: and therevppon
it is said, that to be hoare heared, is a sign of years, not of knowledge.
And if I may say, that an old man without knowledge and virtue, is worthy no
honor at all, for that it is a sign he has spent his youth in nothing that
is commendable. Which is confirmed by this saying, that three sorts of men
are odious to the world, a poor man proud, a rich man a liar, and an old man
a fool. Now touching conversation, I would advise old men to temper always
their falke with gravity and wisdom, and for the most part to speak of those
things which serve for example and instruction of life.


Guaz. No doubt, it is always the use to attribute much to old age, and their
words are ever of more force then young men's.


Annib. Thereof it comes, that as young men being asked their age, make
themselves younger then they are, to conserve the ornament of youth, and to make
others think they have that force and sufficiency in them, which is incident
to youth: so likewise old men always make the^ selves older then they are, to
enjoy the pre-eminence and authority which is given to age. *


Guazzo. This is very true for the most part, yet now and then we see some
old doting fools, who notwithstanding they feel their legs feeble and
trembling under the^. and see in their glass their white hears, which
exhort them to change of life, and manners, yet for all that they will not
yield themselves, but will take upon them to play the soldiers, and the
lovers, little esteeming that saying, that It is not meet for age,
to sue the slippery train:
Of Venus or of Mars both, which
pay labor but with pain.


So that they will not only not confess their age, but make themselves younger
then they are.


Annib. Those whom you speak of are very offensive, for that by their evil
example they imbolden young men to do ill. And therefore I account him to be
of great wisdom which can conform his ma^ners to his age, having an eye to
the saying of the Apostle, when I was a child I spoke like child, but being
man grown, I cast away al childish tricks. But you say nothing of those, who
not content to yield to the course of nature, desire to seem young, and go
another way to work to hide their age, that is, by pulling of their white
hears, or else seeking to convert their silver hears into golden ones, the
simple souls not perceiving that this their transformation or rather
deformation is no more seen then a nose in a man's face.


Guaz. There was one old graybeard, who perceived this well enough, but too
late and with repentance. For having been denied a suite which he craved at
his princes hands, he went and dyed his bearde and his head, and persuading
himself he should not be known, returned two days after to the prince,
preferring his former suite, who spying his craft, making as though he
perceived it not, answered him, I cannot with mine honor grant it to you; for
that I have alredie denied it to your father, who, two days since requested
the same thing at my hands.


Annib. Let us now make an end of this matter, aduising old men to suffer
their mind to wax old together with their body, and not to behave
themselves youthfully in their age: and when they are arrived to their end, not
to seek to turn back, but rather to give themselves to consider that age
naturally makes them crooked and stooping toward the ground, to the end
they may think to return from whence they came, and to remember that at that
time their breath even hangs at their lips. * They have further to take
heed, least they contemn young folk (a fault common to many of them) for it
is their part too make account of them, and to use great discretion in their
behavior toward them, to the end, that young folk (if for nothing else)
may thereby be moved to do them honor: otherwise they may assure themselves
they shall be had in contempt and derision. They must be sure (being amongst
youth to use great respect as well in words as ^estures, remembering that the
intemperancie of old men makes young men more disordered and dissolute. * And
to conclude, that they have regard to the commandment of Paul, that they
be sober, chaste, wise, sound in faith, in charity, and in patience, which
virtues will make them acceptable to all honest companies. * But now let us
speak of Gentlemen and yeomen, between whom by reason of their difference and
inequality, there are diverse things to be observed in company.


Guaz. I think that labor lost, or at least a thing not worthy your labor
to go about to instruct the base people, about whom, being by nature uncivil,
rude, untoward, discurteous, rough, savage, as it were, barbarous, and void
of understanding, you shall loose your labor, and according to the Proverb,
both water and soape.


Annib. If you mean by those of base birth, only laborers and rustikes, our
speech in deed would be spent in vain: but if you consider the infinite
number of persons which reach not to the degree of Gentlemen, and yet are not
from it, you will not deny but that both for the good mind they carry with
them, and the good calling they live in, they are worthy some place in
company, and that they ought to be put in the midst between Gentlemen and
clownes. And truly I know many men of means calling, who in Gentlemanlike and
courteous conditions, in good bringing up, and all their talk and behavior,
excel many Gentlemen. And contrariwise, I am sure you know many Gentlemen more
uncivil then the Clownes themselves.


Guaz. If they be uncivil, how are they Gentlemen? And if they be Gentlemen,
how are they uncivil? I pray you even at once undo me the knot of this
gentry, which I see to be very intricate by reason of the diversity of
opinions which are about it, and so consequently you shall come to set forth
manifestly the Conversation between gentlemen and yeomen.


Annib. Having this day to speak of many things and being alredie late, I
cannot fully satisfy your request. For I should be driven to stay hear long
time to bring in all that, which many authors have at large written of it,
esspecially that great Tiraquel one of the kings counselors in the Paliament
at Paris, yet somewhat to follow your mind, and not much to hinder our
course, I say unto you (as it were in passing by) that some falling to define
gentry, have said it be the dignity of the fathers and ancestors, others
the ancient patrimony, others riches joined with virtue, others virtue only.
Besides that the worthy master George Carretto an Academike alleged the
other day in his discourse the authority of Balde who makes three sorts of
gentry, the first in respect of blood, as the common sort understands it:
the other in respect of good conditions, as the Philosopher takes it: the
third in respect of both, and that I call true gentry.


Guaz. There might be added here that other sort of gentry, which is gotten
by the Privilege of Princes.


Annib. Perchance he joined that with the Philosophers gentry. For it may be
said that the prince by that privilege does approve the virtue and merits
of him he rayseth to the state of gentry. But the excellency of gentry has been much more restrained by Diogenes, who being asked, who were the best
Gentlemen, answered, those which set naught by riches, honors, pleasures, and
life, and which overcame their contraries, to wit, poverty, ignominy, pain,
and death.


Guaz. I think the race of such Gentlemen is at this day extinguished.


Anniball. Now for that there are many distinctions of gentry according the
diversity of opinions, albeeit some Philosophers assign four sorts and some
five, I will be so hold devising familiarly with you, to make yet one sort
more according to mine own fancy, though I swarne a little from their
opinion. There are then three sorts of gentry, whereof I derive three sorts
of Gentlemen, to wit: Gentlemen of the first, second, and third degree. I
will give to those of the first degree, the name of half Gentlemen, having at
this time no more proper term. I will call the second, Gentlemen: and the third,
right Gentlemen. Now of half Gentlemen, I ordain three sorts, the first
those which are Gentlemen only by birth, coming of some ancient house, but
having in themselves neither good conditions nor good behavior, nor so much as
any show of gentry.


Guaz. Those in my opinion may rather be said to be descended of Gentlemen,
then to be Gentlemen indeed: and these be those which strain themselves to
swear at every word by the faith of a Gentleman, when there is nooth required
of them, by means whereof they make themselves suspected, as witnesses which
offer themselves before they be asked for: and they seem to be afeard least
they should not be taken for Gentlemen, as those who are known in looks, in
words, and in deeds to be very clownes. And though they take upon them the
name of Courtiers, yet in their behavior they show themselves little better
then Carters.


Annib. There is no cause why we should marvel at those differences, for
like as in fields, so in houses, there springs up fruit in great
fertility, and in some process of time, there come thereof excellent and
famous men: and after by little and little they fall to decay and become
barren, so that the sharpness and goodness of the wit is changed, and
degenerating is made gross and blockish. Yea, it is evidently seen, that not
only houses and families wax old, but even whole Cities, yea the world it
self. How many ancient houses have there been, whereof there is not at this
day any remembrance? or else they are brought into poor and vile estate.


Guaz. Dant says thereof well, that Races razed are, and houses run to wrack.



Annib. Therevppon it is said not without great reason, that if one have
respect to the first original, there is no king but is descended of slaves,
nor slave, but comes of kings. And if you call to mind things of the time
past, and compare them with the present, yea if you but have regard only to
the revolution of our times, you shall see that as all other things, so houses
turn like the wheel, being now ascending, now at the highest, now
discending, now at the lowest. So that it may be said to be gentry, both
which begins, which increases, which diminishes, and which vanishes.


Guaz. A man might also well compare the state of gentry to the course of the
moon. But wherefore is it think you, that God causes this alteration and
change in families?


Annib. Perhaps to this end, that we should not hoorde up for our selves any
treasure on earth: and that we should lift up our selves to the contemplation
of heavenly things, in which only a man may put his assurance. But there may
be here alleged another occasion, which is, that God will suffer no evil to
remain unpunished. For a famous writer, speaking of the nobility of the
world, makes it nothing else then ancient richesse, and adds, that every
rich man is either unjust him self, or else the heir of some unjust man.
Whereupon he concludes, that the gentry of ones house, takes beginning of
injustice: and therefore we must not marvel if things ill gotten are ill
spent. But to return to my purpose, these half Gentlemen, who being not by
nature endued with any veriue, make boast of the worthiness of their
ancestors, are to be laughed at: For the more they set forth the
worthiness of them, the more they lay open the imperfection of themselves,
for that there is nothing that makes the childrens faults more to be seen,
then the bright show and glorious shyning of their fathers and graundfathers.
And no doubt he that has no commendable thing in him, the more he speaks of
the gentry of his ancestors, the more vile and contemptible he shows
himself. And thereupon it is grown into a Proverb that unfortunate children
extol the virtues of their parents. God therefore keep us from the state of
these half Gentlemen, whose deeds being not answereable to the nobility of
their house, they are little accounted of in the world, and taken as it were
for Bastardes. Wherefore we will conclude that in verity and truth we ought
to respect the qualities and virtues which are in the parties themselves, and
that it is in vain to stand upon the renown of our progenitors. Next unto
this first kind follows the second of Gentlemen by good conditions.


Guaz. Which take you to be the best of those two?


Annib. Whether do you more account of those things which are gotten with
labor and industry, or of those which nature or fortune bestows upon us?


Guaz. Why the first?


Annib. And whether do you think more excellent of the gifts of the mind, or
of the body?


Guaz. The gifts of the mind.


Annib. Consider now that gentry by birth costeth you nothing, but that you
have it by succession, mary gentry by virtue you have gotten hardly, having
first passed through the pykes, and a thousand dangers. Moreover we are to
consider that gentry by blood belongs to the body, but gentry by good
conditions has relation to the mind. Which made the tyrant Phalaris say,
being demanded what he thought of gentry, that he acknowledged gentry to
come only by the means of virtue, and al other things by the means of
fortune, for that one of base birth may become most noble above all kings: and
contrariwise one well borne may become the most wretched and contemtible of the
world: and that therefore we are to boast of the gifts of the mind, not of
the gentry of our ancestors, which is alredie extinguished by the unknown
and degenerated posterity. * Whereupon I think them worthy of great
commendation, who from very low place with the ladder of their own virtue
climb to most respected highness. As many Popes, Emperors, and kings have
done being the sons of very mean men. *


Guaz. Yet for all that you see how the world comme^ly reputeth gentry by birth
as legitimate, and gentry by virtue as bastardily, and far inferior to the
other. And if you do but sound the opinion of the Gentlemen of this City,
they will, I warrant you in a manner all of them say unto you that they had
rather be borne Gentlemen and have nothing in the world but their rapier and
cloak, then to be descended of base parentage, and to be Senators or
Presidents.


Annib. It is reported that the fox cast his tail about a young treeful of
fruit to the intent to shake it and make the fruits fall to the ground, but
failing of his purpose he went his way, finding fault with ye fruit, saying,
they were without taste and not good enough for him. The like do those whom you
speak of, who being not by virtue able to aspire to those degrees, mislike of
the degrees, and of those persons who by their virtue have attained unto them.
But assure your self that those which hold that erroneous opinion, are for the
most part void of virtue. But if you shall talk with a Gentleman that is so by
birth, who by the help either of learning or of arms has gotten this second
gentry, he will no doubt make more account of the gentry purchased by his own
virtue, then of that which is descended unto him by birth. So that I marvel
nothing though that common opinion take place, seeing that the number of
Gentlemen without virtue is far greater then of those which be virtuous. Yet
you remember that it was said yesterday, that the common opinion consists
not in the number, but in the quality of the persons: and therefore the
opinion which you have brought forth shall not be called common.


Guaz. This same is one of the abuses of diverse countries and specially of
France, where learning is so little accounted of, that a Gentleman, though he
be scarce able to maintain himself, thinks scorn too apply his mind too
the study either of the laws or of physic. And though there be no gentry in
a manner, to be compared to that of the Presidentes and Counselors of the
King, yet you see those that are Gentlemen borne, count them to be but base
and ignoble. But I have seen many rightly served, for this their corrupt
opinion, or rather obstinacy: For I have seen one of these Counselors or
Presidents (to keep their state) suffer these Gentlemen which have occasion to
use them, to knock a great while at their gates, and when they are come in,
they walk long time in the Court, or in the hall of the house, before they
shall be admitted to their presence, and they are driven oftentimes (after that
he shall be mounted in have upon his Mule, to go to the Palace) to lackey after
like slaves, so infourme him of their causes and suits. But there was nothing
in France which went more against my stomach, then to see the Secretaries of
noble men in so little credit and reputation: whereas in Italy the Secretaries
of Princes are had in great honor, and justly for that they are partakers of
their inward thoughts, and the keepers as it were upon trust of their honor
and estimation. And in France he that has a servant which can coppie out
writings, and keep count of his revenues in a book, he gives him forthwith
the name of Secretary.


Annib. I have reasoned many times with your brother about that matter, who
amongst other pleasant matters told me, that in the voyage which he made
last, by post in France, being sent by the Duke our master to the King, being
to change Horses in a certain place, the Postmaister came unto him, and
called twice aloude (Secretary) and forthwith there came out of the stable a
foul great Groom with a pen and inkehorne at his girdle, and a pen at his
ear, who had charge given him to make ready three horses: whereupon the
secretary set hand to the harness, and sadled one of the^, and two other
servants did the like: one of which, your brother asked why his master made ye
secretary dress horse? who answered, that his master took him for a Groom
of the stable, and for their companion about ye loking to the horse: but for
that he could write and keep a reckoning of the horses which were let out,
his Master had like wise made him his secretary.


Guaz. He might well say he was secretary in Vtroque, to wit, with the pen
and the currycombe.


Annib. He said moreover, that when the Duke of Neuers sent him to the
lodging of some Prince, or of the great chauncelour, or some other, he was
soon let in, if he termed himself one of the Dukes gentlemen, but if he named
himself secretary, they made him tarry longer, and regarded him the lesser.
Now to return to my purpose, I say again, that the Gentleman by virtue, is
more excellent then the Gentleman by birth. Yea I could say unto you, that
many count gentry by blood to be foolish, and nothing at all: and amongst
others a certain wise man said, that gentry of the mind, is, to be endued
with worthy thoughts: and the gentry of the body, is the gentlemanlike mind:
meaning, that the gentry of the body, was not to be attributed to the house
we came of. Another Philosopher affirms likewise, that it is in vain called
gentry, which referring it self to the worthiness of blood, is not ours, but
others. And therefore the light of another cannot make me shine, if there be
no brightness in my self.


Guaz. That is noted to us by the saying of Dant, that only he is bright, who
shines of him self.


Annib. A man may also add here the saying of our Galen, that those who being
void of virtue themselves, have recourse to the cognisances and arms of their
predecessors, see not how that vaineglorie is like certain kind of coin,
which is current in those towns and places where it has been stamped and
made, but it cannot be put away in other places, but is taken for counterfayte
and naught. But I will not here omit that which is excellently written in a
letter, by his brother Frauncis Coronato, our Academike doctor in divinity,
that they are to be laughed at, which take so much upon them, to put
difference between themselves and other, as if they had been made by some
other creator then God, for that the flesh makes no difference, nor one more
excellent then another* And though a vessel of gold be more esteemed then one
of Copper, for that it is of more precious and fine matter; yet that cannot be
said of us, who come all of one lump of flesh. Yea the soul it self makes
no difference between us, for so much as we come all of one father and
creator. But that which puts a difference between us, is the virtue of the
mind. So that neither in respect of the master* nor of the form, nor of the
mind, considered of it self, but in respect of the virtue gotten and acquired
by our own industry, we are more excellent one then another. And thereof we
may now see that touching the original, we are all one thing, and as one
said, we are all made of dirt: and as we have one self beginning, so have
we likewise one self end. Wherefore we are to conclude, that gentry and
renown is not got by our birth, but by our life, yea and sometime by our
death, according to that saying, A worthy death does honor al our life.



Guaz. It may be well said also that a right Gentleman is not borne as the
Poet, but made as the Orator.


Annib. It is said also that philosophy received not Plato a Gentleman, but
made him one.


Guaz. Yet, for all that in my opinion it is a good thing to be descended of a
good and honorable house.


Annib. I grant you that, for gentle race, besides other good effects, makes
a man ashamed to degenerate from the virtue and valor of his ancestors. Yea
and gentry is to be honored for this respect, that for the most part the better
lineage we come of, the better behavior we are of. And therefore Q. Max*
Scipio, and others said, that beholding the pictures and images of their
ancestors, they felt themselves maruaylously stirred up to virtue. Wheretoo
princes have a regard, indeuouring always to make gentlemen their chief
officers. And truly it happens seldom that he does ill, who sees thereby
the honor of his ancestors together with his own brought in danger.


Guaz. There remains for you now to speak of the third sort of half
Gentlemen.


Annib. I need not use many words to you touching that sort, and it suffices
to say, that those same get their gentry by custom: and that this gentry is so
weak, that it exte^deth not generally, but has place only in some part. And
albeeit a com^^^ soldiour, or a merchant, or other living of his own
revenues, be not altogether taken for a Gentleman, yet there are some
countries and towns, where, according to the custom; or by some other
accident, they are taken for Gentlemen, and admitted indifferently into the
company of Gentlemen. And there fore according to that common opinion, those
same may be called Gentlemen in their country, but not else where.


Guaz. In few words, your mind is that those amongst the Italians,
Spaniards, Frenchmen, Lombardes, or of any other nation, are Gentlemen, which
are termed and taken so: and that a man may be a gentleman or a yoman
according to the custom of the place where he is, out of which he shall be
otherwise by a contrary custom.


Annib. My meaning is even so. But seeing we have spoken sufficiently of half
Gentlemen, let us speak now of Gentlemen which have the two fiest kinds of
gentry joined together: to wit, that by blood; and that by virtue. The
Philosophers make great account of gentry by birth, when it is accompanied with
virtue, without which it may be said to be dead, as a body without breath.
And therefore if we look thoroughly into the matter, we shall find that it
happens seldom, that a house does maintain it self long in honor without
virtue, or is able to rise to high estate and dignity. For if one of base
calling, give the beginning to gentry by the excellency of some virtue, that
is a certain sign that virtue is the foundation of gentry, and that to
maintain gentry, it is necessary to maintain the foundation thereof.


Guazzo. In truth gentry is unseemly without virtue, and in my opinion one
that is borne a Gentleman, is not worthy of account, when he is not endued
with good conditions.


Annib. Leaving then the wrong opinion of some countries, to come near to the
ancient majesty of the Romans, we will hold for certain that gentry
increases no less by the virtue of learning, then by the prowess of arme^.
For that this saying is most true* that gentry is the daughter of knowledge:
and that knowledge does gentellise him that possesses it. And therefore the
science and knowledge of good letters, being no less to be esteemed of, then
the knowledge of martial feats, it is certain that the gentry of the one, is
no less then of the other. But for all this, we must not think it sufficient
for us to be known to be but indifferently learned and virtuous, but we
must endeavor to attain to excellency therein. For the more good parts be
in a man, the more Gentlemanlike he is said to be. And I can not here but
speak of the folly of some Gentlemen, who having nothing but gentry by birth
to brag of, are not ashamed to say, that they are as good Gentlemen as the
Emperor, as if a Gentleman could not increase in gentry: And not considering
that there are degrees of gentry, as well as of dignities and honors: and that
one is so much more Gentleman * by birth * then another, by how much his
gentry is more ancient, more renowned, more manifest, and more mighty. Which
may be said, not only in respect of birth, but also in respect of virtue. And
as of the two dogs which Lycurgus brought before the Spartanes, which though
they came both of one lytter, yet the one ran to the potage pot, the other at
the hare: so of two brothers, the one shall be more gentle then the other, by
how much he shall be more learned, virtuous, and placed in higher degree. And
you know that without the spurs of preferment, to prick men forward, the
gentry of houses would soon decay, for no Gentleman would take pains to
atchieue any thing worthy of honor. To avoid which inconvenience, we ought
to have in our minds the saying of Galen, which is, If we be Gentlemen, let
us not show our selves unworthy of our house: if we come of a mean house, let
us by our deeds raise it to renown. But what speak I of Galen, let us think
of that divine saying, You are the children of Abraham do the works of
Abraham. Yet in my opinion it is not enough to follow the trace of worthy
predecessors, but we must lay before us the noble devise of Charles the
fifth, to wit, the pillars of Hercules, and to dispose our selves to go beyond
them, and to attain to such virtue, as may woorthily be termed heroycall. For
if it be a great delight for a man to know, that from time to time out of his
house, (as out of the Troyan horse) there have issued captains, Colonels, and
knights, like as out of the universities of Pauia, Padua, and Bologna, there
come doctors of philosophy, physic, and law, how much more good shall it
do him, who may say, that he has, according to the Proverb, * wings brother
then the nest, * and by the excellency of his deeds, and sufficiency in
learning and feats of arms, has surpassed the deserts, dignities, and
degrees of his predecessors, and alone as it were carried away the price. By
the example of Augustus, who said, I found Rome of stones and brickes, but I
have left it of marble. Now to dispach this matter, these gentlemen whom I
speak of, may make their boaste to have two advantages above gentlemen by
birth only. The first is, virtue, the other courtesy, the right ornament of a
Gentleman: For of courtesy and gentleness he is termed a gentleman.


Guaz. When a man is gentle both by birth and virtue, I see not what may be
added more unto him, and yet besides those two sorts of Gentlemen, you have
set down a third kind of right or absolute gentlemen. By which terms you put
me in mind of aqua vitae, and such like, which are three times stilled.


Annib. Like as in the third distillation is bestowed greater charge, and more
excellent matter arises of it, so in these absolute gentlemen there are
required greater gifts, and greater perfection they are endued withal. To be
short, I call those absolute gentlemen, who to their gentry by birth and
virtue, have great riches joined: which serve greatly to the maintenance of
gentry.


Guaz. You have now opened my eyes, and I know that I was not before thoroughly
awakes. I see now apparently that there is nothing makes gentry more bright,
and shining, then the brightness of gold and silver: wherein a man may say
there consists another kind of gentry.


Annib. In proof of that which you say, some would have it that riches should
make gentry, but I cannot think the^ to have so great force, for that were to
debase ge^try too much. But I may be bold to say this, that though riches can
add no degree to gentry, yet they are a ready instrument to put in practice
certain virtues belonging to gentry: and especially liberality, whereby
gentry, like a glass stricken with ye beams of the fun is made more bright
and shining. And therefore these absolut gentlemen make themselves seem above
al other. Whereof are to be seen particular examples in those cities, where
there are universities or schools* For there gentlemen of great wealth will
show themselves above a great number of other scholler^. Yet perchance they are
no better borne no^ endued with be^ter conditions the^ the other are, and yet by
reason of (...) r^^hes they one more accounted of* And as a pre^ious stone
(...) fine gold and curiously wrought is more goodly to sight, then another
that lacks ye workmanship, so those gentlemen which keep open household,
which have a great train after the^, and which spend much and freely, are much
more esteemed of the other common scholars, who are gentlemen to, and yet those
former are honored and courted of them.


Guaz. In conclusion the power of riches is great and a man may see that al
things are in subjection to money.


An. It is showed unto us by an Epigram translated out of greek wc was uttered
ye other day in the Academy, and is this.

^
amongst the Gods to place,
The earth, the water and the wind,
and Sun with shining face.
The stars and the fire,
but as for me I take.
Silver and gold to be the Gods,
which most for men do make:
To yield them their content,
and if thou them possess,
Of houses* lands, servants, and friends,
thou shall have great excess.
And if thou freely wilt*
in bribes thy coin bestow,
Both judge, and jury will be pressed,
all favor thee to s^owe.
Yea Gods from heaven will hither come*
all honor thee ^o do,

Guaz. It is said, that gold break thr^e gates of Diamant, and that the
tongue has no force when gold speaks.


Annib. We will say then according to these opinions, that where power and
ri^^es are greatest, their gentry is greatest and perhaps it was therefore that
Galigula the Emperor hearing certain princes reason of Nobility* said, That
it belonged only to an absolute prince meaning, that it was proper only to the
Emperor. But laying apart these opinions, I am of this mind that riches joined
with good birth, and good conditions, make not a man an absolute gentleman, if
they be not accompanied with that royal virtue; called magnificence* and if
he bestow not those riches bountifully as is meet for his estate.


Guaz. I^ you will have riches to be a help to gentry, it shall behoue a man
rather to be saving, that he may be able to keep himself rich, for according
to the saying of ye Poet.

The virtue is unless to keep, then for to get.
And I remember. I have heard tell how a king of France going to see the
lodgings and rooms of a fair house belonging to the steward of his household,
said, That the kitchen was a great dealer too little, in respect of the
greatness of the house, but the steward answered him, that, that small kitchen
had made the house so great.


Annib. It is well done to know how a man spends, but I altogether mis^ike
covetousness, which is an enemy to gentry and a token of a base mind. And here
I would have you call to mind some rich Gentlemen, who having, or (to speak
more properly) possessing ^^ith riches, suffer nothing but smoke to go forth
of their houses: and as if they were driven to it of necessity, go with a
pielde threede bare cloak on their back, with a gresie Cap on their head,
their hose torn and patcht, neither can they any way excuse their
miserablenes, but by saying we are known well enough, we either have better, or
we may have better: and having a horse in ye stable, yet they think they may
honestly enough walk on foot. I am sure you cannot abide that these gentlemen
should stand upon their gentry, so much as those which keep a worshipful
house, open as well to strangers, as to their neighbors, and chiefly, to the
poor and honest* which they are bo^nde to do (being able) thereby to
maintain the name and worship of the ancestors, and to show themselves
their lawefull successories. To be short, riches well bestowe^, are a great
ornament, and setting forth to a gentleman.


Guaz. The harder is the state of poor Gentlemen, who are constrained by
necessity to live like owls in the dark.


Annib* Amongst other inconuenientes, and discommodities, which p^^^tie is
brings to a Gentleman, this is one, and no small one* that he is some times
driven to match him self in marriage with some woman of base parentage, by
reason whereof, his blood is corrupted, and his children degenerate, who after
follow the nature of neither father nor mother.


Guaz. Though our Borcace maintain that poverty takes not away gentry, yet
in my opinion, it does at least dismember it, weaken it, disfurnish it, turn
it into it dublet, yea, and strippeth it stark naked.


Annib. Some of those poor gentlemen are to be pitied, to wit, those who by
some mischance and evil hap, not by their own fault, are become poor and
low. But those are worthy blame, who knowing themselves to be poor, endeavor
not while they are young, either by learning, either by war, either by service,
to withstand poverty, which they know to be the overthrow of gentry. But you
know there are many, whom their noble birth makes ignoble: For they think, in
yt they are borne gentlemen, they never need seek other reputation or
countenance. And if you do but look about these mountains without going any
farther, you shall see some houses so full of Gentlemen, al companions and
equalles in this seigneorry, that every one of them has scarce a little hole
to shroud himself in: and they come at diverse doors so thick as it were
conies out of a Berrie. And grounding themselves altogether upon that little
smoke of gentle birth, they suffer themselves to be restie as it were like
Bacon with yolenesse: or else to be carried through necessity to commit
shameful and dishonest deeds. * So that it may be said, that by resting in
their seigneory, they loose their gentry: yea, and now and then, loose both the
one and the other *. It is not long since, that a friend of mine of Moncaluo
told me he saw at the market a poor wretch, who having brought thither an
Ass laden with wood, when he that would have bought it of him, offered him
less then he liked to sell it for, he swear by the faith of a Gentleman that
he had sold another load for a great deal more money, mary he would sell the
same somewhat better cheap.


Guaz. I would sooner have believed him if he had sworn by the ear of the
Ass. But perchance he made himself believe that to lead an Ass to the
market to serve his own turn, was no stain to his gentry.


Annib. There are some which hold with these (misers rather then Gentlemen)
saying, that to do such things for a man's own behoof, does not derogate so
much from his gentry, as if he did it for hire, and for the service of others:
and they allege for themselves the example of a Philosopher, who being found
fault withal for carrying fish under his cloak, answered, that it was for his
own eating: inferring thereby, that (according to the proverb) it is an ill
horse that will not carry his own prouender.


Guaz. I think I have also heard that in some countries, he which with his
own hands fylleth his ground or does any other work belonging to husbandry,
loses not thereby one jot of his gentry. But for my part I will always
pray, good Lord deliver me from such kind of gentry.


Annib. Therein, as I have alredie said, we must have regard to the custom
of the Country, and it shall be no marvel at al unto us, to see in some towns
certain gentlemen (contrary to the order of other towns) go to the Butchery,
and Market, and buy victuals, and carry in their handkerchiefes or table
napkins, salados, fruit, fish, or some other small trifle.


Guaz. For my part, I would be loath to do so, and I had rather live only
with dry bread.


Annib. Neither do I (I promise you) like of that fashion, but we must bear
somewhat with poverty, which perchance forces them to it, or else perhaps it
has been an ancient use amongst them, and the time may come, that it shall be
left. But to return to our purpose, the richer a Gentleman is, the greater he
is. For riches no doubt carry credit and favor with them, for when the rich
speaks, every one keeps silence, but when the poor speaks, it is said,
what fellow is that? And therefore let us hold as an Oracle the saying of Horace.

Birth and good qualities are nothing worth,
if riches from them he shut forth.
And for conclusion of our discourse, we will say that a man is established,
and set in the highest and surest degree of gentry, when his seat is vpholden
with these three most strong feet, good birth, good qualities, and riches.


Guaz. I like very well of your witty distinction, but for that you said not
long ago, that courtesy and gentleness is the chief ornament of a gentleman,
it comes now in my mind to ask you whether a Gentleman by birth,
degenerating from his ancestors, and from his own nature, using neither
courtesy nor virtue, may rightly be termed a Gentleman.


Annib. Though courtesy necessarily appertain to a gentleman, yet you see it is
wanting in ye most part of those which are gentlemen born, which comes to
pass for the reason already given. But touching those, who not only want ye
gentlemanly instinct, but besides live dissolutly, I can say no more, but that
a man borne well, and living ill, is a monstrous thing, and worthy to be
abhorred. And it is a common saying, That gentry stands the evil in as much
steed, as a looking glass does to a blind man. But to satisfy more fully your
demand, I will conclude this matter with another common distinction, according
to which it is said, that there are Gentlemen of Gentlemen, Gentlemen of base,
and base of Gentlemen. Gentlemen of Gentlemen are those, who, descending of
worthy ancestors, tread in their steps. Gentle of base, are those who
extracted from lo parentage, raise themselves to gentry by their virtue. Base
of gentle are those, who degenerating from the virtue of their forefathers, are
become naught, and vicious. But it is high time to think of the rest of ye
matters which we are to entreat of this day, and to consider what is to be
observed in ye conversation of gentlemen and yome^ together.


Guaz. I see by you then, you mean to allow them to company together, but in my
opinion, such company, and such confusion is not good. And you see that most
commonly gentlemen resort to their equals, and that if they accompany with
yeomen, and those which are their inferiors (if urgent business drive them not
to it) they are discommended, and little esteemed of other Gentlemen.


Annib. There are many gentlemen, who not understanding what gentry is, think
it an evil and infamous thing not to be a gentleman, and therefore they fly
from it as from ye plague, and they think it no less shame to be seen in the
company of the baser sort, then to be taken in the common stews: not knowing
yt there is no more difference between the gentleman and the yeoman, then
there is between two brickes made of self same earth: whereof the one is set in
the top of a tower, the other in the bottom of a well. Yet there are some
gentlemen of better disposition, who frequenting for ye most part, the company
of gentlemen, take no scorn when occasion serves to accept of the company of
those which are no gentlemen. Now in these same differences in my judgment,
the first, by bending the bow too much, break it in sunder, and by shuting up
ye treasure of ge^trie too closely, show a kind of inciuilitie and
churlishness, odious not only to the world, but to GOD him self: for that
they vouchsafe not for brothers, and companions, those whom he avouches for
his children. The other, in my mind do two acts of gentry, in that
accompanying with Gentlemen they degenerate not from their kind, and
frequenting the meaner sort, they express that gentleness and courtesy which is
proper to a Gentleman. According to that philosophical and Christian saying,
That the more lofty we are placed, the more lowly we ought to humble our
selves: which is in deed, the way to rise higher. Besides, the gentleman which
uses the company of his inferiors, gives, and receives singular pleasure:
For that they are marvelous well apaid when they see a Gentleman,
notwithstanding the inequality, which is between them, to make him self
their equal. Whereby they are induced to love him, to honor him, and to do him
service: and whereby they themselves win credit, and are the better esteemed
of by their equals. But the pleasure which the gentleman receives is great
deal more, who conuersing with other Gentlemen, is feign to frame himself
ofttimes to their fancy: knowing that every one will look for as much
pre-eminence every way as himself, but in consorting with his inferiors, he
shall be ye chief man amongst them, and rule the company as he list, neither
shall be forced to say or do any thing contrary to his mind: which liberty is
seldom allowed him, being amongst his equals.


Guaz. And for that purpose, when I chance to go abroad to recreate my
self, I accompany my self more commonly with one that is inferior to me, then
with my equal: For with my equal, I must for good manner sake, seek rather to
follow his mind then mine own, and make as though I liked of that, which
likes me nothing at all, going with my feet sometime thither whyther I go not
with my heart. But I do with my inferior what I list, and dispose of him at my
pleasure, so that I find the company of my equals to be as it were servitude,
and of my inferiors, liberty.


Annib. You have reason, and therefore you see that for the most part a
gentleman makes his abode in a village or Manner, whereof he is lord, where he
seems to be a king: for that he is there obeyed, and nothing done contrary
to his pleasure. Which he shall not have in a City, where he is no more then
other Citizens are, and where he is much less respected.


Guaz. Seeing you will not that a man shall refuse the company of the meaner
sort, I think it needful to show, which of them are chiefly to be admitted
into company.


Annib. When need shall require, it shall not be amiss to conforte with all
sorts of persons, though of never so base condition: which Diogenes meant to
show, who being asked, why he went to drink at the Tavern, answered, I
likewise go to be powled in the Barbers shop. And there upon we see that
diverse Gentlemen of this City, are not ashamed to be seen in the open street
talking with diverse workmen, Artificers, and handiecraftes men, for necessaries
appertaining to their house and household. But if necessity constrain us not,
we ought not to admit into our company others then those, who, though they be
not Gentlemen by birth and calling, yet have civility in their behavior, and
wit in their talk, which makes them differ altogether from the common sort.
And touching Gentlemen, it behooves them to know, that they are subject to
some infirmities, amongst the which, arrogancy is one, which is too commonly
used, especially by Gentlemen of the first sort, who have nothing to stand
upon, but the good house they come of. And therefore saying aside their lofty
looks, they ought to behold their inferiors with a more gracious eye, and to
use courtesy toward them, which as we said before, as proper to Gentlemen,
and by means whereof, they get the good will of their worsers. Otherwise, let
them be sure they shall incense the whole people against them, and
consequently, by the common voice of the people to be very ill spoken of.
Besides, to confemne the meaner sort, may sometimes do a man great
displeasure* as it did to a Citizen of Rome, of the house of the Scipioes, who,
while he labored to be one of the Officers called Aediles, met with a country
fellow, whom he took by the hand, which feeling to be rough and hard
brauned, he scoffingly asked him whether he used to go with his hands or with
his feet, which set the husbandman in such a rage against him, that like fire
amongst flax, he stirred up the whole people against him, and so wrought the
matter, that for lack of voices, he went without the office he stood for,
and to his great shame, he learned how hateful and hurtful a thing it is
for a brave gentleman, to mock and scorn a simple soul of the country. *
Wherefore let not a gentleman brave over those which are no gentlemen, but let
him remember that his gentry took beginning of one who was no gentleman.
Which is given us to understand by the Poet, which says, The first who ere he
was,
of whom they race did grow:
Some shepherd was, or else, some such,
whose name I will not sheme.


Moreover, let him remember that Gentlemen were admonished by Christ that they
should not be puffed up with vain glory, for so much as they ought to say with
the common sort ( Our father which art in heaven) which they can not say with a
pure and unfeigned heart; if they take not yeoman and poor men for their
brothers. To be short, they ought to print this in their hearts, that no man
is to be commended for the gentry of his ancestors, nor to be reprehended
for their baseness. And they must know, that he which despises the unnoble,
despises his first fathers, and consequently, his own self. Wherefore it is
the part of a Gentleman to behave him self so gently and courteously in all his
dooinges, * that out of his eyes, tongue, and manners, his gentlemanly mind may
show forth. * And he that is not willing to take this course, must content
him self to be a Gentleman only in his own conceit, for he may not look
that any man else will take him so. Now touching the unnoble or yeomen, they
must not for all this, think them selves without imperfection, for many of
them have an infirmity more grievous and pernicious then any before rehearsed:
which is, that they will not acknowledge and confess the (...) inferior to
Gentlemen, both by nature, fortune, and virtue: not knowing ye amongst the
seven degrees of superiority, this is particularly set down of Gentlemen over
the vaser sort, who by all reason ought to submit themselves to their will
and pleasure. As then by some infirmity of the eyes, if it be not soon
healed, a man quickly becomes blind, so of this imperfection in the common
people, some of them fall into such blind arrogancy, and so foolish a vain,
that they will not stick to vaunt themselves to be that which they are not, and
both in their talk and in their apparel brave it out like Gentlemen.


Guaz. A goodly matter I promise you when men will go about (as our Boccace
says) to make an Orange tree of a briry bush. In my mind those which extol
themselves in words and brag of their birth, rather disgrace themselves
then otherwise. Like the poor drudge brought in in the Comedy, who told that
his father was a goldsmith, and being asket what work he did belonging to
that occupation, answered, that he set stones in mortar. Or like the mule who
being demanded of his birth, and being ashamed to say that he was an Asses
son, answered, that he was a horses cousin. But this fault of changing and
faigning of names and callings, in my fancy is more used in our country then
in any other. And if you mark the Spaniardes here with us (notwithstanding
two months before they had not a shoe to put on their foot, and confessed
themselves to be poor and needy) yet when they have picked up their crummes a
little, they will be master one of another, and use great honor and
ceremonies, to the end that we should the better account of them. I think
they durst not do this in their own country, but here they are bold to do
it, for that they see it ordinarily done amongst us: and that he will boast
himself to come of an ancient house, whose father never so much as came in
place where a Gentleman had been. You shall see other some, being the children
of cobblers and pedlers, who having gotten a little wealth, take upon them very
higly, and become most currish and cruel.


Annib. Do you not know the saying of the Poet, that There is no rigor like
to his,
who from low state extolled is.



Guaz. And therefore I think the example very rare, yea, and singular of King
Agathocles: who, being a Potters son, would always eat his meat in earthen
vessel, to the end, that having always fresh in mind his fathers
obscurenesse, he should take no pride of his own greatness. But how little
is this example followed by many rich Pesantes, who are not ashamed to attire
them selves like Gentlemen, to wear weapons by their side, and such like
ornaments, which are proper only to gentlemen: before whom they will make no
courtesy to take place. And this abuse is so in use at this day in Italy, that
as well in men as women, a man can discern no difference in estates. And you
shall see the Clownes will be as brave as the Artificers, the Artificers as the
Merchantes, and the Merchantes as the Gentlemen. In so much that a Taylour
using to wear weapons, and to be appareled like a Gentleman, is not known
what he is, until he be seen sowing in his shop. But you shall not see this
disorder and confusion in France, where, by ancient custom several apparel
is worn, according to every ones calling. So that by the garments only, you
may know whether a woman be the wife of an Artificer, a Merchaunt, or
Gentleman: And which is more, by the apparel, you shall know a difference
between Gentlewomen them selves, for some attire is proper to Ladies, and
those that attend in the Court upon some Queen or Princess, likewise to the
wives of Presidentes, Counselors, and principal Magistrates, which
nevertheless is not allowed to every Gentlewoman.


Annib. Our abuse herein is in deed insupportable, and requires that Princes
should put their hands hereto, and cut the combs of these clownish
cockscombes, and make them come down from their degree of gentry, by forcing
them to wear such apparel as may be at least different from Gentlemen, if
they will needs have it as costly, for besides, that under such a mask there
may be much falsehood wrought, it is reasonable also, that as princes would
find themselves grieved with gentlemen if they would prefer themselves
before them any way, so they ought not to suffer the honor and degree of
gentry to be disgraced by the presumption of malapert clownes. But be it that
there were no way to refourme that abuse, yet those who are gentlemen indeed,
ought not to be moved with the matter, but rather to laugh at it. For the Ass
which put on the Lions skin (thinking that thereby his master would more
respect him) was known for an Ass, and used like an Ass. Now for so much as
in this matter of civil conversation, we have not undertaken to speak of the
manner of apparel, we will leave this digression, and come to conclude, that
yeomen ought to know their degree, and by a certain kind of humility to show
themselves inferiors to Gentlemen in doing them reverence: Assuring
themselves, that as by saucy presumption they make themselves hated, so by
lowly humility, they make themselves loved of Gentlemen.

But I see well now we have stayed so long upon the discourse touching
Gentlemen, that we shall be faigne to pass over lightly and briefly the
conversation of princes.


Guaz. Nay rather it were requisite that you made thereof a long speech* for
that the faults of Princes are many and more grievous then those of private
persons: i^ the Poet say true, which says* The more infectious is the fault,
and followed of the more.
By how much higher he is plast.
That does ill sample show.


And if you mark it well, an evil Prince does not only suffer himself to
be corrupted, but besides he corrupts others: for that his subjects take
delight to follow his fashions, and think it not only tolerable, but very
reasonable to conform them selves to their head. By reason whereof they do
more harm by their example, then by their offense.


Annib. I had rather we might say nothing at all of this matter. For there
want not writers, both of the times past and present, who have taken the
courage and the care to instruct princes, and to set down thorowely what their
life and conversation ought to be. Besides we are to consider, that it
pertaines not to us to speak of their dooinges, which are ^^reprehensible and
incomprehensible. And to speak my fancy freely, I have always blamed in my
mind, those which will appoint laws and orders of life to Princes, who are
Lords over Laws, and inioyne them to others. And therefore by my will we
will not * apply the humility of our Philosophy to the Majesty of Princes: *
for that being Gods on earth, it is to be thought, that all which they do is
done well: and that to reason of and call into question their dooinges, is
nothing else, but with the Giants, to lay siege to heaven.


Guaz. I perceive well, that according to the Proverb you love to stand far^e
of from Jupiter, (...) lightning, being assured that no man shall accuse you
for that you shall not say, and me thinks you have regard to that which is
said by one, That to reprehend princes it is dangerous, and to commend them,
plain lying.


Annib. It is so far of, that I meant to (...) any such thing, that I did not
so much as think it. For being persuaded that they hold of the divinity, I
think they cannot easily err or commit act worthy reprehension. Neither
can I choose but laugh at certain curious fellows, who discoursing of the
affairs of the world, and not knowing the hidden secrets of the deep
devises of the Pope, the Emperor, the king o^ great* Turks make of their
doings a thousand wrong and fond interpretations, being far wide of their
thoughts* And they persuade them selves that princes are fools: that they
live at all adventures without aduy^e and coulisayle, and that matters should
go better if they themselves were Princes.


Guaz. The stinges of those which eat their bread, and live in one self court
with them, are far more pricking to Princes, then of those which stand so
far of, descanting upon their doings. Whereupon a certain king used to
say, that he was like a Planetree, under whose boughs, while the weather is
foul, many shroude themselves, but when fair weather comes, they pull it
up by the roots, so he gave succor to many which were afflicted with the
storms of trouble and misery, who afterward when the mind of prosperity
began once to blow with them, bended themselves to his ruin and overthrow.


Anniball. Do you think that Princes are ignorant of it.


Guaz. No I warrant you, for like Gods they know not only what men say, but
what they think. But belike to their divine knowledge to tell what men think,
and to their delicate ears to hear what men say, they lack sharp and
pearcing tongues to tell those of their faults, which abuse them.


Annib. Those which dare abuse Princes seem never to have read that verse,
Know not that Princes hands, will reach a great way of.


Neither to know that the ears of the Ass fastened to Midas, mean that he
easily understood what every man said and did. They know not also that
Princes partake with the divine power, being able to pull down the mighty and
set up the weak.


Guaz. Yea but if Princes would punish such fellows they should do a deed
of justice, But I see well that in this point they had rather conform
themselves to divine mercy then to due justice. For commonly they will not once
have the matter called in question.


Annib. That is the right act of a Prince, and therefore it is well said, That
the Egle catches not flies.


Guaz. Say also hardly, that they are so far of from taking punishment of
such fellows, that many times they do most good to those, who speak most
evil of them.


Annib. Weighing belike that the good will be content with enough, and that
they are sure always to be in league with them, but the ill being insatiable,
they think it needful to give them one dishe above commons, to stop their
mouths. Now for so much as the great mysteries of Princes are not easy to be
discovered, it shall suffice us to know, that * though some of them fall out ill
(which I will not deny) yet for the most part we see they are good, * and
according to the Proverb, have always an eye on the Scepter* neither do at
any time any thing which any man, no not Momus him self, may justly find
fault withal, or which is not to be well thought of by all. Behold for
example, the reverent and redoubted majesty of the King of Spain, whereby
filling men's hearts with the reverence of him, he is as it were adored like an
Idol of Princes and Potentates, and you will yield unto me, that with great
virtue he makes him self known for a King, and with great dignity
maintains his royal estate. Lay before your eyes the mild and gracious
countenance of the most Christian King of France, his incredible courtesy and
affability, whereby as I hear, and as you ought to know, he makes him self
loved and obeyed, rather of his familiars and friends, then servants and
subjects, and you will say, that by that humility he exalts his royal
throne, if it might possibly be raised higher. Present to your view (if your
eyes be able to behold it without dazeling) the famous government of the
Queen of England, the reverence is borne her by strangers, the obedience by
her subjects, the fear of some, the love of all, her stoutnesse in contemning
her enemies, her stayednesse in sticking to her friends, her policy in
preventing perils, her clemency in punishing offenses, her provident care for
her country, her tender love toward her people, her exalting of the good,
her disgracing of the ill, her singular humility in most sovereign majesty,
her stayed temperancy in most flourishing prosperity, her rare modesty
accompanied with exquisite learning, her maidenly chastity, joined with
heavenly beauty, to be short, her unspeakable perfection in all things, and you
will say that spite it self can not deface her doings any way, and that in
spite of spite she will triumph over all ill tongues, yea and over al those
which envy her happiness: you will say with Aristotle, that prudency is only
proper to Princes, and with the scripture, that Princes hearts are in the hand
of God, and that he does direct them by his divine wisdom.


Guaz. Why how now Gentleman, what tempest of affection has carried you thus
away into the commendation of a Prince, whom you never saw, nor to whom you are
beholding any way? I must and will say in deed that she is the rarest woman of
the world, I must confess her government to be most glorious, and the
commendations which you give her to be both due and true: but yet I must say,
that like a merchant willing to set forth his ware, you have blazed forth her
perfections, but you have concealed her faults: you have made no mention how
she has banished out of her country the authority of our holy father the
Pope, how throughout all her dominions she has planted a religion different
from the faith which we and our forefathers have been always trained up in:
Which faults are so foul, that like a spot in a gorgeous garment, they are a
great blemishe to the brightness of her renown. But were she void of them,
I could not then but say with you, that she were to be thought rather a
heavenly Goddess, then an earthly Princess.


Ann. If there be nothing else to keep her from heaven but her religion, no
doubt but she shall go thither so soon as God shall plague her subjects so sore
as to take her from them: For I can tell you this, that the most learned men in
the world are of this opinion, that her religion is the very high way to
heaven. And though for my part I make no account of it, for that I know it not,
neither mean to deal in matters of religion, for that I profess it not, yet
if a tree be known by it fruits, no doubt but this tree is good, which
brings forth such fruits, as the like are not to be found in ye whole world
again: As first, a Prince endued with such piety, such purity, such good
gifts, such rare virtue, that she may be a pattern for all Princes to
practice by: then grave and wise Counselors, referring all their thoughts and
doings to Gods glory, to their Princes safety, and their countries commodity.
Next, a well disposed and orderly comminaltie, ruled as much by religion as law,
obeying as well for conscience as for fear: And last of al, continual peace and
quietness, which is a singular blessing of God, and an undoubted sign, that
he lyketh well of her religion, and is well pleased with her proceedings.


Guaz. If you can gather so much goodness out of that which I objected
against her as a fault, I will hereafter find no more fault with her, but
honor her as one without all fault. Therefore I pray you return to the matter
we have in hand.


Annib. I say then (as I said before) that therefore you ought to think that
all the purposes and proceedings of princes, are grounded upon discretion and
judgment, and that they do all things better then we are able to proportion
them out unto them: of whom I may say that which King Leonidas said, to whom
as one objected, Thy kingdom excepted, thou have nothing more then we: Yea,
answered he, but I had not been King, if I had not been better then you.


Guaz. That fellow could not be without a reply to beat back the nail
again: but perchance he liked better to yield with his tongue, then with his
heart, by the example of the Peacocke, who said the Eagle was a fayrer bird
then he, not in respect of his feathers, but of his beak and talents, which
caused that no other bird durst stand in contention with him.


Annib. Well, I say to you again, that the doings of Princes are blameless,
altogether without the compass of our judgment, and always mistaken of us:
for those who^ we take to be cruel, are just: those whom we suppose to use
extremity in justice, use lenity in mercy: those who ordeining new and
extraordinary imposts and paiments are thought to be covetous, deserve rather
to be counted provident and wise, for that they are not moved thereto by
avarice, which cannot enter into their noble hearts, but for the conservation
of their own estates, and their people. So that the imperfection of our
judgments makes us take all their perfections clean contrary.


Guaz. I know not how you can attribute these perfections to all Princes,
seeing the histories are full of naughty Emperors and Kings, which lived most
wickedly.


Annib. I do confess it unto you, neither do I marvel any thing at it, for
that they were not Princes by nature, but by violence, neither had they any
knowledge of Gods word, yea and were rather feared then loved: whereby they
themselves were forced to fear others, and to keep them upon their gardes,
for he yt will be feared, must of force fear those which fear him. To be
short, they were unjust, disloyal, covetous, lascivious, which rewarded the
evil, and persecuted the good, who for a kingdoms sake would have it lawful
to break all laws, and they were those in reproach of whom the fable is told
of ye Lion, who entered into agreement with other beasts, that like good
fellows they should distribute the prays which they took amongst the^ al
indifferently. But afterward, every one coming to demand his part, he showed
them his teeth, saying, The first part is mine, because I am better then you: I
will have the second, for that I am more mighty the^ you: the third, by reason
is due unto me, for that I took more pain in the taking of it then you: and
for the fourth, if you will not give it me, I will have it spite of your teeth,
and so farewell friendship. And therefore it is not to be marvelled at, that
these tyrants for the most part died of some violent death, by sword, or by
poison. On the otherside you know that ye princes of our time, come to their
crowns either naturally by succession, or lawefully by election, that they are
Christians, and endued with the knowledge of the truth: that they are sent by
God, to maintain justice on the earth, to defend us from oppression, to
repress the insolent, to reiecte flatterers, to respect the virtuous, to
gratify the good, and to show themselves both in word and deed, no less
stayed and immovable, then the corner stone, or the celestial Pole.


Guaz. But for all this, it would like me well (seeing you deny not, but that
there are some Princes subject to some infirmities) that following your
course, you would give some precepts, touching the conversation between
Princes and private persons, that our discourses may be insufficient in no
part.


Annib. For so much as you will have me, contrary to my determination, to
speak of this matter, I will bind my self only to matters of most
importance, and I will leave to you (who are well experienced in the
disposition and qualities of Princes) to give judgment what belongs to them
in every point. There are then two special imperfectio^s in Princes, whereby
they soon come to loose honor, state, life, soul, and all together. The
first is, Ignorance, which carries a Prince into many inco^uenie^ces. And
surely it is a great abuse, that Princes have not the knowledge of good
letters, but are faigne to use that shift, which an Emperor used, who being
reproved, for that he spoke contrary to the rules of Grammar: answered, that if
an Emperor were above the laws, much more was he above the rules of Grammar.
But he showed thereby, that he knew not that there is nothing more behoofull
for the upholding of Empires and kingdoms then learning. For we must think
that a Prince void of learning, must needs either behave himself disorderly in
his government: for that according to the saying of the Philosopher, ignorance
joined with puissaunce, brings forth madness: or else like an infa^t, he must
refer himself wholly to the discretion of others: as the Emperor Galba did, who
though he were not altogether without learning, yet he gave himself in pray to
3. of his officers commonly called the Schoolemaisters of Galba, who nurtured
him in naughtiness, and were the cause of his overthrow.


Guaz. Thereupon it is said, that as that Prince does ill which deals in
matters of his own head without advise, so he does scarce well which suffers
himself to be ouerruled by others, and of a master becomes a servant. And
it is a great chance when the Officers see the Prince so very a child, but
that they will conspire to cousin him, to set his honor to sale, and to make a
very jest and laughing stock of him.


Annib. Therevppon it is said that a Country is in better case where the
Prince is evil, then where his friends and officers are evil. Now I will
speak of the second imperfection, which is covetousness, which being once
entered into a Princes heart, there is no mischief, cruelty, impiety, or
wickedness, which it will not persuade him too: yea even to make sale of
Offices and of Justice, to fyle his hands with the vile gain of some things,
which very private persons would be ashamed to meddle withal, and to seek to
have about him such fetching heads, who consume themselves in a manner away, in
devising new kinds of extortion and polling, and to set it forth with some
goodly title. So that endued with this insatiable mind, he is always ready to
procure that the exchecker may be filled full, and the country emptied
clean. Of which fault it follows, that he living always miserable full of
suspicion and fear, with a sword still hanging by a hear over his head, he
takes at one time from his subjects liberty, from himself safety, from both
tranquillity?


Guaz. Now I will say you give to an ill Prince that honor which is due unto
him, and I see not why we ought not as freely to blame the il, as to commend
the good, whom God long preserve. But returning to the infirmity of
covetousness, I think it much more molesteth and tormenteth the higher sort,
then the meaner or lower: and that many Princes have engraven in their hearts
the desire of some kingdom, which when they have obtained, yet nevertheless
they are never the more satisfied, but grow still in desire of some other: so
that this saying may be verified in them, Alexander seems great to the
world, but the world seems small to Alexander.


Annib. In truth Alexander ought to be counted poor, or rather wretched: for
that he which is not content with that he has, has never a whit more, then
he, who has nothing at all. That Prince then, which coueteth to be well
spoken off, and well thought off by his subjects, will take heed of those two
faults before named: and that (through his ignorance) when matters come in
consultation, he may not sit amongst his counsaylours, like a dumb dog,
he will endeavor himself first, to lay hold of learning and wisdom: whereof
he shows an undoubted sign, in making account of those, who are learned and
wise.


Guaz. Arestinus being asked, why few Princes nowadayes extend their
liberality to those that are excellent in Poetry or other arts, as they were
wont to do in times past: answered, for that their conscience gives the^ how
unworthy they are of the praises which by Poets are given unto them: and for
other arts, it is daily seen, that a man makes no account of that, which he
knows not. Therefore I would in any wise have a Prince learned, both for this
and other causes, by you alleged.


Annib. Amongst all the learning meet for a Prince, that is the chiefest,
which entreats of matters of state and government: And therefore it is said,
that Demetrius exhorted Ptolomey to read many books pertaining to government,
for that there he should find many things which his subjects durst not
tell him. Next, it behooves a Prince to fly above all things, that before
named, Covetousness, as the head of all mischief: not to suffer so vile and
so unworthy a guest to lodge in his house, and to put off a private person, and
put on a public, referring all his cogitations to the benefit of his people.
Besides this, that he consider with himself, how heavily a Scepter and Crown
do waygh, and if he aspyre to the kingdom, in hope of a more secure life,
he immitateth him, who clymbeth to the top of a high hill, in hope to save
himself from lightning and tempest: whereupon one with great reason termed
the life of a Prince, a glorious misery: an other called it, a noble bondage:
naming moreover, a good king, a public servant. And Tiberius, (as I remember)
named the Empiere, a great beast: Insomuch, that if every man would ponder in
his mind the pains, the watchinges, the labors, the perilles, the vexations,
and finally the weighty charge a careful Prince is subject to, it should not
perhaps be seen, that two would strive and go to war for one kingdom, but
they would rather content themselves to be ruled, then to rule: whereupon a
wise prince knowing ye weight and danger of so heavy a burden, which he
alone for want of strength and knowledge is not able to bear, provides
himself of officers and counsaylours, who are seen as well in civil, as
marciall affairs, for the execution of Justice, and conversation of his own
state: Remembering the Proverb, that an evil Prince, has evil sides: that
is, evil counsaylours. And therefore in making this choice, he takes good
aduisement, providing so near as he can, that they be endued with honesty and
learning. Wherein Phillip, king of Macedon was so presise and circumspect, that
only having found out, that one of his officers died his beard, he put him
forth of his office: saying, that he could not be true and faithful in
public matters, who wrought treachery with his own beard. Besides, he will
never conclude any thing without their advice, especially, when justice is to
be executed in any thing: remembering how it is said, that when Jupiter was
minded to bestow any benefit upon mortal creatures, he did it of himself: but
when he was disposed to do harm, either by lightning, tempest, war,
plague, earthquake, or such like, he assembled the rest of the Gods, and
wrought his vengeance by their advise. The Emperor Antonius also used to say,
It is more meet that I follow the counsel of so many and such good friends,
then to suffer all them to follow the fancy of me alone. A Prince likewise
must endeavor to surmount his subjects, not in idleness, but in industry and
forecast. And as the celestial things can not stand still, but with continual
moving take force: so he ought always to exercise and travail him self in
governing his subjects with justice, and in looking to their welfare and
profit, in such sort, that he fulfill the saying of the Emperor Adrian,
which was, that a kingdom was to be used as a thing belonging to the people,
not to the Prince himself. Furthermore, let him be sure to get ye good will of
his subjects, which is the sure and inexpugnable strength of a realm, which
good will he shall get, following the opinion of Titus Vespasianus, showing
himself such toward his subjects, as he coueteth to have them toward
him. And as there is nothing more hurtful then to be hated, so is there
nothing more helpefull then to be loved. Which no doubt is gotten with
gentleness and courtesy, and therefore no marvel though that Vespasian by a
general consent were called the jewel of the world, and the darling of
mankind, for that he was always ready to give audience to all men, and not to
suffer any to depart out of his sight unsatisfied.


Guaz. There is no other thing in truth that makes the golden world, but the
goodness of Princes.


An. A prince must not only show himself courteous, affable, and gracious, in
co^uersing with his subjects, but besides, must use his authority modestly,
especially in offenses committed against himself: wherein it ought to suffice
him that he might have taken vengeance: and to imitate those mighty and strong
beasts, which never turn again against little curres which run barking after
them. Remembering the saying of Cato, that the mighty ought to use their power
moderately, that they may use it continually. Whereupon Traiane used to call
the Senate Father, and him self their servant. But to use a word for all, we
will say, that a good Prince ought to purchase to him self the name of the
father of his Country, and not to bear himself otherwise toward his
subjects, then a father does toward his sons. And for so much as out of
the example of Cyrus in Xenephon, and of many others, may be perfectly
gathered the precepts perteining to a Prince, it shall be enough for us to add
to that we have already spoken, these three rules: that is, that the Prince
make himself well thought of by speaking soberly, that he show his bounty,
in forbearing from polling his subjects, and his wisdom in governing himself
discreetely. And that Prince which shall observe these rules, may justly say,
that he is the lively Image of God: as on the contrary, he may assure
himself, that if no mishap befall him in his life, he shall feel in his
death this saying verified, That the mighty shall be mightily tormented. Now
let us come to subjects, and their conversation with Princes, which (speaking
of Princes in general) I have always thought that subjects ought to avoid
so much as they may, for that the good will of Princes kindles upon a heat,
and upon a soden, but it is by and by blown forth again with the wind of
envy, or slander, which is proved by the example of Lysmiacus and Scianus, who
were so far in favor, the one with Alexander, the other with Tiberius: who
nevertheless fell from their high favor, into most foul disgrace and
destruction. Yea, and without fetching so far, we see at this day many of
the like chances. And though there be now and then some one which
mainteineth himself still in credit, and yet the poor soul always lives
with an unquiet mind, and his master does continually load him like a good
horse, with some burden or other, and never leaves until he have quite tired
him, so that he finds that saying true, That whether thy Prince love thee,
or hate thee, it is all one evil. Whereupon I think not amiss to follow the
fable of the earthen vessel, which in no wise would have the company of the
brazen vessel. And you know well, that in their company a man cannot utter his
mind freely nor do any thing contrary to their pleasure: if he do, he
shall be no friend of Caesar's.


Guaz. The conversation of Princes in my judgment is not to be avoided, in
any other respect, but for that it takes away that liberty, which is so
acceptable in company, and brings us into a certain kind of bondage, which
we cannot li^e of long, but we must consider on the other side, how much the
being in the Princes company does countenance us, how thereby we take away
occasion for men to think that through baseness of mind, we abandon the
Court: what honor and profit we often reap thereby, and what contentation
and pleasure it is to us to be admitted into our Princes presence, yea, to be
in the company and sight of such a Saint, as you spoke of erewhile, I think
most heavenly happiness.


Annib. You have prevented me right: for I meant to add, that though this
conversation be dangerous, and that I myself especially never sought to enter
into it, yet being well used, brings estimation and profit. Besides, that
the Prince excelling us so much in virtue and valor, by how much he is above
us in degree, it is also to be thought, that his company avails greatly to
our edification in virtue and goodness. Like as the example of the Prince you
but now mentioned, has made such virtuous, learned, and accomplished
Courtiers, that there is not a more flourishing or famous Court in ye world.
But you are not ignorant, that some, not unlike the earthen vessels, are broken
by leading their life with Princes, because they do not behave themselves as
behooves them. And therefore, for their welfare and security, I briefly
prescribe unto them, that they be not puffed up with pride and vain glory, nor
bear them never the bolder for the favor and good countenance of the Prince:
but rather, the more they are exalted, to show the more humility and reverence.


Guaz. I like that well, for I have noted, that the Duke my master has
withdrawn his favor from some, who have abused his goodness toward then,
whereby their fall was so much ye greater, by how much before they were placed
higher. And truly I know by proof, that he which will long enjoy the favor
of his Prince, must like the Bear, infane wether, be sad to think of the soul
that is to come: which doubtful thought, will keep him in such humility and
lowlynesse as Princes like of.


Annib. A Man cannot possibly behave himself to reverently toward them. And
though it be reported, that when Aristippus could not be heard of Dionisius, he
threw himself down at his feet, saying, the fault is not mine, that I commit
this idolatry, but the kings, who has his ears in his feet: yet perhaps it
might have been replied to Aristippus, that the fault was his, for yt without
using due reverence, he would be cheek mate with the Prince. But let us end
this matter, charging every one what soever he be, to reverence and obey his
Prince with all humility, for that ye honor is not given to him, but to God
him self, whose minister he is. And what is said of Princes, is to be
understood also of Magistrates, not regarding that there are amongst them,
which are unjust, cruel, partial, ignorant, corrupt, respectours of persons
etc. but having respect to this, that they are the members of the Prince.


Guaz. Yet I would gladly have you descend to some particular point belonging
to Magistrates: to whom I think there are necessarily some several rules to be
prescribed, different from those you set down to Princes, and so much the
rather, for that some of them touching their dealinges may be amended.


Annib. The hurt certainly is inestimable, that comes by an ill Magistrate,
and therefore it is said, That a Swoorde is put into a mad man's hand, when an
office is bestowed upon a naughty person, who is commonly called an Ape in
purple. Whereupon we are to advertise Magistrates, that as touching their
calling, they be charitable in correcting, upright in judging, and merciful in
punishing. And I would have those which begin to grow proud by reason of
their preferment, to remember the example of that Ass, which bearing the
image of the Goddess Tsides, on his back, and seeing that every one which
met him, kneeled down, and did adoration unto him, entered into great pride,
and persuaded himself, that that honor was done to him. Into the self same
error, some Magistrates fall, who seeing themselves saluted and honored of
every man, imagine that themselves deserve that honor: Not perceiving that for
the most part, that honor is not done in respect of any desert of theirs, but
in reverence of the Prince, whose image they bear in their head. Nay rather
Magistrates in steed of being honored rightly, and for their own sakes, very
often receive (as the Proverb is) wind in a net: and taste meat seasoned
rather with smoke then with salt.


Guaz. They may well say with our Lord, The people honors me with their
lips, but their heart is far from me.


Annib. It is the saying of a wise man, That he that sits worthily in the
seat, does honor to the seat: but he that sits unworthily, shameth it.
And therefore a discreet Magistrate ought not to take upon him bigly, or to
alter his manners in respect of his dignity, which he shall not be sure
always to enjoy: but so to use the matter, that he may be respected and
honored, not in respect of his office, but of the good parts which are in
himself, to the end that when he shall be out of office, he may say that he
remains in honor, without the honor. And touching his conversation with the
Prince, this is enough for him, that neither for fear nor hope, he consent at
any time to any thing that is unjust: neither to full fill his perverse humor
any way. But if it be a grievous fault to consent to the disordinate desires
of the Prince, it is much worse to put naughty matters into his head, when he
before thought not of them, and to stir him up to wrath, too cruelty, to
vengeance, to extortion, and such like.


Guaz. Yea, but by your leave, those are the officers which continue longest in
favor.


Annib. Yea, but where the Prince is wise and virtuous, you shall most commonly
see such fellows leave their hyre, yea and their hide too behind them, and
end their days most miserably and shamefully. The last advertisement to be
given to officers in respect of private persons is, that he show himself in
countenance severe and terrible, which makes the guilty afearde* and the
guiltless bold, which commonly pleases the good, and displeases the ill,
and that he be patient to hear every man, but especially the poor, neither
yt he be less liberal of justice, or quick in dispatche toward them, then
toward the rich and mighty. But alas, covetousness and ambition bear such
sway, that in the judgment place, the offense of the rich is sooner defended,
then the innocence of the poor: and pardoning the crows, pigeons are
punished. But for that the time passes away, let us pass to speak of the
conversation between the learned, and the ignorant. *


Guaz. I think it a matter impossible, for you to tune this later sort in
such sort, that they may be acceptable in company to the other sort.


Annib. Whereupon ground you that opinion?


Guaz. Upon the example of water and wax, which by no means may be
incorporated together: I mean, upon the too great diversity of their nature
and disposition. You see, that the learned are seldom or never in the company
of the unlearned: knowing well that men make no account of that which they know
not. And thereof arose the fable of the Cock finding a precious stone, which he
set less by the^ a barley corn.


Annib. It is an ordinary saying, that ignorance is a kind of folly. And
therefore I would have you consider with me, that there are in the world two
sorts of the ignorant: the one foolish, the other wise. I call foolish
ignorant, those who are not only rude of understanding, and void of learning,
but also have in hatred and disdain all those who are wise and learned: and
like natural fools judge all those to be fools, and scoff at them, which
make profession of learning: counting themselves happy in that they know
nothing, and always perseuering in that error. By reason whereof, those who
are learned, have reason to fly their company. For to reason of learning
amongst l^arned the honor which is due unto them, but I think it meet to
confess, that the learned are as the staff and stay to the weak and feeble:
and that of all the things which we possess in this world, only learning is
perpetual and immortal, and therefore I take great pity of those who have
not the good hap to have it. And it may very truly be said, that it is not
so much commendation to a man to be learned, as it is shame to be unlearned.
Learning no doubt takes from a man ignorance, learning directs him in the
course of his life, learning makes him acceptable to all me^, learning is an
ornament to him in prosperity, and a comfort in adversity: finally, learning
sifting him from the dregs and filth of the common people, serves him as a
ladder to climb to honors and dignities, and raises him from earthly
vanities, to the contemplation of things Celestial and divine.


Guaz. You attribute so much to the honor of learning, that you seem to
forget the commendation due to arms: which (as you know) is able to weigh
with it, in any ground in Italy.


Annib. I am not ignorant, that a personage of account being asked whether he
had rather be Achilles or Homer, made answer, Tell me thou thy self,
whether thou had rather be a Trumpetter, or a Captain? But though this
answer make for arms, yet I pray you tell me what you think to be the end
and mark that wise and worthy men shoot at?


Guaz. I think it be to leave behind them that, which may triumph over
death, and according to the saying of the Poet.

May fetch a man forth of his grave,
and keep him still alive.

Annib. You say well: but whereof depends this immortality and everliving
name?


Guaz. Of learning, and histories, whereby it is conserved for ever.


Annib. You may see then, that learning is above arms, for that learning of it
self is able to purchase immortality: but arms cannot do it without the
aid of learning: which Alexander the great knew well enough, who calling
Achilles happy, for that it was his hap to have so excellent a setter forth
of his doings, would say no more, but that he desired likewise to light upon
one, who with the like grace, would gather into one book, his trauelles,
conquests, and renowned Acts: which without some such excellent wit, to
commend them to posterity, he knew would soon be buried in oblivion.


Guaz. I think verily, that without some spur of everlasting praise, few
men would be pricked forward to enterprise any thing worthy praise.


Annib. We all covet this glory, as the fruit and lawful reward of our
travel: and there is no man but is right glad to consecrate his name to
immortality. For proof whereof it is told that a certain writer published in
print a little pamphlet of his own making, entitled, The contempt of glory,
wherein by many notable reasons, he endeavored to prove that it is a vanity
unseemly for a man to gape after glory, in consideration of his own works.
But that writer was afterward charged to have committed the same fault, which
he found fault with in others, for that he had set his name in the first page
and beginning of his book. Whereby it was apparently known, that if he had
contemned glory in deed, as he went about to persuade others by words, he
would have caused his book to have been imprinted without his name, which
being blazed in the fore front as it was, gave a manifest sign, how desirous
he was of glory: but Cicero would never dissemble in that point, who in a long
letter, openly, and earnestly requested Luceius to gratify him in three
things: The first, that he would set down separately from his other
histories, the conspiracy of Cateline, thereby to give immortal fame to his
name: the second, that he would add some thing in respect of the friendship
which was between them. The third, that he would publish his book with all speed
possible, that while he were yet living, he might taste of the sweetness of
his own glory. I will not here let pass Augustus, who joined to his last
will and Testament his own acts piece by piece, appointing that they should
be engraven upon his tomb in pillars of brass. But how many other may a man
rehearse, who went canuassing about, and craving for this brute, and this
glory, by the mean either of histories, or of images, or of tombs, or of
pictures, or of buildinges, or other memorials.


Guaz. It seems a greater marvel to me, that so honorable a desire should
enter into the heart of a common Courtisan, named Trine, who being very rich,
such time as Alexander the great razed the walls of Thebes, went and proffered
the Thebanes to repair them at her own charges, so that they would be
content that, to her everlasting fame, she might cause only these words to
be engraven in the wall: Alexander razed it, and Trine raised it.


Annib. This woman was better to be borne withal, who sought glory with her
own money, then some are, who get it at other men's cost, and being not able to
leave behind the^ a good report by help of their own virtue, attribute
theeuishly to themselves the doings of strangers, of which sort of men, it is
not long since that we used some speech. Touching arms, I reply that the
deeds of famous Captains and worthy soldiers die with them, if they have
not some to set them forth in writing, or unless they have joined to their
prowess in arms, the knowledge of good letters. So that by the example of
Caesar, they may be able to hold the spear in the rest with one hand, and with
the other the pen to write their own acts, which were very necessary,
especially in these our days, wherein the memory of diverse worthy soldiers,
yea, Princes and Gentlemen, who have achieved many valiant exploites, has
been lost, and is yet from time to time lost. Whereas if they had been so well
set forth as ye famous men were in time past, they should never have had cause
to have envied the glory of Annibal, Marcellus, Caesar, or ye Scipios, but had
been equal to them in every respect.


Guaz. Hereby may be gathered how profitable the conversation of the learned
men is, and how important it is to have the friendship and familiarity of
writers: who with one drop or two of ynke, may prolong our life through many
ages.


Annib. They have power not only to prolong life, but to abridge it. And
thereupon a certain Captain used to say, that the pens of writers, pearce
the soldiers corslets. We know well how diverse writers either to please others,
either led by affection, or moved upon some other occasion, have in their
histories, contrary to their duty, magnified and exalted above the truth, the
doings of some captains, and abased or else concealed the notable enterprises
of other some, and by the force of their hand and pen, have lift up the little
and thrust down the great.


Guaz. Touching that, I remember that P. Iouius being blamed for the
infidelity of his history, he could not deny it, saying yet that he comforted
himself, knowing that when a hundred years were once expired, there would be
no man living that could gainsay his writing, so yt the posterity should be
driven of necessity to give undoubted credit unto them.


Annib. Perchance he would not have put himself in that hazard if he had not
made his account by the majesty and elegancie of his history, to make all the
writers of this time afeard to write against him *. But as ye world goes,
those show themselves wise men, which keep the learned their friends, and
which receive them into their favor and protection: not so much for their own
behoof, as for the love of virtue, which thing brought great glory to
Alexander, to Augustus, and to Mecenas, who bestowed honors and marvelous
rewards upon diverse Gramarians, Orators, Poets, and philosophers. Neither
think I meet to let pass the example of Pius ye second, who in the wars of
his time gave express commandment that ye honor, goods, and life of the
people of Arpines should be spared, in the remembrance of Tully, who was that
country man, and for yt there were many there living, which bore his name *.
But it is good to set down some form of conversation to the learned, and to
put the^ in remembrance in the first place, ye learning makes a man glorious
and haughty, * which is confirmed by Accius the Poet, who took so bigly upon
him, by reason of his learning, that Caesar the Emperor entering into the
college of Poets, he would not vouchsafe to salute him, thinking himself
better then him. I truly was ever of this mind, that as a tree, the more it
is taken with fruit, the more it bends to ye ground: so a man, the more he
is stored with learning, the more he ought to humble himself. For that the
ground of true virtue is humility: neither is any man's name so bright, but
that by pride it is obscured. * And therefore the learned ought neither to hide
their knowledge without fruit, neither to show it upon vain glory, but for
their profit and preferment. They ought also to conform their life to their
learning, for that knowledge is no better in a naughty man, then good wine put
into a mustie vessel. They ought likewise to employ their learning to the
benefit of others, and to make others partakers of it. For that a man does
not possess pleasantly any good thing without company, so that they ought to
take pains to instruct others, in that they themselves are skillful in: and
they must begin to learn to teach.


Guaz. I think it also convenient for the learned in conversation and company,
to take heed of affectation, whereby they make themselves rather disliked then
commended.


Annib. I meant even now to have told you, that that same is the error of
some learned men, who being in the company of the unlearned, take delight to
speak amongst them like a master that reads to his scholars, and as if
they were in the midst of learned men and Philosophers, they make arguments
in mood and figure, and discourse with terms, which are only understood of
the learned: and thereby they offend the ears, and turn the minds of the
hearers from giving attention to their talk. A man ought then especially
amongst the ignorant to use such familiar kind of learning, and with such
discretion, yt it may serve rather for sauce to get the^ a stomach, then for
meat to fill and cloy the^, so that the unlearned may have in detestation their
own ignorance, and in admiration his knowledge.


Guaz. He that shall know how to keep this way, which you have proposed,
shall no doubt give and receive great coontentment in the company of the
ignorant, who without any difficulty will allow of that he shall say, and
have him in great honor for it.


Annib. One said, that as some ships seem great upon the river, which show
very little upon the Sea: so some seem learned amongst the ignorant, which
have but a little when they come amongst the learned. And it can not be
denied, but that in all companies, he ruffleth most, and takes pleasure to
utter that which is in him, who knows him self to be chief and best seen
in the matter which is spoken of. But for all that, he must not persuade
himself that he ought not to hear the unlearned speak, or to make any
reckoning of them: For that there are men to be found, who though they be not
endued with learning, yet they have a good wit of their own, and are able to
compass their matters well enough, and bring them to a good end: insomuch
that many, who are learned, seem but fools in respect of them. Like as a
scholar came to an artificer, to crave his devotion, saying, That he was
master in the vij. Arts. But the Artificer answered him, I am more learned
then thou art, for that with one Art only, I nourishe my self, my wife, and
children, where as thou can not keep thy self alone with seven.


Guaz. Now I pray you give the ignorant some instructions, whereby they may in
conversation get the favor of the learned.


Annib. We have already, if you remember in the be^ginning of our discourse,
enjoined unto them silence, as a most singular thing, which nevertheless they
keep very ill. For that in company, if you mark it, those which know least,
speak, contend, and cry the lowdest. Whereof belike arises this Proverb,
That the brokenest wheel of the chariot makes always the greatest noise.


Guaz. A man might contrariwise apply another Proverb to the learned, That
where the river is deepest, it runs quietest.


Annib. The second advise is, that being in the company of the learned, they
remember that they are unlearned. For by that means they will be wary what
they speak: for it is the saying of a Philosopher, that he never offends in
those things he knows not, who knows that he does not know them. And
contrariwise he is ignorant and does amiss, who thinks he knows, that he
does not know. Thirdly, they are to be advertised, that amongst the degrees
of superiority before spoken of, this is one, that the wise command over the
ignorant: whereas it is their part to be silent without standing obstinately in
contention: for that there is nothing in this world more odious then an
ignorant person, which will contend with the learned, like as the Pie did with
the Nightingale in music. And therefore as it is the part of one that is
learned, gently to impart to the ignorant that which he knows, so is it the
part of the ignorant to ask, without hiding his ignorance, that which he
knows not, and rather to confess not to know, the^ to profess to know: for
the one is a sign of modesty, the other of arrogancy.


Guaz. It were not amiss, yet to use a little skill in confessing the want of
skill, that it turn not to our open shame. But it were no great matter, if one
did like a good gentleman of our country, whom a stranger asked what history
it was that was painted about his hall: the Gentleman said, stay here I pray
you a little, and I will return to you by and by, that said, he went hastily
to the study of a brother of his, who was a Doctor, and bringing him with him
into the hall where the stranger was, he said unto him, brother, I pray you
make answer unto this Gentleman.


Annib. But perhaps it will be a hard matter to find in every house so much as
one, who with his wisdom is able to supply others ignorance. But let us
return to say that the ignorant ought to honor the learned, and to seek their
company, which will make them more politic, more wis^, and more virtuous. For
if you mark it, those which are unlearned, lightly give them selves too
dishonest doings: for seeing that they cannot get the favor of the Prince nor
any preferment any way, for lack of learning and virtue, they endeavor to set
up themselves, either by flattery, either by promoting, either by ^laundering,
or by false accusing, and other naughty means, which those that are learned,
will never lightly use: but enough of this. And for that we said but
erewhile, that the learned receives great contentment in the company of the
unlearned, let us now consider how little that contentment is in respect of
that which he receives being in the companine of his like: For no doubt a
learned man takes much more pleasure in the company of the learned, who know,
yea, and allow better of his learning, then in the company of the ignorant,
who understand it not so well, neither are able to judge of it. Besides, when
he is amongst the ignorant, he takes pleasure only in that which he
himself gives. But when he is with the learned, he delights both in it,
which he gives, and that he receives: for that by turns he does both
teach and learn. Moreover, he has a another contentment, to know that where
is greatest conformity in estate, in life and in study, there is greatest
agreement in good will and amity, and consequently greater pleasure and
contentment, * yea, that effect is bred among the^, which is found amongst
flowers, which being separated one from another give a good smell, but being
bound together in a posie, they recreate the spirits a great deal more, like
as it was well said by a Poet, Two good men joined together, do
in goodness more excel:
And roses joined with lielies have,
a great deal sweeter smell.


Yea, it is a Philosophers saying, that one in comparison of two is no body. *
And truly amongst all other companies, and societies, there is not any more
firmly and nearly linked together, then this of the learned: who for the most
part love better amongst themselves, then kinsfolk and brethren do: agreeing
in like studies, and like affections, they can not but take pleasure one in
another, and reduce them selves from the number of many as it were into one
united body.


Guaz. All other assemblies may be well termed strange and external, and this
same familiar and internal, wherein the minds are exercised in reasoning,
teaching, and discoursing of things, which appertain to the knowledge of
virtue and goodness. And these are the true freendships, which last long.


Annib. It is a common saying, that the bonds of virtue bind more straightly,
then the bonds of blood. And in truth one good man may be said to be a near
kinsman to another good man, by the conformity of their minds and manners. *


Guaz. Hereby I imagine how great the concord, the pleasure, and the profit
is, which is reaped by the Academie of the illustratie (as they term them)
established in this city.


Annib. You are deceived in your imagination, for this Academy being assembled
in the name of God, you may well think, that he is in the midst of them, and
that he mainteineth it in peace and amity. What comfort every one receives
by it, I cannot sufficiently set forth unto you: for that I have tried in my
self and seen plainly in other Academikes, that there is not any one so
afflicted with the common miseries of this city, and with his private
troubles, who setting once his foot into the hal of the Academie, seems not
to ariue at the haven of tranquillity, and begins not to clear his mind of
care: casting his eyes about the hall to see those goodly devises, full of
profounde mysteries. I may well say of my self, that when my body is shut
within it, all my yrkesome thoughts are shut out: the which attend me at the
door, and at my going out get upon my shoulders, but touching the good which
comes of his happy assembly, you may be assured in thinking to your self
what diversity of learning is there handled, sometimes with public lectures,
sometimes with private reasoninges, which breed that delight, which comes of
giving and receiving, as we have said before. And I may say without arrogancy
that the Academie, borrowing me as it were to read in Philosophy, has paid
me home with interrest, being not only bettered in that part, but also
moved with some knowledge in divinity, poetry, and other laudable sciences,
whereof I know I am not altogether void.


Guaz. I have noted by long experience, that for the most part those are
smally accounted of, in company, which have bestowed al their study in one
only profession: For drawing them once out of that, you shall find them very
sottes and fools. Whereas on the contrary, those are very well thought of, who
besides their chief profession are able to discourse reasonably well and with
discretion of other matters: In so much that the knowledge they show in those
bye matters, brings them so much the more honor, by how much they are
estraunged from their ordinary profession. Wherefore seeing in company we
commonly devise of diverse things, leaping from one matter into another, there
is nothing, in my judgment, that does us more honor, or makes us better
liked of, in good company, then to be ready at all assayes, and have a mouth
for every matter: to be able to perform which, I consider that the company
of many learned men is very available, like as that of the Academies is.


Annib. We have alredie said that it is not in one man to speak sufficiently
of all things, by reason of the shortenesse of his life, but for so much as
all learning is not in one alone, it is good that many assemble together to
make amongst them one perfect man, as it falls out in those learned
companies.


Guaz. Seeing the conversation of these Academikes is so auayleable, I look
you should set down some orders for them, which they ought to observe, to
maintain themselves long in agreement and amity.


Annib. I should think I should commit a fault if I should speak any thing of
that, for that it were according too the Proverb to instruct Minerua: knowing
that it is in them rather to teach, then to be taught the orders of
conversation. Besides that, they have laws and orders set down in writing, by
force whereof, friendship and concord is inuiolably kept amongst them.


Guaz. I pray you yet at the least, to tell and recount unto me the order of
the Academie of the illustrati in this city, and to declare unto me the
original of it, and what is the manner of their conversation together.


Annib. If I should thoroughly satisfy your request, this day would not be
enough to do it, but to content you somewhat, I briefly say unto you that
these Academikes desirous to travail continually for their own glory, and
the universal benefit, have proposed unto themselves the enterprise of the
sun, which going out of the Horizon, ascends to the opposite of the moon,
which sets in the West, and upon this devise, are set these words. Lux
indeficiens, with the name of Illustrati.. The laws of the Academie are a
great many, but they are referred al, chiefly to the honor of God, and
conservation of the state of the Academie. In proposing of matters, in
discoursing and in answering, they proceed with great respect and reverence,
without tumult, without confusion. And in giving of voices every one prefers
his ancient before him, as touching private congregations, some are called for
the creation of the Prince, Counselors, Censors, and other Officers: who are
made by secret voices, and they continue but from four months to four.
Some to hear the discourse of some Academike, who loves not to do it
publicly: some to admit the new Acadmikes that were before chosen by privy
voices: and to to hear their speeches, wherein they render thanks too the
Prince and the Academikes. Some to confer of those things which are to be
handled in public: and then there are ordinarily made lectures and discourses
of diverse matters, and by two Academikes the compositions and works of the
Academie are read, and afterward the writings and doings of strangers.
Every two months they change their Prince, and in that ceremony, the old
Prince gives up his throne and delivers the seal of the Academie too his
successor, who placing himself in the others seat, takes possession of the
principality: which is done in every point with such state and majesty, that
I am not able to express it. Which you may imagine by the great multitude, not
only of Citizens, but of strangers, which are present at it. Moreover, it
happens sometime, that some Academike is married, and then the bride and
other gentlewomen with her, are invited to this assembly: where she is
honored with great pomp and solemnity, with pleasant discourses, with
commendatorie verses, with music and such like. Like as my Lady Francis your
cousin was, to whom in open assembly there was given in the name of the
Academikes a Carcanet of gold, which you may perhaps have seen about her
neck, whereon the one side, is bravely set forth, the devise or arms of the
Acacademie: and on the other side, the devise of your brother: but something
altered, for whereas that has a flying swan, with a branche of bay in her
mouth, and this writing on it (above the skies) this has besides the shadow of
the same swan, and ^he posie is changed, which is (Be a mate in this manner)
meaning that she ought to follow the steps of her husband, as the shadow did
the swanne, They use also at the death of any of the Academikes to make
funeral assemblies, in honor of him with such gravity and sadness that it
is wonderful. I could rehearse unto you many other notable things, but I
will omit them for the time is short, which we have to bestow in other
matters, we will only say then, that the conversation with the learned
stands us in marvelous steed, delights us much, and is the cause of
great love and amity. Which is showed by the ^able of Narcissus, who being
without company, so soon as he saw himself in a fountain, fell in love with
himself: and therefore nothing being more like unto us, then our Image, it may
be well said, that when one that is learned loves an other that is learned,
that both of them love nothing else, but their own Image in an other. And it
may be likewise said, that this their friendship is perpetual, as well as the
love of ones self is. Now let us come to the conversation between strangers
and Citizens.


Guaz. Seeing we have but a little time left, it were bette^ to omit this
matter, as a thing little and seldom happening.


Annib. Let us at least show unto the Citizen, that it is his part to have a
pitiful eye toward strangers, and to consider, that being far from their
country, parents and goods, being deprived of all those commodities which
we enjoy in our own houses, they are to be succored with all aid and
favor possible, and especially those, which are in necessity: For no doubt,
he that receives them into his lodging, purchases to himself a lodgeing and
abiding place in heaven, by means of his charitable courtesy: yea we must
know, that this work is so acceptable to God, that he that gives only a
cup of cold water to drink, in the way of charity, shall not go without
reward* And though the commodities here below are not to be compared with
the heavenly rewards, yet let us think what honor and profit the good
enterteinement which we give to strangers brings us: for that those, which
keep open house for strangers, do not only win credit in their own
country, but without setting foot out of the precinct of their own
terrytorie, they are known, and honorably reported of in foreign countries:
besides that, they are sure, when they travail, to find friends, money, and
succor at need.


Guaz. It is a great contentment to a man, to see himself esteemed, and made
much off by his parents and friends, in his own country: but that is but a
trifle in respect of the good it does a man, when he sees himself
entertained and honored, where he is scar^e known. And therefore you shall
easily persuade me to perform this duty toward strangers, toward whom I
feel my self maruellously well affected, for that in my travail. I received
at their hands great courtesy.


Annib. For that cause I was about to tell you, that those show themselves most
hoggish and cruel to strangers, who never went out of their country: Who for
that they have not felt the inconveniences, and discommodities of travel, have
no consideration of the state of strangers, neither are moved with any
compassion toward them. Wherein they are greatly too blame, for that they
ought too show to strangers more courtesy and honor, then to their own
countriemen. Being the saying of a Philosopher* that a stranger when he is
deprived of his friends and parents, is to be pitied both of God and men.
And therefore being in company with them, we ought to use great respect
toward them, both in deed and word, forbearing finding of faults, and other
boldness, which we might lawfully use toward our own countriemen, yea, and
to cloak and to bear rather with their imperfections. So that some are of
this opinion, that we ought not to deal ill with strangers, though they
deserve it.


Guaz. It is very true, but yet oftentimes strangers are worse used, then they
should be by their own fault, when they will be of household with us in a
manner, and be more familiar and bold, then they ought to be, which makes
them fare the worse.


Annib. And therefore it shall be the part of a stranger, being in another man's
house, not to take upon him presumptuously, but to behave himself so modestly,
that every man may love and favor him* For as if he set himself forward too
much, he shall be pulled back with shame: so if he hang back, he shall be
halled forward with honor. He must also in company use the same behavior in
word and deed toward you, as you are bound to do toward him: whereby your
conversation may be acceptable on both sides. It remains to speak of the
Conversation between the seculer and the religious.


Guaz. You may have soon done if you will, seeing that now a days this
Conversation happens but one day in the year, and of that day but one half
hour only, which is spent in confessing our sins: which done, we not only
fly the Conversation, but the very presence of our ghostly father.


Annib. To whom impute you the fault of this sildome conversation, to the
religious, or to the lay people*


Guaz. It can not be ascribed to the religious (for they seek both us and ours)
but to us, who fly from them.


Annib. And why think you, we fly from them?


Guaz. The Devil belike persuadeth us not to come at them, nor to have them in
any reverence or honor, because some of them are sprinkled with some
imperfections.


Annib. It was demanded of a Pope, whether it were lawefull for Priests now a
days to minister the Sacrament in wooden Chalices, as they did in times past:
who answered nothing else, but that in old time golden Priests ministered in
wooden Chalices, and now wooden Priests minister in golden Chalices. To
like effect is this saying, That there is in the world scarcity of Priests,
and plenty of Priests, that is, too many in the bare name, too few that
rightly execute the office. But it ought to suffice us to know, that they have
the name and the true calling of Ministers, and that God has given them unto
us, not that we should be judges of their dooinges, but folowers of their
doctrine. And those which like not their company, no doubt offend greatly, and
suffer to enter into their minds the wicked spirit, enemy to religion, and
the Christian faith. But true Christians can not deny, but that the company of
the religious is greatly available: For that by their doctrine they keep us
in the right way, and by their outward gravity only they give us an example
to do well. I for my part, never yet met with any of the Ministry carrying
so evil a report, or leading so lewd a life, but that by his company, I was
rather stirred then stayed from well doing: And I have always been of this
mind, that nothing but good can happen unto him which frequenteth their
company. We must then leave it to God to judge of their life, and being
amongst them, we ought to forbear all lewd speeches and behavior, whereby
their godly ears may be offended, and GOD him self dishonored, and to have
them in continual reverence and honor: * Forso much as they are the
messengers of GOD, and bring the glad tydinges of the Gospel unto us. Yea, and
are termed in holy scripture the sault of the earth, the light of the world,
a Candle upon a Candlestick, giving light to all which are in the house of
GOD, a picked seed, a holy nation, and finally, Stars and Angels. So that
all the honor and reverence we do to them, we may a^sure our selves is done
to GOD himself. * You are not ignorant on the other side, that the duty of
the Clergy is, in conuersing with the laytie, to beware how they so much as
speak any thing tending to evil example, or giving suspicion of an ill
disposed mind. Remembering the saying, That the vain words of temporal men,
are mere blasphemies in the mouth of spiritual men. * And before they go
about to infourme other in godliness, they must refourme them selves from
naughtiness: For it is in vain to go about to make the shadow strait, if
the body which gives the shadow be crooked. They must also in teaching and
reprehending, be neither too sharp nor too gentle, but tempered between the
rod and the staff: with the one to strike us, with the other to stay us. *
They ought also by their good life and doctrine to amend our naughty lives,
and to stir us up to reverence them, by showing them selves more devout, more
just, more faultlesse, then us, for there is nothing that does more dishonor
the church of God, then that Laymen are for the most part of better life and
conversation, then spiritual men are.


Guaz. If I remember the division which you made of the kinds of Conversation,
there remains no more for us to speak of, but the conversation with women.


Annib. It was very meet this discourse should be reserved to the end, to
refreshe us being weery with the long journey we have gone this day.


Guaz. I doubt me, that devising of this conversation in steed of refreshment,
we shall feel greater travel and torment, or else I most say, that your taste
differs much from mine, for that I have always thought the conversation of
women, not only vain and unprofitable, but dangerous and hurtful: and if
you feel any spirit in you, repugnaunt too this my opinion, conjure it, and
drive it out of you by the virtue of three notable sentences. The first is,
that if the world could be mayteined without women, we should live like
GOD himself. The second, that there is nothing in the world worse then a
woman, be she never so good. The third, that the naughtiness of a man is
better than the goodness of a woman.


Annib. These three sentences serve rather to keep in, than to cast out the
spirit which is within me: and I see well you respect nothing, but the
outward bark. But if the sharpness of your understanding will pearce intoo
the pith, you shall find that those speeches have not been used in reproach
of women, but in reproof of men's incontinencie, and frailty. Who offend
sooner in frequenting honest women, then noghtie men? For that haunting the
company of Userers, thieves, adulterers, slaunderers, and such like, of evil
Conversation, they will not suffer themselves so soon to be tempted and taken
by their naughtiness, as in accompanying with women. For though they be never
so chaste and honest, yet men will be moved with a lascivious and disordinate
desire toward them: which is verified by that which is said, Thou can
neither be more learned then David, neither more strong then Sampson, neither
more wise then Solomon, who notwithstanding have fallen by means of women.
Behold the very juice and true meaning of the sentences by you alleged, the
which I will say once more, are more meet to keep in my spirit, then to cast
him out. For if it be so that virtue consist in things difficulte and
uneasy, I think to do a virtuous act to conjure my senses to be quiet, and
not to be moved any thing with the presence and company of women: amongst
whom I have gotten the habit to live in this my tranquillity of mind.


Guaz. Your Philosophy perchance has so mortified you, that you can promise
your self the constancy of that Philosopher whom a woman took for an image.
But I must tell you, that virtue is given to few, and it is known that not
only the common sort of men, but even Hermites them selves have letten their
Portis fall out of their hands at the sight of women.


Annib. If I be not of the order of that Philosopher, neither am I of the
disorder and lightness of those who are in love with every one they look on,
and have so little hold of them selves, that they will be lost in the looks of
a woman, and are no more to be seen in them selves. Yea* their folly is so
great, that if a woman show but a merry countenance, make some sign by
chance, or use any other iesture, they apply it all to themselves, as done in
their favor, and filled with a thousand vain pleasures, and oftentimes make
court to such a one, whose mind is far of both from them, and their purpose.


Guaz. And this is also a fault of women, who are commonly said to be like
death, for that they follow those who fly them, and fly those which seek
them.


Annib. Honest women fly in deed those which follow them dishonestly. Yea,
and the dishonest fly too, though they suffer themselves soon to be overtaken.
But you shall never find woman so shameless, but that she thinks it a
fault to follow others, and will be first sued to her self. So that ye fault
is not as you say in the woman, but in the man. But you seem to be a very
rebel against women.


Guaz. I am no rebel unto them, for that I never promised or swore faith or
fealty unto them. But how can a man love them that are called women, of the
woe and hurt they bring to men.


Anniball. And why not of the woe and hurt they drive from men, which is
confirmed by God him self, who says, he made them for a help and comfort to
man.


Guaz. What, to help to consume a man as the Poet said?

Lesbia does suck the purse and body dry,
to buy love so dear, is most extreme folly.

Annib. That is not the Conversation that we are to speak of, and it seemed
very strange to me, that you being a Courtier should profess your self
such an enemy to women.


Guaz. Pardon me I pray you, I mistook you then, for so soon as you began to
speak of the Conversation of women: I thought you had meant of those with whom
men try their manhood withal in amorous incounters. For I think that those
which make profession of the life, ought to learn, the means how to trafike
together in such sort, that they may live long time together in love and
liking. And touching women of honesty and reputation, you know well that it is
my part not only to reverence them, but to maintain and defend their honor
and good name, both with word and with sword. Yea, though duty did not
constrain me to do it, yet affection should carry me to it, having been always
most desirous of their favor.


Annib. We can not (saving our honor) speak of the Conversation which you
mean: and in my fancy it is our parts rather to overthrow it, then to build
it up, as a thing unworthy of the civil Conversation. And to the end you
remain no longer in suspense, I would have you with me think this, that the
nature of man is inclined to nothing more then to ye love of women. But that we
may not be deceived, we must know, that there is one Venus in heaven, and
another in earth: the latter is, the mother of wanton love, the other, of
honest affection. Wanton love is nothing else but a passion, which blinds the
understanding, peruerteth the mind, confounds the memory, wastes the goods,
weakeneth the body, withers youth, kills age, which is the breeder of
vices, an inhabiter in idle and empty heads, which is a thing without reason,
without order, and without any stay, a fault proper to fools, and which is the
abridger of man's liberty.


Guaz. It appears you are well acquainted with our Boccace, seeing you
remember so well his sayings, wheretoo may be added, that of the Poet, I see
the thing I do, the truth which to my cost,
I know, no whit does me deceive, yet love so rules the roast:
that who so follows it, no virtue follow shall,
for unto lewdness and to vice, it does him daily call.



Annib. For conclusion, so soon as this love has taken root in the heart, in
the same instant are lost goods, honesty, renoume, virtue, yea, body and
^oule. And therefore al those who are folowers of this fo^d brutish love, are to
be admitted only into the company of incontinent and naughty women. For they
are not worthy the presence and entertainment of the honest and virtuous. Next
follows the heavenly love, which being inamoured with the beauties of the
mind, is the cause of much good, and of many commendable effects. For it
makes men affable, discreet, courteous, painful, pacient, valiant, and as a
brave writer has alredie said, It takes from men all rude and clownishe
behavior, it makes them familiar in company, pleasant at the Table,
amiable every way. It is the chief bringer in of mercy, and banisher of
cruelty: it breeds friendship, and drives away hatred: it is it which
makes a man friendly, liberal, desirous to do well, and loath to do ill: it
is a wise guide in our trauayles, in our desires, and in our words: to
conclude, it is the most perfect ornament of man's life. And truly, if you
mark the order of feasts, plays, and merry meetinges of friends, you will
say, that all those assemblyes are cold and nothing delightful, if there be
no women at them. For as men in their presence pluck up their spirits, and
endeavor by words, iestures, and all other ways to give them to understand
how desirous they are of their favor and good will, so you ought to think,
the object being out of their eyes, they will become careless, mannerlesse,
and less ready to commendable enterprises. To be short, women are they
which keep men waking and in continual exercise: yea, I think there is no
man so lazy and drouzy, but that he will open his eyes when he hears talk
of women. And so soon as he spyeth coming a far of, her whom he has
placed most near to his heart, I warrant you he sets his ruffes, he
turns his Cappe and feather the right way, he pulls up his cloak about
his shoulders, he stands a tiptoe, he shows a joyful and smyling
countenance, and he seems to be become a new man, that he may be more
acceptable to the sight of his mistress, in whose presence he changes
color, and looks pale, by reason that his heart abandoneth his body to
follow her, being drawn as it were by it own image.


Guaz. Women do the very same, who I warrant you would not be so fine, so
trimmed and tricked up, so amiable every way, but of a desire to please men.


Annib. You see then that this love is no less mutual then honest.


Guaz. Yea, but if this love were so honest as you make it, you should not see
men show them selves more affectionate to the fair then to the foul, to the
young then to the old. But you see few take pleasure either in ouerworne
antiquities, or unseemly deformities. By reason whereof it is easy to be
known, that they are in love rather with the body then the mind: and that
their love is earthly, and fleshly, which you have already banished out of
good company.


Annib. Women did the like for all the world toward men. For I know some of
them which are very angry in their minds, when their chance is to be led in
a dance, either by a child or an old man: whereas on the contrary they are
very glad when they have gotten a young man by the hand.


Guaz. In my opinion they have great reason in it, for that as a wise man
says, pleasures and favors are not to be done either to a child or to an
old man. For the one forgets them, the other dies before he have occasion
to requite them.


Annib. That is not the occasion which moves them to do so. And to avoid al
confusion, we must consider that love is a desire of beauty, and that beauty
is of three sorts, to wit: of the mind, of the body, and of the speech. The
first is discerned by the understanding, the second by the eyes, the third by
the ears. And therefore it is said that the three graces represent those three
parts. So long then as love is guided only by the eyes, the ears, and the
mind, it is without question, honest, and wise lovers ought to content
themselves only with the fruition of those fruits, without thinking or seeking
any farther. And contrariwise, it cannot be counted honest, or deserve the
name of love, but of lust and folly, when they are moved to it by any other of
their senses. Now we are here to consider, that naturally our minds are
most drawn thither, where beauty does most abound: and therefore no marvel
if men for the most part address themselves more willingly toward the fair
and young, then the foul and old: for that in the fair and young commonly
those three sorts of beauty concur, of the mind, of the body, and of the
speech. Whereas in the foul and the old the beauty of the body is wanting,
which in the foul fails by nature, and in the old by length of time. The
same reason may serve to show why women in banquets and dancing make more
account of young men then of children or old men, for that in children there
is no other beauty to be seen but that of the body: for the two other are
wanting, I mean of the speech which consists in pleasant devise, and fine
filed talk, and of the mind which is showed in discreet behavior and
virtuous deeds, which cannot be ripe and perfect in them. In old men is to be
found only the beauty of the mind and of the speech, for that they have not
that of the body, which is worn away with time. But all the three beauties
meet together for the most part in young men. And though this inclination be
common to men and women, yet you see some men fall in love sooner with an old
woman then with a young, and with a foul then with a fair: which happens
likewise to some women, which bear fervent affection to some men who are
altogether bereeued of the beauty of the body, and in a manner deformed, but
happily endued with virtue, pleasantly conceited, and valiantly given. A man
can not term this folly or lack of judgment. For it must be said that a
woman casting her fancy to a man of unseemly personage, does naturally make
small account of that outward beauty, and is induced to love him in respect of
the other beauties of speech, and of the mind: and that a man does the like
toward a woman. Neither ought we to think it strange that some lovers, the
older, they wax the more fervently they love one another: but we ought to
judge their love the more perfect. For touching ye woman ye more she grows in
years, the more ripeness the beauty of her mind grows to, and the older the
man waxes, the better he is able to discern the beauties of his mistress,
whereby his love the more increases. But for that my chief purpose is not to
discourse of love, but of the conversation with women, it shall suffice us to
know, that there is no man in the world so blockishe, or such a Cimon, who
being in love, calls not his wits about him, and waxes not more wise: who
by honest love, and the courteous and pleasant company of women, feels not
himself inflamed with virtuous and heavenly thoughts, and who besides other
laudable studies, is not thereby stirred up to Poetry. And thereof it comes,
that Apollo vaunting him self to have been the cause of the work of a
certain Poet, fraught full of amorous devises, Venus withstoode the matter,
saying, That that Poet had remained mute, if her son had not hit him with his
golden shaft. Now touching the Conversation with women, all men ought to know
this, that they ought to do them all the honor and reverence possible, and
that Romulus made a law whereby he ordained, that in assemblies men should
always set women above them. And though every man for the most part
addresseth his service to some one above the rest, and makes her the star by
whose aspect he does direct all his doings, yet we must not cease to show
duty and reverence to all: and to show our selves both in deeds and words
desirous of their good will and favor: taking heed how we say or do any
thing at any time to their shame and reproach. For there is nothing that does
more dishonor and defame a man then that: whereby he not only loses his
reputation, but also (being in the disfavor of women) is deprived of that
contentation, which otherwise he should receive in their company. Wherefore
it is best for a man always to imploye his tongue to their praise, never
discommending them either openly or secretly, either upon spite or in a rage,
or upon what occasion soever.


Guaz. I think nothing in the world more difficult then to take from women an
evil opinion, which they have once conceived against a man.


Annib. You know they are easy to admit an accusation against a man, but hard
to remit his offense. And as nothing makes them stomach us more then to
dispraise them, so there is nothing makes them fancy us more, then to
commend them. And for that cause, I have known many women which bore more
favor to the professors of learning and Poetry, then to any other.
Furthermore, he that frequenteth the company of women, must not enter into
strife, and contention with them, or seek too get the better in reasoning with
them. For by such overthwart and obstinate dealing, there is nothing gotten at
their hands, but ill will. Therefore it is ever better rather to sooth them,
then thwart them in their sayings. But I will end this matter, concluding
that a man cannot do amiss, so that he honor, serve, and obey them, and
omit nothing that may admit him into their favor. On the other side, women
ought to consider that men will not be so ready to do them honor, if in
Conversation they behave not them selves modestly, according to their calling
and kind: and dispose not their dooinges in such sort, that men may like and
think well of them. To bring which to pass, they are chiefly to take heed
of one fault which many of them hardly reframe from, that is, from talking
too much.


Guaz. Do not you know the Proverb, that three women make a mereat?


Anniball. I know also that it is commonly said, That where is least heart,
is most tongue. And therefore silence in a woman is greatly commended: for it
sets her forth much, and makes her thought to be very wise. Yea, she
must not only have regard to keep her tongue, but besides to accompany her
words, her laughter, her looks and behavior, with such a grave and stately
majesty, as besemeth a matron, which I say, because there are in the world
diverse women both honest, virtuous, and witty, who carry the name of matrones,
and yet in their outward behavior, they show them selves foolish, riggishe,
and retchles. There are other some of them, who being good elderly women, use
themselves like young wanton gyrles, and being women, behave themselves as
boldly as men: whereby they much diminishe their credit and reputation.
Moreover, there are some, who coveting to be counted unreasonable honest,
frown so ill fauouredly, and set such a solemn and sour countenance on the
matter, that they make men think them rather proud then honest: and in steed
of being well thought of, they make themselves ill liked of. Yea, and by that
coy cloud, the bright shining of their beauty and virtue is ouercast.


Guaz. Thereupon the Poet said.

That in a proper piece many good parts are hid
by curious niceness, which to none as yet good ever did.
And surely, they are much deceived in their reckoning, which think to be
thought more honest, by using dainty coyness. For they consider not how
bounty and courtesy are nothing repugnant to honesty, but rather always
accompany it.


Annib. I might here well speak of many women of our city, who by the
lowelinesse of their looks, the comeliness of their persons, the sweetness
of their words, the quickenes of their capacity, the modesty of their
behavior, and decency of manners, make men greatly delighted in their company.
But for that the time would fail me to speak, namely and sufficiently of them
all, and that the worthiness of some of them is so great, that without suspicion
of envying their perfection, I cannot with silence ouerpasse it, I am minded to
present one unto you (without naming her) upon whom all the graces and
perfections that may be, are abundantly bestowed.


Guaz. She has great cause to stand upon her pan^osles, and to think her
half penny better silver then other women's.


Annib. If she should do so, she should loose much of that honor and
reputation she has: for that which chiefly makes men have her in admiration
is, that notwithstanding the surpassing excellency, which is in her, she
makes no more account of her self then other women do: and seems to show,
that she does not know what good parts are in her. So that by this discrete
humility, she is exalted to higher dignity, and men have her in the more
honor. I say then that this Lady in conversation is singular, and meruellous:
for of all the noble parts in her, you shall see her make a most delightful
harmony. For first, to the grauenesse of her words, agrees the sweetness of
her voice, and the honesty of her meaning: so that the minds of the hearers
entangled in those three nets, feel themselves at one instant to be both
moved with her amiablenesse, and brideled by her honesty. Next, her talk and
discourses are so delightful, that you will only then begin to be sorry,
when she ends to speak: and wish that she would be no more weary to
speak, then you are to hear. Yea, she frames her iestures so discretely,
that in speaking, she seems to hold her peace, and in holding her peace, to
speak. Moreover, when she knows a matter perfectly, and discourses of it
discretely, to the great commendation of her wit, yet she will seem to
speak of it very doubtfully, to show her great modesty. She will also in
talk cast often times upon a man such a sweet smyle, that it were enough to
bring him into a fools Paradise, but that her very countenance contains such
continency in it, as is sufficient to cut of all fond hope. And yet she is so
far from solemn looks, and distributeth the treasure of her graces, so
discretely and so indifferently, that no man departs from her discontented.
Yet for all that, you must not think that she is over prodigal of her
courtesy. For I can assure you this, she wins more hearts even with very
slender rewards, then other women do with the greatest favors they can
possibly show, And though she give good countenance to all, yet she
beholds them most graciously, and who bestow their time in learning, or
otherwise most commendably: in whose company she takes singular pleasure,
which is a manifest sign of her virtuous disposition. But see the great
wrong, which envious fortune does to noble minds, in not extolling her to
the state and power of a Princes, that she might be able as well to prefer
and bring the virtuous to promotion, as she does now honor them, by bearing
them singular affection. I cannot sufficientlye set forth unto you the graces
and perfections of this most perfect piece, but for conclusion I will say, that
she may well be set for an example, whereto other women ought to conform
them selves, to be acceptable and well thought of in the company they shall
come in.


Guaz. If I be not much deceived, I know who it is you speak of, and of
whom you make this honorable report.


Annib. I spoke but of one, and yet if all the women of this City should hear
it, I am persuaded every one would think her self to be the woman I meant.
But you may as well be deceived in gessing of whom I spoke* as I may in
reading whom you mean. Therefore let us speak no more of it, but let each of
us be content to keep his thought secret.


Guaz. With a good will: But for so much as you have set down orders to the
conversation of women, and have produced so rare, and so high an example, I am
partly in doubt whether it be good for men continually to use this
conversation, and therefore I think good you limite in what manner, and to
what end we^ ought to use it.


Annib. With all my heart, for by that means you give me ocasion to set
convenient bounds to the conversation of women. I say then that there are two
sorts of leisure, the one evil, the other honest. I call that evil, which
proceeds of a base mind, and which withdraws a man from watching, from
study, from travel, and from all commendable actions: which is only proper to
those, who are good for nothing, who fear the Sun and the rain, and which
apply themselves to vain devises, and to the sacrifice and service of Venus
and Bacchus.


Guaz. A brother of my taylour, which brought me home some apparel this
morning, takes it otherwise* for talking with me of his affairs, he told
me, that he has four brothers, whereof three lived by their labor, as he
did, but the other would not work a stich, but goes loytering up and down
all day long, saying, That four knaves may well maintain and keep one honest
man: meaning that to work, belongs to slaves, but to be idle, to honest
men. Now judge you how many honest men there are by that rekoning, who are
always bu^ied in taking their ease.


Annib. Those same may well say, they have received their hyre: for seeing they
enjoy the pleasure of being idle, they must not look to receive the reward of
virtue. But think not yet, that though their bodies be at ease that their
minds are at quiet: for they are thereby the more occupied, yea, and eaten as
it were with the rust of idleness: and not knowing how to use leisure as they
ought to do, they are more grieved with doing nothing, then others with
laboring hard. And this idleness is not only the cause of vain and
lascivious thoughts, but also of wicked and dishonest deeds. Whereupon Cato
used to say, That those which did nothing, learned to do ill. Besides that
they are odious to the world, yea, and to God also, who is highly displeased,
when a naughty pack or an idle merchant craves his aid and assistaunce. *
For you know how he cursed the Fig tree which was without fruit. *
Wherefore all those which delight to do nothing, ought to know that there is
nothing procures more infamy to a man, then idleness and effe^^natenesse.
And if it be unseemly for the ignorant to pass the time idle, much more are
they to be blamed who are learned. For it is a common saying, that he is in
great fault, which knows what is good and does it not: and that he does
much ill, who knows no good. But for that I have neither mind nor leisure
to speak of these idle fellows, I will now speak of honest leisure, which
belongs to honest men: and I say that all affairs bring with them pain and
travel, by reason whereof it is requisite to take in time and place, for
medicine, rest, and recreation, which are so necessary to our life, that
without them we cannot long continue. And therefore* it is both reasonable and
necessary for a man, sometimes to repose himself, and withdraw his mind from
weighty and earnest cogitations, by the example of the invincible Hercules,
who for recreation sake used sometime too play with his little children.
Finally, our life is like to instruments of music, which sometime wresting
up the stringes, and sometime by loosing them, become more melodious. And if
we mark well the end of the public and solemn plays, which Princes in
old time caused to be set forth, we shall know that they did it not so
much to get themselves a good name amongst the people, as to recreate and
refreshe men after their trauelles: that after such shows they might return
more willingly, and cheerfully to their work.


Guaz. I know by experience, that there is nothing does more wear me out,
nor as they say make the bombaste of my ^ublet so thin as continual
affairs. And if I be molested with mine own private matters, you may well
think that I am not only molested, but even altogether mortified with my
masters business, which to dispatch to my credit, and as duty binds me,
makes me (as you may well think) often carry a pensive heart within my breast:
Being a^sured that I had by this time left my skin on the hedge, were it not
that otherwhiles I force my self to use some recreation and honest pastime.


Annib. Though this leisure be honest, profitable, and necessary, yet there is
a certain measure to be kept in it, which we must not exceed: For that
nature has not made us for play and pleasure, but rather to spend our time in
the study and execution of grave matters.


Guaz. You mean then to ^et before me this leisure, not as meat to feed
me, but as a sallade to get me a stomach, or else as some confect to close up
my stomach: and you allow only so much leisure as is sufficient to recreate
a man, and to renew his strength after travel: meaning, that we should play
to live, and live to play.


Annib. My meaning is even so: for he that should wallowe continually in
pleasures and delights, remaining always idle without doing any thing, would
soon become intemperate and lascivious. Thereof it comes, that in old time
were set down the exercise of wrestling and Music, for the two strongest
pillars, to stay up our life by. For as the one makes a man strong and fierce,
so the other makes him mild and gentle: But both together serve both the
body and mind to much purpose. Seeing then that in the conversation with
women is chiefly found this honest leisure, which serves to comfort, yea, and
to take from us the grievous passions which oppress our hearts, we must take
heed that we be not so wrapped in it, that we never come out of it, least
thereby we distemper the mind, and effeminate* it in such sort, that it
loose that courage which is proper to man. And therefore we must use that
pleasure and recreation not for ordinary food, but for some extraordinary
preservative, or some exquisite restoritie, remembering that old saying, that
we must taste honey but with our fingers end: * yea, we must deal so warily
in the matter, that it may be said that we have been in the very jaws of
Scilla, and drunk of Cyrces cup, and yet have escaped ^^th drowning and
trans^ourming *.


Guaz. Though this honest leisure (as you say) serve to take away the care of
the mind, yet it is so that often times in discourse (which is caused by this
leisure) the mind is void of travel. For a man must whet his wits in such
sort, that in steed of taking his ease, he sometime takes more pain then
when he is waightily affaired.


Annib. I think there is no honest leisure, but has some exercise of the
mind or of the body joined unto it. For the wise holds opinion, that to
enjoy leisure well, it is necessary that we employ it in learning somewhat.
And therefore you see that though music has been invented for the pleasure
and recreation of the mind, yet it is not learned by chance, but by science,
about which a man must travel his mind, like as at Chestes or other such
games. Contrariwise, it is our use when we have spent a great part of the day
either in study or about public or private affairs, to walk either alone,
or with company the space of an hour^ upon pleasure. And though we exercise
the body in going, and the mind in devising, yet all that time is attributed
to leisure and recreation: for that it is chiefly bestowed to the end to
withdraw the mind from weighty affairs, and careful thoughts.


Guaz. You make me here remember our peasants of the country, who having
labored sore all the week, spend the sunday in daunsing out of al cry: in so
much that saving your reverence, they stink of swet, and take more pain that
day only, then they do in all the work days besides. And yet according to
your opinion it must be called leisure or passetyme.


Annib. It can not be termed otherwise: for albeit they exercise the body less
in working then in daunsing, yet they do the one with pain and grief, and
the other with so great pleasure, that it makes them the next day after go to
their work a great deal more lustily. And if you mean nothing else, I
confess that I my self am in that respect of the nature of those Country
fellows, for being weeried with the continual exercise, I use all the day,
sometime on foot, sometime on horseback, to see my patients, in the evening,
in way of pastime and recreation, I often walk with your brother, or others,
almost half a mile out of the town: and in this pain I find great ease and
refreshing to my mind that is weeried with the travel of the day. Whereby you
understand that all the time which is chiefly spent for pleasure, ought too
go under the name of leisure, though there be in it some exercise either of
mind or body. It is very true, that this leisure loses it name, when it is
turned into continual exercise without doing ought else, so that a man cannot
properly term leisure or pastime, the exercise of a Musician, who all the day
long does nothing but teach some or other to sing, or to play on some
instruments. In which respect belike Phillip king of Macedon rebuked his
son Alexander, for that he was so skillful in Music, not that he misliked
music, but because his son was so exquisite in it, that he doubted it was
his chief profession, neglecting other things more necessary to his estate:
which was not unlike to the doing of the Emperor Domitian, who put from being
of his counsel a Noble man, because he daunced too artificially. Wherefore
we may gather hereby, that we ought not in passing the time to loose the
time: but to limite this leisure in such sort, that we take no more of it then
is necessary for the recreation of our minds.


Guaz. I am of opinion, that amongst many pasttimes and pleasures, whereby
men's minds are recreated, there is none more to be accounted of, then that
which is taken in feasts and banquets: I mean not the sumptuous and solemn
ones, but the friendly and familiar, which are set forth by a Poet, for the
things most apperteining to the felicity of man's life.


Annib. As solemn feasts are full of noise and confusion, so the other are
full of quiet and friendship. And as the first by the diversity and delicacie
of fare, provoke me^ to the pleasure and filling of the body, so the other with
sobriety, and the good company of only friends together, works the solace and
recreation of the mind.


Guaz. I can not but often commend that most ciuil^ custom of France, where
the parents, friends, and neighbors agree together, to bring every one their
ordinary provision, as soon into the house of one, as soon of another, where
without great cost, and yet with great variety of meat, and diversely dressed,
leaving all their pensive thoughts without the door, they suppe merrily,
lovingly, and friendly together.


Annib. That good custom is no doubt greatly to be commended: for if
sometimes in trauayling by the way, it greatly refreshes us, when at our inn
we meet with good company (though strangers unto us) with whom we may talk
and be merry at the table, you may soon guess how much more good it does us,
when we are in the company of our kinsfolks and friends.


Guazzo. I think that in this kind of conversation also, there are some
orders and laws to be prescribed, therefore I look you should make mention
thereof.


Annib. Many excellent writers have set down many orders to be observed in
feasts, but the chief are these, that the feast always ought to begin at the
Graces, and end at the Muses: that is, that the number of the guests be not
under three, nor above nine: that they be neither too talkatiue, nor too dumb:
that no man take all the talk to himself, a thing very unseemly, for all ought
to be partakers as well of the talk, as they are of the wine. That the
discourse be pleasant, and of such matters as men have no leisure to talk of
abroad while they are about their business: joining (if it may be) pleasure
with profit. That the talk, specially amongst women, be not doubtful, hard*
and intricate: whereby even amongst men, the hearers are made melancholic by
beating their brains to understand it. And thereupon it is said, that a
certain Orator being requested at a table to speak of eloquence, answered,
Those things which are fit for (...)


to satisfy a new friend, wherein I greatly commend your wit, and give you
most hearty thanks for it, desiring you to inriche my poor understanding, with
the treasure of your gentle and learned discourses: that you may have just
cause to continue your good opinion of me, and I may be made worthy of the
praise you give me, in esteeming me more then all the magnificence of Genes.


Annib. If it be so that your virtue receive increase by my discourses, it is
so also that my discourses are much bettered by your witty demaundes: but to
return to our matter, we have to entreat this day (according to our
yesterdayes determination) of the domestical conversation, that is to say,
within the house, which we will likewise reduce to those two special points,
of speech, and of behavior: for I must tell you, that I mean not in this
days discourse to set down how a man should well govern a house, nor how a
master of a house ought to provide for things, appertayning to food, to
apparel, to his profits, to his expenses, to buildinges, to tilling of his
ground, and to the saving of his goods: but I mean to speak of the particular
points which they of one household ought to observe in conversation one with an
other. And to come to the matter, I say that for the most part the domestical
conversation happens either between the Husband and the Wife, the Father and
the Son, the Brother and the Brother, or the Master and the Servant: and of
these four points shall our discourse consist.


Guaz. I think this division ought to have been more large: for seeing in
families there are the Uncle and the Nephew, the Father in law and the Son in
law, the step Mother, and the step Daughter, the Coosins and Allies, me
thinks that division is not great enough.


Annib. As under the name of Father and Son, I have comprehended Mother and
Daughter, under the name of Brothers, Sisters, and of Masters and man,
Mistreis and maid, so I include the Uncle, the Father in Law, and the Tutour,
in the name of Father: and the Son in law, the Daughter in law, and the
Pupil, in the name of Sons: and the Coosins and Allies, in the name of
Brothers: so that in my opinion, the division before made, is not defectuous,
neither requires any addition of things superfluous. And for so much as the
chief conversation comes by mean of marriage, for that Cities cannot be
without families, nor families without Husband and Wife, let us enter into the
field, and begin with the conversation of the married, seeing the cheifest
honor is due unto it, not only for that it is first in order, but also for
that there is no conversation more agreeable to nature, then that of the male
and female.


Guaz. Though our chief purpose be to speak of the conversation between the
husband and the wife, yet I think it were not amiss that you should first give
some good instructions to him that means to marry.


Annib. Your advise likes me well, and it may be that that speech shall have
force to stir up in our hearts a desire to marry.


Guaz. I have heard say that there comes some time upon us by chance a
desire or appetite, which you Physicians call disordinate, to which you forbid
meat: if then that appetite of marying a wife shall chance to come upon me,
for my part I mean to satisfy it by no other mean then by abstinence:
calling to my remembrance the great commendation a Philosopher gave to those
that had a great desire to sail, and yet would never hazard themselves on the
sea: to govern common wealths, and yet would never meddle with it: to marry
a wife, and yet would never marry any. * Or I think it good to do in that
point as one did, who being earnestly solicited by his mother to take a wife,
answered her, that it was not yet time: and being a few months after
importuned by her in the same matter, he answered that now the time was past. *


Annib. There are some men so dainty and delicate, that they know not what
they will themselves, but mislike of every state of life: but you know that a
wise and stayde man frames himself cherefully many kind of life, and
specially forgets not this sentence, That it is an execrable thing wilfully
to deprive ones self of immortality, which he does who seeks not to have
wife and children: mary I say not for all that, that it behooves every man to
have a wife by his side, but rather I forbid it to many persons: for I say
unto you, that many occasions offer themselves, whereby the devil, enemy to
our quiet, puts himself between the husband and the wife, and not only
makes the marriage to have unhappy success, but besides, thereby brings many
houses and families to ruin and decay.


Guaz. I would gladly hear what those occasions are.


Annib. He that would make narrow search for them, might find inow of them: but
I remember three of the chiefest, which are not to be concealed in this
discourse. The first is, inequality between the married couple, either in
years, or in calling: whereof arise so many quarrels and inconuenie^ces, yt I
think it most necessary that the parties be equal.


Guaz. Touching the difference in years, me thinks it is an unseemly thing,
to see a young woman matched with a man that carries the countenance rather to
be her father than her husband, and I am persuaded, that young dainty damsels go
as willinglye to such husbands, as they would do to their graves. For they
are sure to become wydowes in their husbands life time: besides that, they
which have been so matched know, how troublesome an old husband is to a young
wife: yea and which is worst of al, the poor souls are in this hard plight,
that what honesty so ever be in them, or what modesty so ever be in their
behavior, yet men will not stick to mutter that they are lewd and light, only
by reason of their husbands white bearde. And I know not which I may count
greater, of the jealousy which is entered into the husband, or of the suspicion
which is given by the wife.


Annib. Consider I pray you, on the other side, the goodlye name which
wrinkled and toothlesse women get in taking to husbands young and beardlesse
boys, and tell me whether the rage of those women be not greater then the hard
fortune of the other: but to make short, there can be no agreemente between
such contrarieties. And as Venus and Saturn are at continual war the one
with the other, so the old coupled with the young, never agree together. The
like happens in marriages which are not equal in calling and condition: for
so long as the one shall be nobly minded, and the other basely given, there can
be no consent of minds, nor agreement in good will, but continual strife and
debate. Now to the former occasion of unhappiness in marriage, I will ad the
second, which is, when the marriage is made against the will and liking of the
parties: whereof I have seen great inconvenience to grow, to the shame,
reproach, and to late repentance of the makers of such marriages: but this
disliking is for the most part on the woman's side, without whose knowledge the
marriages are talked of, and concluded, and the dowry told and paid: yea they
are often conveyed to their husbands into strange countries among barbarous
people, before they have any inkeling of the matter, by means whereof the
miserable wretches, fearing the commandment and rigor of their parents, are
many times enforced to do against their mind, and to accept with their mouth
that which they refuse with their heart.


Guaz. In France there happen no such disorders, where the maids as well as
the men have free liberty to say yea, or nay, as their fancy serves them.


Annib. But let us come to the third occasyon, which perchance is that which
imports more, and which always brings forth evil effects, which is, when
a man takes a wife without dowry.


Guaz. You have reason: for when these husba^^ yt marry for love only, consider
with themselves how their wives have brought nothing unto them, their love
begins to wax cold, and repenting their folly, they begin to use them not
like wives, but like kitchinstuffes: whereas those that marry rich wives, are
sure still to have somewhat to be in love withal: you see how now adays fair
women without riches find more Lovers then Husbands, and there are few that
take wives for Gods sake, or as the saying is, For their fair looks: for
every man now has his eyes open, neither care they for flesh that has
neither taste nor savor: yea they have always this saying in their mouth.

Bring somewhat with thee,
If that thou mean to live with me.

Annib. I see Sir you take the matter wrong, and that you are far wide of my
meaning.


Guaz. How I pray you?


Annib. For that if a man marrying a poor wife, make a drudge of her, a Woman
likewise marrying a poor Husband, makes a slave of him, so that, that
comes all to one reconing.


Guaz. Your meaning is then that a man should take a Wife neither richer nor
poorer then himself, but equal in both and that he should not take for dowrye
that which is more or less.


Annib. Yet you understand me not, for that you take for dowry told money.


Guaz. Why, you know that by dowry is meant the money and the riches that a
woman is possessed withal, and so ye great lawmaker Licurgus understood it,
when he made a special law, that maids should bring no dowries to their
husbands, and if you take it not so, me thinks (under your correction) you
take it too straungely, and too obstinately.


Annib. Licurgus gave that Law to a people composed of the learned, and of the
ignorant, by reason whereof it stood^ him upon to speak that every man might
understand him: but I talk with you, who by the deepenesse of your
understanding, can reach to the knowledge of the dowry which passes all
other dowries, wherewith you are so plentifullye endowed, that if you were a
Woman, you would greatly inriche your husband.


Guaz. I feel my self now pleasantly ridden upon by you: and I see well, that
you speak of the dowry of the mind.


Annib. The same Licurgus being askte why he would have men take wives without
dowries: answered wisely, that he did it to the intent that none should be
rejected in respect of their pouertye, nor none chosen in respect of their
riches: but for that we live in a time, far differente from those times, I
think it not amiss to take a mean dowrye to help bear the charges incident
to marriage, and to maintain himself in that view which belongs to his
calling. But I would not have a man do as two old men of this city did, who
treating a marriage between the Son of the one, and the Daughter of the
other, have stayde this five years about a matter of a hundredth Crowns
before they will conclude it, giving the world plainly to understand, that
they set more by the money, then by the affinity. And therefore it were
better to keep a mean, and to marry one neither too rich nor too poor, for
the over poor, brings into her husbands house necessity, and the over rich
seruilitie. * And as he is termed most unfortunate, who weddeth a poor wife,
so it is a common ^aying, That where enters in the rich dowrye, there goes
out the free liberty. * But returning from whence I began: we must take
heed, that in taking a Wife, fond Fancye be not our guide, and that we be
not carried away, either with riches, or bewty, without virtue. Women likewise
ought to have the same consideration, who are often surprised with an outward
appearance, desiring for husbands, those who like Cipres trees are high and
fair, but bear no fruit.


Guaz. Seeing you allow of dowry to support the charge of marriage, I think you
will not disalow of the bewty of the wife, for the contentment of the husband.


Annib. Albeit she be sufficiently fair, which is furnished with the bewty of
the mind: yet I would be loath to have for a companyon, for so long a time,
one that is deformed, for that our nature abhors things foul and monstrous:
besides yt, an ill favored face is often times taken for a token of il favored
conditions, and it sildome falls out, yt a good mind is lodged in a misshapen
body. And if there be any, which having viewed their own deformity in a glass,
have by virtue and good qualities supplied the default of nature, though ye
wise will account the^ for bewtiful and perfectly shaped, yet ye vulgar sort
will count them but counterfaite. I remember a pretty jest of a Gentleman of
great countenance, marye of a very ill countenance, and evil favored face,
who being invited to supper by a Gentleman of his acquaintance, went thither
alone somewhat before supper time, but the mistrisse of the house thinking he
had been a servant sent before by his Master, having set her own servants
about other business, prayed my Gentleman to clean some wood: which he set
himself about very diligently. Now the Gentleman that had invited him,
coming in the mean while, asked him what he did. To whom he answered with a
merry countenance, that he bore the pain of his deformity: Whereby you see
how the evil fauourednesse of persons diminishes their dignity. And as I
would not willinglye have an ill favored wife, so neither would I have one
that were sickly, or not likely to bring forth perfect and goodlye children,
the which the more fair and well proportioned they are, the more amible they
are, the more fit for any enterprise, and the more capable of dignities and
promotions: and thereupon the Poet Mantuan promises by the mouth of Juno, a
fair Nimphe in marriage to the King of the Wyndes, whereby he may become the
Father of a goodly offspring.


Guaz. I think verily those husbands are most unfortunate which are troubled
with foul ill favored wives, if it were but in their dreams only: And I know
not which is worse, to have a pore wife, or a foul one.


Annib. You shall then know it, when you shall know which is worst, to fare
ill, or to s^eepe ill.


Guaz. It is very true that the evil of a poor wife is in a manner curelesse,
whereas the inconvenience of a foul wife may be some way redressed.


Annib. And which way?


Guaz. Mary by providing for himself a pretty wenche in his house, and to do
as one said, I know not who: If that thy wife be foul, and that thy maid be
fair,
To have thy wife let thee suffice, thy maiden never spare.



Annib. That saying comes from a wanton Author, and is rather to be
reproved then followed: as there was a Gentleman of this Country, who would
in no wise follow it, whose hap was to have a wife of great stature, with a
pretty long beard on her chinne, and so monstrous a creature every way, that it
was doubtful whether she were a woman or a tiger: and to make it short, she
was such a one, that he which should deal with her, should rather do penance
then commit offense: well, she passing along the street, in the company of
some fine dames, certain Gentlemen strangers stayed to view her, laughing and
wondering at her: and as her husband by chance passed by, one of them asked
him what she was: who poor man shrinking in his neck, said he knew her not.


Guaz. He might well say he had more wife then he needed.


Annib. Yet he had not more then he loved, for he used her well, and would
follow none of that corrupt counsel you aleaged but now.


Guaz. You tell me of the great goodness of a husband, and of the great
happiness of a wife, but I think if he do not loathe her, yet at least he
does by her as men do by things they make dear account of, which is, to
keep them very carefully, and never to use them but in great necessity: not
loving (as the proverb is) to be dronken with their own wine.


Annib. Well, how dear so ever she is unto him, he may be sure she shall not
be taken from him: but let us fall from the foul to the fair.


Guaz. And a man cannot securely keep them, for every one will be catching at
them. I remember that a Gentleman sent a Paynter to a very fair woman's
house, to draw her Picture, but her Husband coming in the mean while,
hindered his work, and drove him forth of doors, saying that perhaps the
Gentleman which sent him, after he had the Copye, would seek to have the
original also, but in comparison between the fair and the foul, I say for
my part that it is less grief to be hanged on a fair pair of gallows.


Annib. It is yet an ordinary saying, That he yt has a white Horse, and a
fair woman, is never without trouble: whereto may be added this saying: Haste
thou taken one fair? to thine own care. And you have often heard reported of
diverse women, whose singular bewty has brought their husbands to destruction:
besides, we must remember how for the most part pride and bewtye go
together: and that the wife of Herod though she were sober and chaste, yet by
knowing the excellency of her own bewty, she became marvelous proud and
arrogant.


Guaz. The Poet showed that, saying: Her beauty is so euenly matched with pride,
That pleasing others clean she set aside.



Annib. Ad hereto that bewty breeds temptation, temptation dishonor: for it
is a matter almost impossible, and sieldome seen, that those two great
enemies, bewty, and honesty agree together. And hardly may a man assure himself
of those things, which almost every man sigheth for, and sueth for: some
assaulting them with their proper personages, some with their good wit, some with
eloquence in words, some with magnificence in deeds. And though it fall out
often that bewty and honesty are joined together, yet it falls out sieldome,
but that exquisite bewty is had in suspicion: whereby the renown of the
Husband and Wife is but sinisterly judged of. I leave here to speak of the
Wars and destructions of diverse people and countries, happening only by the
peerless beauty of some women: and it shall suffice to conclude, that there
is nothing in the world which causes greater discord and trouble, then a
woman when she is desired of diverse men.


Guaz. If then a man can take neither fair nor foul, with out inconvenience,
it is best to meddle with none at all.


Annib. Yes you must take one that is neither fair nor foul. It is long since
that I learned that the perfection of the body consists in the mean, so that
it be neither too strong nor too bewtifull, neither to weak, nor to deformed:
for the one makes folk audacious and proud, the other low and base minded.
And therefore mean bewty is highly commended, and becomes a woman best:
Whereas the extremity of fairness or foulness is much misliked, for that
the one tormenteth, the other lotheth: breefely, the bewty, gestures, and
countenances of a woman, ought to be such, yt most men may like of them: for
thereby their husbands will be stirred up to love them, and bridled from loving
others besides the^: but if they be not amiable in other men's eyes, surely
their husbands will never make great account of them: for a man cares not to
possess yt thing, which no man coueteth to have.


Guaz. But what think you of those which floorish up the^ selves by art,
saying they do it to please their husbands?


Annib. But do you think that it is so?


Guaz. I think the gorgious apparel they put on when they go abroad, is
rather to please those which are abroad, then the husband that is at home.


Annib. We ought to think also, that those which use artificial means,
displease God much, in altring his image, and please men never a whit, in going
about to deceive them. I know no man of judgment, but sets more, by ods, by
a natural bewty that shows but meanly, then by a painted artificial bewty
that shines most gallantly: And I would wish those dawbed, pargetted, and
vermilion died faces, to consider what scoffs and mocks, men when they are by
themselves, give to those bolstred bewties, which are ever accompanied with two
false persuasions: the one, that they think themselves made bewtiful by the
force of those artificial colors: not knowing, as a Poet says, That painting
could not Hecube Helene make:
The other, yt they think those which look on the^, to take that painting for a
natural color: For I knew one once inueigh earnestly against counterfaite
women, not perceiving poor fool her own purple died face, whereas some of the
coolours stacke upon her gorget: but such women would be tried in such sort
as a great many were once by an honest Matrone: who at a feast making one at a
game wherein every one by turns commands over all the rest, being come to
her turn, she caused a basen with water to be brought, wherewith she forthwith
washed her hands and face, commanding all the rest to do as much, whereby a
great many of them with grief and shame made ye painting run down along their
cheeks. I know also a young woman, whose face two months since was like a
coliers, and now she ietteth up and down so bewhited, or rather so bepainted,
that she seems quight another woman: yet when she wrieth her head a little,
there appears such blackness in her neck and throat, so different from her
face, that you would verily think it were a Fleminges head set upon a Moors
neck.


Guaz. Belike yt pore woman knows not that the payntinges of the face
described in the secrets of Alexis, will serve also for the neck and throat.


Annib. If such vanities be to be borne withal in women, yet the gross folly
of some husbands is by no means to be pardoned, for some seeing ye paintings
of their wives, allow of it, persuading themselves that it is done to please
them, and they on ye other side to please their wives, will set ye cap awry
after the cuttingest manner: some husbands also find much fault with those
women that love not to curle up their hear roistingly, but use to kembe it
down smoothely, swearing by no beggars, that if their wife should use it, they
would wind her neck behind her, like a chicken. I know not which of these two
sorts are the veriest fools, the one for liking that which is evil, the
other for disliking that which is good.


Guaz. In truth I cannot think well of such women, and I make account that as
their colors are faygned, so also is their heart and affection, so that there
is not to be looked for at their hands any pure or faithful good will. It is
to be thought that love being naked, loves none of this counterfayte
disguising, whereupon our Gentle Tuscane, to nippe those women which are
curious in such follies, and to give a singular commendation to madame Laure,
terms her bewty natural.


Annib. We will maintain then, that a woman taking away and changing ye
coolour and complexion which God has given her, takes unto her that which
belongs to a harlot. And as yt which is natural is the work of God, so yt
which is counterfaite, is the doing of the devil: yet I must say, that this art
is not so generally to be condemned, but that it is in some cases to be
tolerated: for if it be permitted to a man to seek remedy to take away some
wart, moale, spot, or such like disgrace coming by chance: by much more
reason ought it to be allowed to a woman, to correct by art any imperfection,
either natural or casual, appearing in her face. Wherefore we will allow it
lawful for a woman to redress any thing yt is amiss about her by art, so yt she
be necessarily driven thereto, either by some indisposition of her body, or for
the conservation of her femenine state: provided it be done so slightly, and so
discretely, that the artificial dealing be not seen, or being seen, that it
be not misliked. And for so much as we are agreed that a wife is to be chosen
neither to fair nor to foul, it is best we pass farther, and from henceforth
indowe a Wife with that dowrye which may make the marriage firm and sure.
First, we are to reprove the abuse of men, who in choosing a Wife, use no
other order then they do in buying a Horse, for the buyer will be sure to
prye into every part, whether he be sound of wind, and limme, whether he
be without crack or flawe, whether he be young, and of good stature, whether he
be well paced, and have those outward marks which betoken a good Horse. I
deny not, but by the looks of a Woman, a man may gather somewhat of her
disposition, but seeing God has commanded us not to judge by the face, we must
use a more certain and commodious way.


Guaz. I have always liked of those marriages which are treated of freely,
without hiding any thing, which after coming to light, brings grief and
repentance to one of ye parties: but neither men nor women use that order,
indeuouring so much as they may, to cover their faults, as well of ye body as
the mind: by the example of the painter, who being to draw a one eyed
Gentleman, would not draw his whole fate, but represented him in such sort
that the defectuous part was not perceived.


Annib. The Philosopher Crates did not so, who being requested in marriage by a
virtuous and honest woman, went before her, and thinking to himself that she
was ignorante that he was crooked backed, lame, and poor, he put me of his
cloak, and laid it down by his staff and his wallet, and after protested
unto her, that his wealth and his bewty was even such as she saw, and that she
should consider well of it, that she might not after have cause to repent her
bargayne: but she for all this, accepted the party, saying that she could not
possibly have a husband more rich or bewtifull then him.


Guaz. Now I pray you go to that point which you promised, whereby husbands
may deal surely in the choice of wives.


Annib. I will show it you by the authority of Olympias the mother of
Alexander, whose saying, worthy to be written in letters of Gold, was: that
women are to be married with the ears, before they are with the eyes, for the
custom of our country, not permitting men to have free access to the houses
where the maids to be married are, not to intertayne them with familier
device, as the fashion in France and other places is, we ought at least to
deal in such sort, that out of the mouth of diverse, constant report may come
to our ears of the parentage, and of the life and behauyour of them: but the
greediness of the world is so great at this day, that men seek diligently
for Asses, Oxen, and Horse, of a good race, but a man cares not though his
wife be ill brought up, and worse borne, so that she be rich enough: but he
that is wise will above all things have a special regard of the conditions
and qualities of his wife, and will note what the life and conversation of her
parents is, and has been, remembering the saying, that the Eagle breeds not
the Pigeon, but that Cat will after kind: And verily it is a very rare matter
to see children tread out of the path of their parents and predecessoures,
yea I am sure you can call to your remembrance families, where are to be
seen by succession in the Nephews and children, the roots of covetousness,
beastliness, foolishness, drunkenness, or such other faults wherewith their
parents before them were spotted, whereby the Proverb is verified, that an
ill bird, lays an ill egg, as on the other side it is sieldome seen that a
good tree brings forth ill fruits.


Guaz. I cannot hold with your opinyon in this, for daily experience shows
that that rule fails often (that I may not say is false always) if you search
the ancient histories, you will in a manner say that nature does not her
part, for you shall find that many virtuous men have been begotten by vile
and foolish fathers: and contrariwise, that many good and wise fathers have
gotten foolish and naughty children. And if we may believe things present, do
we not see and know many very honest women, who have very dishonest harlots to
their daughters? wherefore we may assure our selves that in marriage, fortune
bears more sway then wisdom: and that it suffiseth without being so
curious, to cross ones self, and so to be lead blindfolde to this bargayne.


Annib. The doubt which you have put, no doubt is great, and worthy your wit,
but though it cannot be denied, but that good Parents may sometime have
children of naughty nature, so that (as you say) my rule holds not, yet some
say further, yt it always falls out, that a good Father gets a naughty
child, which agrees with the saying, That the children of Princes and rulers
are sieldome of such perfection as others, and yet they will not have Nature in
the fault, but affirm contrarily, that nature does not her duty, when a wise
Father gets a sun like to himself: founding their opinion upon certain
subtle and Philosophical reasons, which at this time I mean to omit. Now the
case being so, it were good for a man that would marry, to be sure that his
wife come of ill parents, and it were best for wise men to take heed how they
marry, for fear of getting fools to their children: but I take not the matter
to be so, and therefore I answer you and those other, That nature always
tends to the best: so that of good parents, ought naturally to come good
children: and if it fall out sometime otherwise, the fault is not to be imputed
to nature. For if one look advisedly into the matter, he shall see, that for
the most part it happens not by the birth, but by the bringing up: That is
the cause that many gross heads, by continual study become ready witted: and
other who ever in their cradell are found to have a quick wit, in process of
time, either through idleness, or gluttony, or some such misgouernment, become
slow and dull headed. Now from that consideration, I would have you come to
this, that the Father who, through much travail and trouble, both of mind and
body, has gotten wealth and honor, though he gets children of great wit,
yet he is so ouergone in fatherlye affection toward them, that knowing he
has provided for them sufficient to live by at their ease, he cannot abide to
see them travail and labor as he has done: so that, vanquished with a
certain tender affection, he suffers them to be brought up delicatelye, and
wantonly, and is the cause, that by this idleness, their natural force
decays, and by custom and habit, is changed into another nature. Consider
besides, how the children perceiving themselves thus coaxed, and pampered by
their parents, keep themselves, so much as they may, out of the dust and the
sun: neither care to apply their mind to any commendable thing, or to seek
to get more then that living which their parents have left them: not unlike
the crow, which lives only by the food which other Beasts leave. And sure
there is no doubt of it, but that if they were meanly left by their parents,
they would grow to be wise, and sufficient men. And thereof you see, that for
the most part, poor men's children become rich by their own study and
industry, and rich wax poor by their negligence and idleness: which is
signified unto us, by that pleasant wheel which turns up this saying:
Riches breed pride, pride poverty, poverty humility, humility riches, and
riches again pride: We will maintain then for most true, touching generation,
that as a man of men, and of beasts a beast, so of the good for the most part,
is ingendered the good: but the good Father must be admonished that he trust
not so much in the goodness of his nature, that he think that only
sufficient to keep his children good: but beholding them with an eye rather
advised, then pitiful and fatherly, he must seek to better their good nature,
in stirring them up to virtuous deeds, assuring themselves that to ariue to the
perfection of virtue, it is not enough to be well borne, but also to be well
brought up: whereof we will speak by and by in more convenient place. In the
mean while in the choice of a wife we shall not do amiss to be well infourmed
of the honesty of the mother, in hope that the daughter will follow her honest
nature, and conditions, and that we shall have much less pain to keep her in
her goodness, the^ if by the perverse nature of the mother she were naturally
inclined to ill: but it is not enough to know the qualities of the mother, but
we must likewise be privy to the conditions of the Father, for that the
children participate with the nature of both two: and it often falls out,
that they draw some imperfection from the one of them, which the other is
clear void of. And though it be expedient for every man to have a wife that
is well borne, yet I would have Gentlemen especially take heed, yt they match
only with those that come of Gentle blood: for the cauilling of Sophists
against gentry, is vayn, who having no regard to things common, and known
to every man, to wit, that to have a good race, men buy horse and dogs which
come of a good kind, of fruits also they make choice of the best sorts,
will not likewise consider that to a Gentleman the good birth of his wife is
auayleable, for the issue they shall have between them, nor weigh how much it
imports to the children, whether their original be barbarous or otherwise,
wherein like ignorant fellows, they show themselves not to know, that in
generation there are certain secret instincts of virtue and excellency,
communicated by the Parents to the children.


Guaz. I now consider that if it be true that education be another nature, yt
is requisite not only to know whether ones wife be borne of good parents, but
also whether she have been orderly and well brought up: which always
comes not to pass, for that there are some who having but one daughter, ar
so blinded with the extreme love they bear her, that they will not have her
hindered of her will in any thing, but suffer her to live in all wanton pleasure
and delicasy, which afterward is ye cause of many inco^ueniences.


Annib. You are not a whit deceived: yet for all that the husband must not be
discouraged for the too much tenderness of the parents over her: for she
being yet but young, with the help of her good nature, he may easily, like a
tender twig, make her straight if she begin to grow crooked: and with grave
admonitions refourme her wanton mind. Thereby we may gather, that it is better
to marry a young gyrle, then a maid of ripe ye^res, who is hardly brought to
leave her old il tricks, if she have taken any.


Guaz. Yet there are some of a contrary opinyon to yours, who hold it better
to take a wife which is of years of discretion, knowing how to order a house,
then of these infants newly come out of ye ground, whom you must either teach
your self, or else appoint the^ a governor. And truly if any stranger should
come to my house, to whom I would give good entertainment, I should dye for
very shame, if I should he cumbred with one of those simple sottish creatures,
which knows neither how to ask a question, nor how to make an answer, nor
in discourse to show her self a wise and gallant wench, and if she be not
able to perform that, I had rather lock her up, and say she is sick.


Annib. You shall never find young woman so sauory every way that may please
your taste, but that living with you you will change her manners, and frame
her to your own fancy. Touching this point, if we will consider how different
the opynions of husbands are, and how diverse the customs of countries are,
we shall stay too long about yt: for some are so kind hearted, that they
wyshe their wives in any wise to give their freindes entertainment being in
their house, thinking themselves happy to have wives that know how to behave
themselves well in that point: and they are very glad that the world may
know there shines in their house so rare and precious a pearl and i^well:
now some on the other side are of this humor, that they think it a dishonor
that their wives should be skillful in any thing else but in spinning and
sowing: and if any strangers come to their houses, they either run quickly
themselves, or send some of their me^ to give their wives warning to withdraw
themselves: which they do, no otherwise then the chicken does seeing the kyte
coming. Compare the people of Siennna and of the Romans together, and
consider how the Seneses to do the greater honor to strangers in their
houses, make their wives present themselves, as ye most dear thing they have
in the world: contrariwyse the Romans inioyne their wives to so stricte a
life, that they seem to be cloistred Nuns. In this diversity of dealing, I
will not give any determinate judgment: for ye custom of each country is to
be obeyed, which is to be obs^rued as inuiolably as a law: neither would I yt
we should dispute which of ye husbands do best, either they which show their
wives, or they which shut them up when their friends come to their houses: mary
I will say this, that all ye honor and all the blame which may arise either
way, falls not upon ye wives, but upon the husbands: for yt they do no
otherwise then they are commanded to do. But returning to the first point, I
reply, that a very young wife is easy to be framed to the pleasure of her
husband: And though for some time her busbande must be feign to be her
master (as you said) to direct her, yet it does him good to see his precepts
redily followed, and he is proud that he has framed her (as they say) with
his own hand, and to his own heart. And I think it be for nothing else that
it is counted a double pain to marry a wyddowe, but for that she must be
first made to forget the qualityes of her first husband, and then made to
dance after the pipe of the second.


Guaz. Me thinks these second marriages have the taste of Colewortes twice
sodden: being so much the more hurtefull, if both the parties have been twice
married: And thereupon it is reported, that the husband and the wife falling out
as they sat at dinner together, the wife in spite of the husband, gave half
the meat that was upon the Table to a poor body that stood by, saying, I
give it thee for my first husbands sake: now the husband took the other
half, and gave it him, saying, I give thee this for my first Wives sake: and
so they were feign to dyne with dry bread.


Annib. There is a worse inconvenience then this, for that this second marriage
is very prejudicial to the children of the first marriage, which are put to
try the stepmothers crueltye, who receiving any blow or injury of their
husbands, so soon as their backs are turned, revenge themselves upon their
children, and beat them most pitiously, that cannot do withal.


Guaz. He was pretily even with his stepmother, against his will, who throwing
a stone at a dog, hit her: saying, it was not flung altogether in vain.


Annib. I will say unto you also, that as it is better for a man to choose a
young wife, then one in years, so he ought to marry while he himself is young,
and not to stay til his hair wax hoare: for being both young, they are the
likelier to have children, and the likelyer to live to see the bringing up of
them, and in their age to enjoy their service and comfort, what time the
children may do as much for their parents, as their parents did before for
them.


Guaz. If I be not deceived, all this talk is besides the matter: for we have
hitherto spent the time in a discourse, which tends to no other end, but to
teach a man to choose a wife that is young, well borne, well brought up,
reasonable rich, indifferent bewtifull, of a sound and good constitution, and
of a good wit and capacity: but we have not yet spoken a word ^f the manner of
conversation between the husband and the wife, as our purpose was to do.


Annib. I presuppose that to converse kindly with ones wife, it is necessary
first that he be well framed to love her: but for that a man cannot perfectly
love yt which he thoroughlye knows not, it is needful first to learn to
know (as we have done) the good qualities and conditions of ones wife, and
which are the good parts in a woman, whereby men are induced to love them:
likewise it is requisite for the father which loves his daughter, before he
marrye her, to sifte thoroughly the qualities, behavior, and life of his son
in law: for it is a true saying, that he which lyghteth upon a good son
in law, gets a good son: and he that meets with an ill one, casts
away his daughter: now the husband knowing the goodness of his wife, being to
live with her, he must above all things love her most hartelye and
vnfaignedlye: for so the law of God commands. That is the strong foundation
which surely vpholdeth the marriage, and that neglected by the husband,
breeds him great shame and infamye: for not loving that, which he has with
care and diligence gotten, and once judged worthy his love, he manifestly
bewrays himself to be unconstant and fantastical: and that he were fitter
to be matched with Megaera, or some other of the furyes, then with a loving
wife.


Guaz. Wherein does that love chiefly consist?


Annib. In this, that he be jealous of her love.


Guaz. I think you mistake, for a woman had rather have her husband without
love, then with iealousy?


Annib. I speak not of that iealousy which makes the husband doubt of some
false measures in his wife, but of that which makes him afearde to offend any
way on his part: which you shall ye better understand, if you bethink you of ye
iealousy, whereby you keep enclosed in your heart ye secrets of your prince,
fearing continually least by your fault they should be discovered. In like
manner, the husband ought to accompany his love with a continual jealousy
and fear, to loose by his own fault the favor and good will of his wife,
assuring himself that that is the only preserving remedy against that
jealousy which makes the husband look awrye, and which you meant in the
beginning. Neither can he any way give his wife a more assured sign of this
honest jealousy, then in behauing him self toward her, in such sort as he
would she should use her self toward him: which doing, he shall be sure so to
find her.


Guaz. This is very good counsel.


Annib. Be you therefore assured that the greatest part of the faults
committed by the wives, take their beginning of the fault of the husbands: who
for the most part require of their wives an exact observing of the laws of
marriage, but they them selves will make no account of them. For you shall see
some of them, who notwithstanding they have received the company and comfort
of the woman by Gods appointment, yet both in words and deeds they will use
that rigor toward them, and usurp such superiority over them, as is
commonly used toward slaves: And if abroad they have received any injury,
their wives are sure to go to wrack for it when they come home: showing them
selves cowardes toward others, and goodly men toward their poor wives. By
reason whereof, it is no maruayle if being overcome with grief and rage, they
call the devils to help them, and that at that instant some lascivious mates
take occasion to attempt her, and hope to attain her, for that she is then
ready to follow, whatsoever wrath and desperation shall put in her head. But
on the other side, when the wife knows that all the beams of her husbands
love, faith, and loyalty, shine upon her only, holding her more dear then all
other earthly things, you shall see her consume clean away in burning flames
of love, and cast all her care in thinking and doing that which she knows
will please him. And make your account, that a friend loves not so well his
friend, a brother his brother, or a child his father, as a wife does her
husband: Who not only confirms her self to his will, but wholly
transformeth her self into him. Whereof there arises between them on both
sides such assurance of trust, and security of mind, as makes them live in
most contented happiness.


Guaz. That assurance of trust and tranquillity of mind, possesses not the
hearts of all husbands: and I am persuaded, yt there are very few in the
world, which (though they set a good face on the matter) assure themselves of
their wives behavior.


Annib. I believe you: but can you tell me whereof comes that common
distrust that men have in their wives?


Guaz. Perchance of the fragilitie and weakness of the flesh, which is
attributed to most women.


Annib. Nay rather to the weakness of love, which ought to be attributed to
most men. For make your count, that at the gate which suspicion comes in,
love goes out. And if perchance the husband have some occasion given him to
mistrust, let him examine his own life well, and he shall find that the
occasion came by him self, and that he has not used her as he ought to have
done: And if he shall repent him of it, and begin once to regard her as the
one half of him self, and to bear her unfeigned affection, he will begin
also to bannish suspicion, and to perceive that he which loves is beloved, and
that in mutual love reigns inviolable faith.


Guaz. A certain spirit tells me, that this your rule is rather praised
then practiced: For he that would observe it, must let the reine lie too loose
on the woman's neck, and refer the care of her and his own honor, only to
her small discretion: Which you know is not the custom of our country of
Italy, where the women are looked to with most watchful diligence.


Annib. A dishonest woman can not be kept in, and an honest ought not. But
those who take upon them the keeping of their wives honesty, suppose that the
world will judge the better of them for it: For they think that men laugh at
those husbands which give their wives the head too much: and they persuade
them selves, that if they do not keep them short, they keep them not as they
ought to do: besides, they think this with themselves, that the wife seeing
the husband to take no care of her, will imagine that he does not care for her,
making belike his reconing, that no man else will desire her. The other, which
abridge not their wives of their liberty, persuade themselves that, that is the
way to keep their wives honest, alleging this reason, that the wife seeing
the husband make himself master of her honor, is displeased with it, and
takes no more care to keep it: but when her honor is committed to her own
keeping, she is careful and jealous of it, as of that which is her own:
besides that, we naturallye are desirous of things which are forbidden us,
and we know that, She sins less, who has free power to sin:
And in truth she only is to be counted honest in deed, who having liberty to
do amiss, does it not: but to rid us out of the crooked quirkes of these
diverse opinyons, I am of opinion that we must go another way to work.


Guaz. Which way I pray you?


Annib. Do you not often times see, two Porters bear up together one burden?


Guaz. Yes mary.


Annib. The husband and wife, are two bodies, upholding one only mind, and
one honor: so that it behooves either of them, to have care for their part of
this common honor: and to bear it up uprightly, there must such an
indifference measure be kept, that the one have no greater charge then the
other, but that the one leave to the other their just part: taking especial
heed, that neither of them draw this way, or that way: for if one shrink
back any thing, it is enough to lay the carriage in the mire. I say then, yet
once again, that to bear this honor bravely, there is nothing that makes
them better in breath, then to exercise themselves in faithful and fervent
love, which once beginning to fail, either on the one side or the other, this
honor forthwith falls to the ground.


Guaz. It behooves you then to divide this charge between the husband and the
wife, and that you appoint every one their part.


Annib. I will do so. And touching the husband, he must know, that as christ
is the head over man, so man is the head over the woman. And therefore if he
follow his head in leading a Christyan life, in following the steps of our
Savior, and keeping his holy commandments, and cheefely the inviolable
bond of holy Matrimony, no doubt but she will follow her head, as the shadow
does the body, and will take his manners and doings for the law of her life,
and will never forget them: but if the husband once change his coppie and
conditions, let him be bold that she will do the like, and follow the
steps of Helene, who is said to have been chaste, so long as her husband
contented himself with her, and after abandoned herself to others, by his
fault. And if he be a man of any understanding, he may soon consider that
there is nothing does more inuenome, or inrage the wife, then the dishonest
life of her husband: for keeping no faith with her, he must not look that
she should keep promise with him: for as the saying is, He that does not as
he ought, must not look to be done to as he would. And I will say unto
you, that in the judgment of the wise, the Adulterer deserves so much the
more grievous punishment, by how much he ought to surmounte his wife in
virtue, and direct her by his example. Moreover, the husband must consider
what his authority is, and how far it reaches over his wife: for some of
them keep their Wives in such awe, that they obey them not as their Lord and
master, but as a Tyrant, so that converting love into fear, they make the
poor women wearye of their lives, and desirous of ^eath: after which ill
entreating, not without just cause, they verifye the Proverb, When their
husband goes about to make earth of them, they go about to make flesh
without him: for the husband must not persuade himself that he is above his
wife, as the Prince over his Subjects, or the Sheaphearde over his Sheep, but
as the mind over the body: which are linked together by a certain natural
amity: * but rather must consider, that in ye beginning man was not made of
the woman, but the woman of the man, and was taken, not out of the head, that
she should bear rule over man, nor out of the feet, yt she should be trodden
down by him, but out of the side, where is the seat of the heart, to the end
he should love her heartily, and as his own self. * And as, according to the
opinyon of the Astrologers, the sun, which is Lord of the stars, goes not
about the Firmament without the company of Mercury: so the husband, being lord
of the wife, ought not to exercise the authority he has over her, without
the company of wisdom. The husband also must provide to satisfy the honest
desires of his wife, so that neither by necessity, nor superfluity, she be
provoked to dishonor: and he must remember, that both ease and disease, make
women often times unchaste. And for so much as many learned authors have set
down the behauyour of the husband toward the wife, it shall suffice to say,
that to bear uprightly on his side the burden of this common honor, he must
accounte of his wife as his only treasure on earth, and the most precious
Jewel he has: and therefore he must take heed, that by his fault, the
price of her fall not: he must also remember, that there is nothing more due
to the wife, then the faithful, honest, and loving company of the husband:
he must also vouchsafe, in sign of love, to communicate unto her his thoughts
and counsayles: for many have found much profit by following their wives
counsel, yea a man is happy that has a loving wife to impart his good
fortune unto: whose hearty rejoicing at it, redoubleth his joy: and if he
disclose any ill hap unto her, she lightneth his grief, either by comforting
him louinglye, or by helping to bear a part of it patientlye. Now if he
chance to spy any fault in his wife, either in words, gesture, or doings,
he must reprehende her, not reprochefully or angerly, but as one that is
careful of her honor, and what opinyon others carry of her: and this must
be always done secretelye between them two, remembering the saying, That a
man must neither chyde nor play with his wife in the presence of others: for
yt the one bewrays her imperfections, the other his own follye.


Guaz. Surely I cannot like of those which will be still dalying with their
wives before others: for they do thereby set other men's teeth on edge, and
make their wives less shamefaste and modest.


Annib. As that is to be misliked, so is not a sower frowning countenance
toward her to be liked: for it makes others pity the hard life she
leads with him, so much, that they seek the pleasauntest remedies for it
they possibly can. Therefore I would always have them show themselves to
their wives, both in speech and countenance, gentle, and amiable, not making
a i^st at that reason which is alleged, Why some women love their lovers
better then their husbands: which is, that the Lover in the presence of his
Lady, is very curious of his behauyoure, that he use no unseemly gestures,
but will be sure to frame all his countenaunces and doings the most amiablye
that he can possiblye: which the Husband does not, who being daily in
her company, cares not what sluttishe prankes he plays before her, which
no question makes her like the worse of him: wherefore he must think that
his wife being of delicate nature, when she sees any such gross inciuilitie
in him, she does not only abhor it, but also begins to think with
herself, that other men are more discreet and better brought up then he: so
that it stands him upon to be seemly and modest in his doings, least
otherwise he offend the chaste thought of his wife, to whose liking he ought
to confourme himself, in all honest and reasonable things, and to take heed
of every thing which may justly mislike her, whereby he shall purchase to
himself that praise, which the men of old time gave to good husbands,
esteeming them more then good governors of countries.


Guaz. Now let us hear, if it please, you the charge of the wife.


Annib. The wife has two great disauantages in ye maintaining of this common
honor. The first is, yt where Gods law commands the husband to love his
wife, ye same law commands the wife not only to love her spouse, but besides,
to be subject and obedient unto him. And therefore they must be let to
understand that the sage matrones heretofore, and namely Sara, called her
husband Lord and master.


Guaz. Then those have so much the more advantage and good hap, whose husbands
are obedient to them, submitting them selves to their commandment.


Annib. Term that rather mishap and ill luck, for yt such husbands for the
most part are fools, doltes, vices, asses, beasts, and are commonly termed
wittoles, for that they believe so well, yt they make conscience to mistrust any
il, though they see another and their wife in bed together, whereof it comes
that their sily wives, like a body without a head, suffer themselves to go
astraye. And though they be of discretion and good understanding, yet the
world makes no accounte of them: whereas contrariwise, the wisdom, valor,
and authority of the husband, serves as a buckler to defend the honor of
the wife, who thereby also is had in more reputation.


Guaz. Yet you see that women are glad to meet with husbands that are gentle
natured, and a little foolish, that they may keep them under.


Annib. Those which had rather command over fools, then obey the wise, are
like to those, who had rather lead a blind man in the way, then follow an
other, having his sight perfect, and knows the direct way they must take:
but such wives need not make boast of their sufficiencye: for at this day the
race of the Spartane women is worn out, and therefore it is best for them to
be content, to let their husbands wear the breeches.


Guaz. A man may well give women this good counsel, but there be few of them
that will be so good as follow it, and which seek not still for soueraigntye
over their Husbands.


Annib. It is a thing reasonable and agreeable to nature, that the stronger
should command over the weaker, * Yet some women have the right art to order
things so well, that the husbands should be thought to do amiss, if they
should dispose them otherwise: Whereupon Cato was wont to say to the Romans,
We command over all the world, and our wives command over us: Neither is
there any doubt, but that many Rulers over Cities and countries, are over ruled
by their wives: but as those women know how in time and place, to be
obedience to their husbands, * so there are some such restife iades, that they
will not at any time be commanded, and by their importunities, exclamations,
scolding, and brawling, continually withstand their husbands wills, and make
a mock at them, playing with them a thousand shrowed prankes, which caused a
certain King to say, that they were very fools that would follow their wife,
running away from them.


Guaz. You put me in mind of that husband, who, his wife having drowned her
self in a River, went crying along the river side, seeking her against the
stream: and being told that there was no question but that she was gone
downward with the stream: Alas, says he, I cannot think it, for as in her
life time she used to do every thing against the hair, so now in her death
she is surely mounted against the stream.


Annib. We will say then, that the wife, as the weaker vessel, must obey the
husband. And as men ought to observe and keep the laws and statutes of the
country: so women ought to fulfill the commandments of their husbands, by
doing whereof they become the mistresses of the house. I could here allege
diverse virtuous women, who clothing themselves with humility, have caused
their husbands to cast of pride, cruelty, and other notable vices: whereof
some confess they have pardoned their enemies, and drawn back their hands
from doing vengeance, some to have undone unlawful bargaynes, some to have
left swearing, and other vanities, and given themselves to devotion, and the
health of their souls, being persuaded and brought thereto by the earnest and
honest prayers, and by the good example, and humble Christyan life of their
wives.


Guaz. Now you have spoken of the first disaduauntage of the wife: go I pray
you to the second.


Annib. The second is, that albeit she see her Husband shrink under his
burden, and fail in love and loyalty which he owes her, yet she must not
do as he does, but supplye vertuouslye his defaulte: showing to the world,
that for her part, she consents not that this common honor should be
violated, but making account rather that it is her part to bear all the cross
her self: which doing, she shall have double reward of God, and double
praise of the world. Whereby you may gather, that this honor is more
committed to the diligence and fidelitye of the wife, then of the Husband: And
though the Husband offend God as much as the Wife, in vyolating the sacred
band of Matrimony, yet the wife ought fyrmelye to print this in her heart, and
to remember always, that where the husband by this fault does, according to
the opinion of men, but a little blemish his honor, the wife altogether
loses her good name, and remains spotted with such infamye, that she can
never recover her honor again, neither by any repentance, nor by amendmente
of her life: let then a wise woman stop her ears against the inchauntmentes of
those which lie in wait for her chastity, and open her eyes to behold this
sentence, that A woman having lost the name of honest wife,
No more a woman counted is, nor to remain in life.
And to keep more safely her honestye both in deed and in name, let her
avoid, so much as she may, the company of women, that have an ill name: who
endeavor by their naughty fashions and dishonest speeches, to bring others to
do as they do, and wish with all their hearts, that all women were like
themselves: but the wife must know, that to fulfill the law which she is
bound to, it is not sufficient to be honest and innocent in deed, if she
do not likewise avoid all suspicion of dishonesty. And if she look well
into the matter, she shall find small difference (in respect of the world)
between being naught, and being thought naught: Wherefore a discreet
woman will fly all lightness and vanity, and keep herself (as it were out
of the fire) from giving either her husband or any other the least suspicion in
the World: knowing that a woman of suspected chastitye, lives in this world
but in a miserable case. And when she hears other women ill spoken of, let
her think in her mind, what may be said of her, imagining with her self,
that when a woman is once in an ill name, whether, it be deseruedlye, or
without cause, she has much ado to recover again her honor: she must
not bear her self so boldly upon her honest meaning, to think that God will
always hold his hand over her head: for he often times suffers a woman to
be reproved wrongfully, for a punishmente of her lightness and vanitye: by
means whereof she has given occasyon of scandale and offense.


Guaz. I grant you well, there are women who perceiving themselves loved of
their husbands, and having a special care of their honor, keep themselves
honest: but I would have you name me but one only woman for a miracle, who
with all her honest meaning, shows not to the World some sign of lightness
and vanitye: and who is not well apayde to be courted, and to be taken for
bewtifull: who takes not a great brauerye and felicity, in keeping their
amorous suitors long time in suspense between yea and nay, and which thinks
not also by these means to increase her reputation.


Annib. It is as common a matter for women to* show themselves vain and
light, as for Peacockes to spread their tails: wherefore we must not
marvel at that which is said by one, When we shall have once taken all
vanitye from a woman, a man shall be able to take nothing else from her. But
wherefore think you women are so glad to be courted and sued unto, meaning
not to yield, but to stand to their honesty.


Guaz. I think that as I am not content to know my self to be an honest man,
but I would have the world to know it, and try it to be so: so women moved by
the same ambition, love to be courted and tried, that by their honest
aunsweres, they may be known to the world to be honest women.


Annib. Those same women be like these cutters, and hackers, who will take the
wall of men, and pick quarrels to them, to show what valyaunte fellows they
are, but they make so many frayes, that at length they are wounded and maimed,
and so are carried to the spittle house: so these poor women, trusting in their
clear conscience, come to the amourous encounter with one, and with an other:
but at length being driven from their ward, they ly so open that they are soon
venued, and so are brought into a place less pitiful, and much worse then the
spittle house: and if they do chance to escape vnuenued or unhurt, yet they
leave the world in doubt of their honesty. But you made no mention how there
are some women who love to be served of lovers, and set forth themselves by
all the sleightes they can, to set their servants and suitors the more on edge,
only to spite other women, and to make them see, that they are as well set by
as they: and that by their bewty and good grace, they can win the good will of
young men unto them.


Guaz. Those women in my mind pull out one of their own eyes, to pull two
from other women.


Annib. We have spoken of two occasions of their vanity: now we must speak
of two coolerable excuses, whereby they use to cover this fault: for some say,
that God knows how ill they can away with these amarous fools, and how
much they abhorte them, but their presumption and insolency is so great, that
they will love a woman in spite of her, and that they are so afearde of them,
that they dare not look out at their doares or windows, least they should
present themselves unto them.


Guaz. They were better never go about to excuse themselves, then do it in such
sort: for it is well known that there is no man such an ass, but that
continual bobbes and repulses will make him soar away: and that if in steed
of their smiling countenaunces, their wanton glaunces, their yielding gestures,
and other lascyuious intysing tricks, they would show a grave look, a demure
countenance, modest gestures, and behavior meet for an honest woman, you
should see these pigeons soon forsake the dove house.


Annib. Others use another excuse and say (as it were under Benedicite) that to
withdraw their husbands from the company of other women, and to draw him to
his own house, they are feign to suffer themselves to be followed by these
amorous companions.


Guaz. I may say unto you, that these women take the way to make their
husbands do that, which they say they seek to preuente, and like some
Physicians, make work where all was well before.


Annib. We will here then briefly comprehend the sum of that we have said, and
admonish the wife, that chastity joined with vanity, descrueth little, or no
commendation at all, but rather lies open to the saying of King Demetrius, who
hearing a married man find sault with one of his concubines, said unto him, My
concubine is a great deal more modest, then thy Penelope: so then she must
take heed how she gives men occasion to think sinisterly of her, either by
her deeds, looks, words, or apparel.


Guaz. For that you make mention of apparel, I cannot but speak of the abuse
which is committed now adays in our country, in the ornaments and trimming up
of women: who bestow upon garments all the husbands substance, and in
garding and trimming of them, all the dowry which they have brought with them,
which makes me amazed at it: And that which spighteth me most, is to see that
the husbands not only consent to such excessive charge, but also like the
notable vanity, which their wives show, in the lascivious and strumpet like
dressing of their heads, whereby they make men rather laugh at them, then like
of them: like as I saw yesterday, after you went from hence, certain women,
whereof one had her tresses crossed, in such sort upon her head, that they
made the likeness of two hearts bound together: from whence, went two
branches of Carnation silk, in manner of two darts: about the hearts
between the tresses were knytte certain knottes of silk and of hair,
representing the amorous passion: from the crown of her head hung a certain
labell, which shoke with every wynd, * signifiyng the lightness and
inconstancye of her brain: * on her forehead the hayres made the form of a
garland, which was set with pearls and jewels, and natural and artificial
flowers, in such variety, that the gardens of Naples are not able to yield
more sorts. I rehearse not unto you a thousand other trifles, which dimmed and
dazeled mine eyes, in such sort as certain Mappes do, wherein are drawn
forth in small figures, the squadrons of horse men, the troops of foot
men, and the number of the pieces of artillery. Now I pray you, is all this
add made by the Wives to please their Husbands?


Annib. To such a goodly devise, there lacks but one golden word.


Guaz. What I pray you?


Annib. Offense to God, hope to the amorous, destruction to the husbands.


Guaz. I see not how it is possible for men to maintain their wives in such
pompeous and masking sort, but that they must let out their money to usury, and
use many deceitful ways.


Annib. I will not say they keep their wives so brave by cosoning, and
cutthrote bargaynes: and that otherwise they live porely, and fare hardly,
purging the sin of pride with the abstinence of ye mouth, and making their
children die with hunger: but though women be very curious in all their attire,
yet it is the hair that they make most ado about: and there are no sorts of
ointmentes and sliber sauces, which they will not prove, to make their hair of
the brauest coolour, in so much, that many going about to alter the color of
their hair by naughty medecines, have wrought their own death: but their
folly at this day is so great, that notwythstanding, by means of such trumpery
they feel their heads to ache, and their brain to be distempered, yet as
murderers of themselves, they will not give over that shameful and deadly
practice: but if they knew well, wherein consists the commendation and
reputation of women, you know well they would not sit up most part of
the night, and rise betime in the morning, to bestow most part of the day in
dressing of their head, and they would consider with themselves that those
which trim up themselves least, are trimmed up best.


Guaz. I have been always of this mind, that those women, whose minds are not
decked with virtue, and goodness, are those which labor above others, to
supply that default with the decking out of the body: thinking belike to have
as good luck as the Lapwing, who though he be but a vile bird, and lives most
in durtie lakes, yet at the marriage of the Eagle she was honored above other
birds, because of the crown or cop upon her head, and of her pyed feathers.


Annib. But it happens to them often times clean contrary: for the multitude
of ornaments covers that little good which is in them by nature, and the
glistering of their jewels, dimmeth ye shining of their virtues, especially
shining so watrishly and weakly, as they do in such women. But it is
ordinarily seen that women, though never so honest, are insatiable of such
trifles. Whereupon it is said, that mils and women ever want something. And some
have showed that fond desire, not only in their life time, but at their death:
As one commanded in her testament, that the jewels she used to wear, should
be buried with her. But contrarily, the wife of Traiane wanne her self great
commendation, by making no account of those toys. And if honest women would
advisedly think of the matter, they should perceive that it is not the gylt
bridle that makes the horse the better, and that by reason of those affected
follies, they live with suspected honesty: which is showed by the saying of a
Poet, who reprehending an honest woman that offended in this folly, compared
her with a lewd sister of hers in this sort.

Your sister seems chaste, by wearing chaste attire.
Although her unchaste life, has laid her chaste name in the mire.
A strumpet you to term, a man should do you wrong:
But sure unto a strumpet, your apparel does belong.
* I will tell you moreover, that it is ordained by the civil law, that if a
man offer abuse to an honest matrone, being attyred like a harlot, there is no
remedy against him by law. Let women therefore be careful to apparel
themselves so modestly, that they may thereby, rather please their husbands,
then make them jealous over them, in attyring themselves lightly: for they
ought to consider, that men suppose, that there is always a light mind, lodged
in a gorgeous body.


Guaz. I have noted often those dames which are so curious in their attire, to
be very sluttes in their houses: and others which neglect such folly, to be
very good huswiues.


Annib. It is a common saying, that one cannot drink and whistle altogether:
and therefore no maruayle, if those which spend all the day in tricking up
themselves, have no care nor leisure to see their house well ordered: but let
us make an end of this matter, concluding, that it may rightly be said of these
costly clad carkases, that the feathers are more worth then the bird.


Guaz. I think good then, you return to the matter, out of the which I drove
you by my digression.


Annib. I will make short, and give charge to the wife, not only to avoid that,
which may anger and displease her husband, but also to frame her self to do
that which may please him: for as that glass is nothing worth, which makes
a sad countenance seem joyful, or a joyful, sad: so ye woman is a fool, who
seeing her husband merry, pouteth or ^oureth, or seeing him pensive, shows her
self pleasant: And therefore let her be resolved to frame her self to the
thoughts of her husband, and to judge things sweet or sower, according to
his taste: for the diversity of minds and manners, is nothing fit to maintain
love and good will: let her also by sweet words, and loving deeds, show unto
him all the signs of affection she can possibly: considering that some
husbands having been accustomed to the amorous curtisies of other women, will
think ye their wives set no great store by the^, if they show them not the
like, or greater. And in any wise let her continue her accustomed kindness
toward him, least by failing of her wo^t, she seem to wax cold in good will,
or by exceeding her ordinary, she seem to color some crime, whereby she may
drive some foolish toy into his head: which folly, if he chance to be possessed
withal, she must labor by all means possible to rid him of it: not doing as
some foolish women do, who very undiscreetly, and to their own great hurt,
seek to continue that suspision in their husbands, that others lay siege to
their chastity.


Guaz. But whether do you think those women do well, who make their husbands
privy to it, when they are importuned with any unlawful requests?


Annib. Those women are commonly blamed, for that there comes much harm by
it.


Guaz. Is it not well done, to show her own fidelity, and bring to her
husband security?


Annib. I think it ill done: for yt thereby she does not breed quiet, but
trouble to her husband, making him doubt, least revealing one love, she
conceal another: and which is worst, it breeds a quarrel between the
husband and lover, whereof much mischief may ensue.


Guaz. We love others well, but we love our selves better, and therefore she
were better endanger others, then herself: for she has cause to doubt, least
her husband should come to the knowledge of it by some other mean, and so may
think ill of her, for keeping it from him.


Annib. A wise woman will always like better yt her husband should here by ye
report of others, of ye repulse which she shall give to her lover, the^ to make
boast of her honesty herself: and a wise husband will hold himself therewith ye
better content, and be the more assured in his mind of his wives honest dealing.


Guaz. There be many which take it otherwise, and which give not this
interpretation to such concealment.


Annib. It is very true: and therefore to avoid this trouble, it behooves an
honest woman to show her self so sober and chaste in countenance, that no man
may be so hardy to assail her. For in deed Castles that come to parley, are
commonly at the point to render: but if she chance to be set upon, let her
make that answer which a virtuous Dame made to her lover in this sort, While
I was a maid, I was at the disposicion of my parents, but now I am married, I
stand at the pleasure of my husband: wherefore you were best speak to him,
and know his mind what I shall do. And if her husband be out of the way, let her
remember always to behave her self, as if he were present: and to show him at
his return, in what profitable work of the house she has spent her time in
his absence, whereby she shall be better liked, and more commended of him.


Guaz. A wise husband in deed will take great pleasure in such things: but that
some are so testie and froward, that they will never be content with any thing
their wives can do, but so take on with them, that they make them wish them
selves out of the world: I would have you teach those poor^ souls some remedy
for that mischief.


Annib. I set down ye remedy already, when I counsayled the^ to be obedient to
their husbands: yet I ad besides, that by ye example of the Physician she seek
to cure ye diseases of her husband by contrary medecines. And therefore if he be
rough and terrible, she must overcome him by humility, if he chide, she must
hold her peace, for the answer of wise women is scilence: and she must stay to
utter her mind unto him, until he be appeased. If he be obstinate, let not her
be overthwart, nor do as she did, to whom her husband brought for their supper
two thrushes, but she would needs have it that they were two owsels or black
birds: and he replying yt they were thrushes, and she holding yt they were
owsels, he is his chafe, gave her a box on the ^are: and yet for all ye, when
ye thrushes were served to the table, she continued in terming them owsels, by
reason whereof, ye husband fell to beating her again: A week after, she put
him in mind of his owsels again, and continuing in her obstinacy, he was feign
to fall to his old remedy. But this matter ended not thus, for at the years
end, she hit him in the teeth, how he beat her for two owsels: and he said, it
was for two thrushes, but she said he was deciued: but she was well beaten for
it again.


Guaz. But what do you think of those husbands which will beat their wives?


Annib. Mary as I do of Sacrileagers, and Church robbers.


Guaz. Yet I remember I have read, I know not where, these verses.

A woman, an ass, and a walnut tree,
Bring the more fruit, the more beaten they be.

Annib. You redd the text well, but not the gloss, which is, He God offendes,
and holy love undoes,
Which on his wife does fasten churlish bloes.



Guaz. Yet it is the opinion of a wise Author, that a man makes his wife the
better by chastising her.


Annib. That Author is of no authority in this matter, for he adds
forthwith, that a man by bearing with his wife, makes himself better.


Guaz. Why, may not a man beat his wife upon just occasion?


Annib. You say well upon just occasion: for he yt shall stay for that occasion,
shall never beat his wife: for a man shall never have occasion, whereby he may
justly beat his wife.


Guaz. Yea but may a man beat her if she commit any fault?


Annib. If she commit any fault, through my fault, I am better worthy to be
beaten then she, but if she do it by negligence, with what heart can I so much
as touch a hair of her head? And if she do it wilfully, why, I ought to
rebuke her with words, and seek to refourme her by good counsel: I ought to
lay before her, ye shame of ill doing, and the praise of well doing, and if
this will not serve, I ought rather patiently to bear with her, then
rigorously to hea^ her, I ought to consider, that she is a weak vessel, and
that we who are strong, ought to bear the infirmities of ye weak, I ought to
consider, that she is flesh of my flesh, and yt no man has hated or hindered
his own flesh at any time, I ought to consider, yt we ought to be comforters
one of another: shall I then become a tormentor of her? with what face can I
embrace that body, that my hands have bruised and battered? and with what heart
can she love ye man that can find in his heart to beat her


Guaz. Well, I perceive you will be a loving husband, le^ us go forward: and
tell me, if on the wives part there be any other thing, whereby she may
continue love and good will between her husband and her, and maintain
untouched that common honor we have spoken of.


Annib. A woman cannot possibly do any thing that may make her husband more in
love with her, then to play the good huswife in her house: for it not only does
him good to see his wife so thriftilye given, but besides, he conceiueth afirme
opinyon of her honesty, seeing her take pains and exercise her body in works
belonging to the house, whereby she gets a lively natural color, and that
virtuous vermilion, which falls of neither with sweating, neither with
weeping, nor with blowing, nor with washing: which makes him deny her no
necessary thing belonging to ye house, when he sees her so careful to keep
the^ in good order, which is not ye fashion of th^se light huswyues, who live
without doing any thing, without caring for husband, children, or any thing
belonging to ye house: showing manifestly, ye though the body be in the house,
yet ye mind is abroad, foundeth to their own shame, and their husbands
disprofit: for it is well known, that when the mistres is occupied in
vanities, the servants take little care of her profit, but look to their
own matters: as the common saying is, While ye mistres plaieth, ye maid
strayeth. And as ye wife ought busily to look about her, in her house: so it
is unseemly for the husband tomeddle with matters within doors: but if his hap
be so ill, to have a foolish wife, which sleeps (as they say) her eyes being
open, you know it stands him upon, to supply ye imperfection of his wife; but
those men are to be laughed at, who having wise and sufficient wives, will (as
they say) set hens abroad, season ye pot, dress the meat, teach ye chamber
mayds, and take their wives office from her, such husbands offend their wives
much, showing yt either they mistrust the^, or contemn the^: besides; they do
wrong to themselves, and show thereby yt there is but (...) in the^* for if they
were imployde abroad in matters of importance, belonging to me^ of discretion,
they would, being come home, be more desirous to take their ease, then to
trouble their wife and servants, in meddling with their matters. And they would
consider with themselves, yt the rule of ye house belongs to the wife, and yt
God has made women more fearful then me^, to the end they should be more fit
for ye wary watching and keeping of the house: whereto a careful fear is very
requisite. I deny not, but the husband ought to know how matters go in his
house; to provide abroad for things accordingly, and now and then to correct
some faults, which his wife perchance either will not* or cannot: but it is
reason that she being, as it were, ye stern of the house, the husband should
commit the whole government of it unto her, as a thing belonging unto her: for
the rest you must know, that as in adversity and trouble, true friends are
known, so the Wife cannot by any means more continue the good will between
her spouse and her, and bind them, as it were, to her for ever, then by
s^icking to him faithfully in his need and adversity, which some of them do
not, who will partake gladly with the prosperities and joys of their husbands;
but they will not willingly take part of their troubles: forgetting the example
of the fair and wise wife of Methridates, who for her husbands sake, causing
her head to be polled, and framing her self to ride, and wear armure, like a
man, accompanied him valiantly, faithfully, and patie^tly, in all his troubles
and perils, which gave Methridates wonderful comfort in his adversity, and
gave the world to understand, that there is nothing so troublesome and
grievous, but that the two hearts of the husband and the wife lincked together,
are ab^e to support it. And therefore when the husbands are afflicted with any
infirmity either of mind or body; let the wives be ready, both in word and
deed, to comfort and to attend them: whereby they shall see their love and
affection will grow more fervent and faithful. For conclusion, the husband
and the wife must count all things common between them: having nothing of
their own in particul^r, no not so much as the body it self: and laying aside
pride, they must cheerfully set their hands to chose things that are to be
done about ye house, belonging to their calling, and to strive in well doing
one to overcome another: whereof will grow such contented quietness, as will
happily prolong their lives to old age: and by the bond of love and concord,
they shall give their children an example to live in unity one with an other,
and their servants to agree together in the dispatche of their business, and
discharge of their duties.


Guaz. For so much as you have made mention of children, I should like well yt
from henceforth, according to our determination, you come to speak of the
conversation between ye parents and the children: for I think it a matter very
expedient, to set down ye orders which they ought to observe in conuersing
together, for ye even amongst the^, there is not for ye most part found that
good agreement, and ye discrete dealing which ought to be: and that the world
is now come to this pass, yt the child is no sooner come to any understanding,
but that he begins to cast in his head of his fathers death: as a little
child riding behind his father, said simply unto him, Father, when you are
dead, I shall ride in the Saddle: yea there are many great knauish children,
which wish and work the death of their fathers: whereof I know not well to
whom to impute the fault, either to the fathers, which keep not their children
in such awe, neither bring them up in such sort as they ought to do, or to the
children, who know not how much they are beholding to their fathers.


Annib. And which of the^ in the end rather conclude you to be in the fault?


Guaz. Marye the Child, who can not bring an action against his father, though
he do him never so great wrong.


Annib. Why, said you not but now, that the child often times knows not his
duty to his father?


Guaz. Yes mary did I.


Annib. To whom will you give the charge, to make the child know and understand
that duty?


Guaz. To the Father.


Annib. Then revoke your first sentence, and conclude that the fault is in the
father, who ought to have infourmed him in his duty.


Guaz. If the father give his son good lessons, and he will not hearken unto
them, what can he do more? if the Father offers instructions with the right
hand, and the child receives them with the left hand, what fault is the
Father in?


Annib. If the father in time teach him to use his right hand, he will never
grow to be left handed: but it is no marvel, if having suffered him to use
that ill custom a long time, he cannot afterward take it from him: And
therefore he ought to accuse his own negligence, for that he has deferred
till evening, to give him those instructions which he should have given him
earlye in the morning at the Sun rising, even together as it were with the
milk of ye Nurse: not considering that in tender minds, as it were in wax, a
man may make what impression he lift.


Guaz. I know not, how you can excuse the children, who after the father has
nourished and brought them up carefully, under the charge of learned men and
instructed them in the faith of Christ, in the end run astray, and living
lewdlye, bring forth fruit unworthy their good bringing up.


Annib. That happens very sieldome, and though it do happen, yet for all yt
the fathers are not discharged of the care over them, which God himself has
enjoined them to.


Guaz. I marvel not so much yt a child virtuously brought up, sometime
falls out naught, or if thereupon afterward arises discord between his
father and him, for ye unlikeness of manners may be the cause of it: but I
count it strange, and as it were against nature, yt both ye father and ye
son, being both honest men, and for their good dealing well spoken of by all
men, it shall often fall out, that they cannot agree together in the house, but
live in continual strife, and dissension: and agreeing well in public
affairs, still disagree about househould matters: whereof I could bring you
many examples.


Annib. You said but erewhile, that the child ought not to commence an action
against the father, if you will stand to that sentence, you must needs
confess that the son, how honest soever he be, does not honestly, when he
withstandeth his father, and conformeth not himself to his pleasure.


Guaz. I auow and make good, that the son ought to suffer the father to
command over him, and that he ought to obey him without any resistaunce: but
that their conversation may frame the better, I think it necessary, to
appointe to the father, how he ought to proceed in his fatherly jurisdiction,
yt he exceed not ye bonds of reason, and give not his son cause (if not to
oppose himself against his pleasure) yet to find fault with him in his heart, and
to think himself ill dealt withal by him, by means whereof, he waxes cold and
faint in ye love and reverence which he ought to bear to his father.


Annib. I can never forget ye undoubted saying, ye few children are like the
father, and that many of them are worse: and ye those which are better, are
very rare and thin sowed. I would have us first therefore search out ye cause,
why so few children resemble the father, and answer to ye hope he co^ceiueth
of the^, whereof arises disagreement between them, and by yt mean we shall
better understand what their conversation ought to be.


Guaz. With all my heart.


Annib. First it is to be considered, that children bring small or no comfort
unto their parents, if nature and fortune be not well tempered in them.


Guaz. How so?


Annib. As a fruitful grain sowed in a soil unfit for it, brings forth no
increase, so a child which is naturally given to learning, shall never do well
if he be given to warfare, so much it imports to find out in the beginning,
whereto he is most inclined. Touching this matter, I remember I have read
certain verses of Dant, which I have now forgotten.


Guaz. You shall see I will help you.


Annib. I pray you do.


Guaz. If that men had more care to follow natures lore,
Of able and acco^plisht men, we should have greater store,
But contrary, a Priest of him we use to make,
Who borne is for the war, wherein he chief delight does take,
And him we make a King, whom nature has ordaind,
A Lawier for to be, and thus is natures course restraynd.

Annib. What pleasure I take in these verses, as well for their delightful
harmony, as for that they give me to know how good a memory you are endued
withal: Here you see expressed one of the occasions of the untoward success
of children.


Guaz. It behooves fathers to use discretion in this point, to find out, as
soon one way, as soon another, the natural instinct of their children: which
is best known in their infancye, as the proverb is, That by the morning it
may be gathered, how all the day will prove after. And I think this most
necessary respect, to be little respected by some fathers, who force their
children to enter into that trade of life* which is altogether contrary to
their natural inclination, and therefore no maruayle though they receive small
com^fort of them: for thereof insueth many times the dishonor of their house,
and which is worse, great offense toward God: as when poor gyrles are put
into religious houses, who even from their mothers womb desired to be married.


Annib. Those fathers which set their children to things contrary to their
disposition, are rather to be pitied then blamed, for that it happens
commonly for lack of taking heed: but these which thrust them into religious
houses, before they are of years to choose or refuse that life, are no doubt
greatly to be blamed: for that they bring their children to it, either through
fear, or through false perswasio^s: which is nothing else, but to withstand
the will of God, and to take from their children that free choice which he of
his divine goodness has promised them. And therefore if the Father be
careful of the honor and quiet of his house, let him be also careful to
know whether his sons mind be given either to learning, or to arms, or to
husbandrye, or to Merchaundise: And where he shall perceive he has drawn
him out of his right way, let him make him return into it forthwith, and
set him again where he would be, otherwise let him assure himself that a
thing ill begun, will come to a worse end.


Guaz. Seeing we are to search the cause, why children oftentimes fall not out
according to the hope and opinyon of their parents: you had need begin at the
milk which they suck, for yt the nurses milk is of such force, yt the use
thereof, makes the child take more after the Nurse, then the Mother which
brought him into the world. And when I remember the custom of diverse women in
France, who bring up their Infantes only with the milk of beasts: I think
thereof it comes, * that diverse of them are so fierce and cruel, that by
their ill life, they show themselves scarce to be endued with that reasonable
part which is proper to men: With the good leave of the good be it spoken.
*


Annib. I am out of all doubt of the maruaylous effects of the Milk, and it
is a thing most certain, that if a lamb be nourished with the Milk of a
Goat, or a Kid with the milk of a yeaw, the Kid will have a very soft hair,
and the Lamb a very rough and hayry Wool. And therefore it is to be thought,
that as the child, by reason of the Milk, takes after the complexion of the
Nurse, so the disposition of the mind, follows the complexion of the body:
And thereof also it comes, that the daughters of honest women, prove
altogether unlike them, both in body and mind, so that to deliver children
from their mothers to Nurses, cannot be said to be other then a corrupting of
nature. But if we should make mention of this first Nourriture, we should
have spoken of it then, when we discoursed of unfortunate Marriages: but I
neither spoke of it there, neither will do here, for that the Philosophers,
and specially Galen, have spoken so pertinentlye, and so sufficientlye, of the
force and virtue of the milk, that we need to make no farther question of it.
I forbore also to speak of it, for that women at this day are so curious of
their comeliness, or rather of their vanity, that they had rather peruerte
the nature of their Children, then change the form of their fyrme, hard,
and round pappes, whereof it comes, that the children fashioning themselves
to the humors of their Nurses, swerve from the love and duetye which they
owe to their mothers, and have not in them the blood which moves them to
obey or respect them any thing, which is manifested by an example of a
Bastard, of the house of the Gracchi, who returning from the wars, laden with
the spoils of the enemy, had his mother and his Nurse coming before him, he
gave to his Mother a Silver ring, and to his Nourse a Collar of Gold: which
his mother misliking with, he told her she was to blame to do so, saying:
You bore me but nine Months in your belly, but my Nurse kept me with her
teates the space of two years: That which I hold of you, is my body, which
you gave me scarce honestly, but that which I have of her, proceeded of a pure
and sincere affection: so soon as I was borne, you deprived me of your
company, and banished me your presence, but she graciously received me,
vanished as I was, between her arms, and used me so well, that she has
brought me to this you see. These reasons, with o^thers, which I will not
rehearse, stopped his mothers mouth, being full ill ashamed, and made his
loving Nurse farther in love with him.


Guaz. Seeing these women will not be the whole Mothers of their Children,
they ought at least to be careful to choose good Nurses, and well
complexioned.


Annib. As the first abuse crepte in, to set out their Children to Nurse:
so consequently followed the second not to respect the nature of the Nurse.
But let us go forward to show the occasions of ye difference between the
fathers and the children, holding for certain, that the principal proceeds
(as we have already said) of the difference between the nature of che child,
and the seat and trade of life he is set to. And therefore I say, that it is
not enough for the Father to know whereto the Child is naturallye given, if
afterward he endeavor not to make him the way plain to assist him, and
carefully to provide for all things, meet to conduct him safely to the end
which he has proposed to himself. Another cause of this difference between
the father and the child, is, when the Father loue^th himself better then his
child, keeping him with him, to play withal, without taking any keep to set
him to masters, which may instruct him in learning, or to the court, or to
those professyons whereto he shall be most inclined: Wherein many welthy
fathers greatly offend, who bearing themselves bold upon their goods, never
take care to bring up their children in learning and virtue, but suffer their
wits so to be dulled with idleness, and gluttony, that (as the proverb is)
They know not Chafe from Corn, or Chalk from Cheese: and they grow to have
as good judgment as the Ass, which judged the Coockoes singing, to be more
sweet then the Nightingales.


Guaz. The more the Father keeps his Children about him, the more he makes
their manners like to his.


Annib. You are deceived, for the life of the old father, is no pattern for
the young son, to shape his doings by: and besides, in time he will accuse
his Father, for that having opportunity to send him abroad to get wealth and
estimation, he kept him at home, and thereby hindered his preferment.


Guaz. The child ought rather to think well of him for it, and to attribute it
to too much love.


Annib. Nay rather to too little love: for disordinate affection is not to be
counted true love.


Guaz. The more dear a thing is unto you, the more careful you are to keep
it about you, and to join it as it were to your heart.


Annib. It is true: but let me ask you, why covet you in keep long a good
servant?


Guaz. Mary for my profit.


Annib. If he were called by some prince, to some higher degree, would you not
give him leave to go from you?


Guaz. Yes willingly.


Annib. Why?


Guaz. For his preferment.


Annib. You then show him greater sign of good will, in letting him go from
you, then in keeping him with you: for that thereby, you prefer his profit
before your own: by the same reason, the father keeping his child with him,
shows that he loves better himself, then his child: for if he loved him as
he should do, he would also love his preferme^t, and would seek to better his
estate: liking better that he should dye like a horse in battle, then live
like a hog in the mire.


Guaz. And what would you say, if the father being learned kept his son with
him, to make him pertaker of his knowledge?


Annib. I made no mention of such fathers, for that they are very rare, which
are endued with learning sufficient to perform such a matter: And if there be
any such, yet they will not, or they cannot take any such pain, nor tie
themselves to such a charge, having other business, mary if they would
undertake it, there is no doubt but great good would come of it, for that the
father would instruct the child more carefully, and the child would receive it
more heedefully of his father, then of his master: And it ought to seem no
strange president neither: For Cato the Censor, taught himself, and brought
to great perfection his son, without the help of any governor or master.
And Octauian Augustus being Emperor, took no scorn to teach his two
adoptiue sons. But the iniquity of our time is such, that men would counce it
a monstrous thing, to see a father, being a gentle man, to teach his sons.


Guaz. The shame is the greater of those, who being neither able, nor willing
to teach their children themselves, take no care to put them out to be
instructed by others.


Annib. A man may see they know not the difference between the learned and the
ignorant: and that the ignorant in comparison of the learned, are worse then
dead.


Guaz. Yet for all that the abuse is such, that the rich men of our time will
not have their sons break their heads with study, and in a manner mislike
that they should learn to read: for I know many of these, rich in living, but
poor in learning, which get them into the shoppes of Merchantes and
Apoticaries, to the boys and Prentises there, to have them write letters for
them to their friends: wherein they bewray at once both their secrets, and
their ignorance: O what a goodly sight is that? but I will not forget to tell
you, that being not long since in an Aduocats study, I heard a clarke of his
(who had closed up a letter which he had written for a gentleman there present)
ask the gentleman the name of him to whom he should direct yt letter, that he
might put it in the superscriptio^: who answered him, That he need write
nothing else but, To my Gossip at Cremone: but the clarke replying that it was
necessary to specify his name* that the letter might come to the hands of his
Gossip, he said it was no matter for his name, it was enough to say (to his
Gossip) for that every man knew him.


Annib. I believe he was a gentleman, because you name him so, but in this
dotishe simplicity, he showed himself as very a clown, as one that I will
tell you of, who, as the Physician asked him what country manne he was: he
answered, that he should see that by his water. These rich folk without
learning, or rather bodies without minds, are termed by Diogenes, sheep with
golden fleeces: And therefore they ought to be more careful to instruct
their children in learning. For as the poor are driven to study by necessity:
so the rich are hindered from it by superfluitye: and they consider not until
it be to late, that learning is more necessary for them, then for the poor,
for that they have more dealinges in the world, and have need of more wit
to keep their riches, which, as brittle, frail, and corruptible, can hardlye
last, without they be conserved with the sweet syrrope of wisdom. And it
is, most certain, that a man lives better with a little, gotten by virtue,
than with a great deal given by fortune. And those which wax proud through
abundance of riches, show themselves not to know what happened to the goord
which made his bragges that he was gotten above the pine tree: but those which
are wise, the richer they are, the better they will consider how riches are
gotten with travail; kept with fear, and lost with grief, and, that he
which puts his trust in them, shall be deceived: for the true riches are
those which cannot be los^e, being once gotten. And therefore discreet
fathers will be careful to bring up their children in learning, persuading
them that they are never rich, until they be learned: remembering always the
example of Philip King of Macedon, who so soon as his son Alexander was
borne, wrote letters to Aristotle, signifiyng the joy which he fe^^, not so
much for that he had a son, as for that he was borne in his time, to whose
instruction and government he had already appointed him: which makes me upon
just ^^casion o^ of charity with this our age, which makes so small account of
those men, who, not only instruct us in learning, but in life also, which are
the two greatest goods that can be desired in this world. And therefore it is so
far of, that they should be despised, that they ought to be reverenced as much
as our own fathers. But for that there are many masters excellent in
learning, and yet lewd in life, the father must be very wary in the choice of
them, least what his son gets one way, he loses another way, for he
must have as great care to make him virtuous, as learned, and he must have
more care to make him good, then to lean him goods: for as one said. If thy
son be wise and honest, thou shall leave him goods enough: but if he be a
fool, thou shall leave him to much: For fools are not fit to possess riches.
Now, if the child be not given to learning, the father must not fail,
continually to employ him some other way: for there is nothing more dangerous
then an idle young manne. And as that tree which blossometh not in spring time,
brings forth no fruit in harvest* so he shall never come to live honestly,
when he is a man, who is not virtuously exercised, while he is a child: but
amongst other occasiones of the ill success of children, this is one, when
the father is careless to make them in time raise themselves from the ground.


Guaz. What mean you by that?


Annib. That the father being careful of his sons advancement, is many
times so curious to see him thoroughly instructed in worldly matters, that,
forgetting how the beginning of wisdom, is the fear of god, he takes no care
at all to instruct him in the Christian Faith: whereof it comes that this
unhappy child, trained up altogether in worldly affairs, and deprived of the
true light, can not see the right way, but runs into perdition.


Guaz. Now you hit the mark right: for the wisdom of the world is folly
with God. And it is a thing impossible for him to live well, who knows not
God.


Annib. To this Christian admonition agrees that which the divine Philosopher
Plato says, where he (...) against fathers, which show them solues ignorant
what their ought to do, trotting up and down this way and that way, casting
all their care to heap up much wealth, and taking so little care for the
children who must possess it, that they exercise them neither in the virtue of
justice, nor of liberality, whereby they may be able to distribute, ^se, and
bestow their goods as they ought to do. Which doing, it may be said, that
they provide for things superfluous, and neglecte things necessary. Which
the Persians knew well, who though they were ignorant of the true worship of
God, yet they were careful above al things to have their children instructed
in justice and virtue. I would then have parents take care both for the mind,
and the body of their children: But for that the mind is more excellent, it is
reason to cast our chiefest care upon it. And for that the mind in infantes is
like a pair of tables, wherein nothing is written, and like and tender twig
which may be bowed every way, it is clear, that virtue or vice may easily be
planted in it. And for that it is known by proof, that those things are kept
best in memory which are learned in youth, fathers ought to instruct their
children in the best things, that is, in the fear and love of God: Holding it
for a general rule, that he which knows every thing, and knows not God,
knows nothing.


Guaz. For that the fathers either will not, or cannot be always with their
children, to keep them in the right way, they ought to provide masters for
them, no less godly then learned, who every day at convenient times may^
teach them some devout prayers, and instruct them in the fear of God: not
ceassing in their ordinary lectures to mingle always some divine precepts.
For imprinting in their tender hearts devotion and religion, it will, while they
live, continue them in godliness, and after their death, it will unite them to
Christ.


Annib. You say very well: And if the father be diligent to instruct his
children in the law of God, he shall get this also by it, that his children
thereby will do him the more honor and reverence: knowing that it is Gods
commandment they should do so. To the former occasion of the ill success of
children may be added this, when the father sets before them a stained and
spotted glass to look in, that is, when he himself gives them il example:
Which the Romans were very circumspect in, whose modesty and discretion was so
great, that the father would never has himself in the company of his son:
and it was counted a great fault in the father, to suffer himself to be
seen naked by his son: no marueyle then, though Cato the Censor put Manlius
out of the Senate, only for kissing his Wife in the presence of his Daughter,
whereby we may see, that it is not enough for the Father to appoynte good
Masters over his Children, and to see them well instructed, if above all
things he be not cyrcumspecte to show himself such before them, as he
wishes to have them to be: for the Master does them not so much good by
his good instructions, as the Father does them harm by his evil Example, for
that they are by nature lead rather to follow his steps, then the masters
precepts: for it is so natural a thing for the son to resemble the Father
in gamening, in swearing, and in other vices, that if by chance some child
do not follow his Father in them, but lives vertuouslye and honestlye, yet
the world will scarce believe that he does so, by reason of the evil
opinyon they have conceived of the Father, but will rather think that the
Child is heir to his vices, as well as to his Lands: And when they can
find no fault with him any way, some or other will not stick to hitte him
in the teeth, that he was the son of the naughtiest man in the world.
Likewise, if the Father be honest, and the son lewd, the Fathers good name
is called in questyon, and men think it in a manner impossible, that the son
should tread awrye, unless he were by his Father lead awyre. And therevppon
it is thought, that if some Roman Gentlemen used too extreme seueritye
toward their Children, they did it not so much upon the displeasure which
they conceived against them, as for the care they had of their own renown,
and the desire to maintain their credit and reputation. I would therefore
have the Father to frame himself to live well, and orderlye, as well for his
own sake, as for the honor and benefit of his Children, who seeing the
Virtue which shyneth in their Fathers deeds, feel themselves moved with
desire to immitate him, and seeing those of the house which stand quietlye and
reverently waiting upon him, to be ready at the holding up of his finger to
execute his commandments, they thereby take example to do their duetye
likewise, and not to be inferioure in obedyence to Servants and Strangers:
and besides, endeavor to be like in deeds to their Father, that they may in
time to come, receive the like reverence of their Servants, as they see their
father does of his: for the Father which gives an ill example to the child,
in time shall be had in contempt by the Child, and abandoned of him, so that
he shall neither receive succoure of him in his latter days, nor in his last
day, that last duty to cloase up his eyes: Besides* the father by living
disorderly and dishonestly, many times make a hand of those goods, which the
children should live by.


Guaz. That agrees with this.

Children many times are made for to weep,
By reason of the ill rule their fathers did keep.

Annib. Yea, there are some cases wherein the seelye Infantes, which have not
offended, are punished for their Fathers fault: And thinking to my self, that
law to be too rigorous, I asked one day Master Frauncis Beccio the occasion
which moved the Emperor Justinian to set down any such severe law: and
amongst a great many reasons which he aleaged unto me, this was the
chief, That the Father naturallye fearing the ill of his Children, more then
of himself, will the better keep himself from committing such offenses,
whereof his children shall bear the punishment: whereby we may know, that the
ill life of the father, brings to the Children both loffe and shame, and that
he must not persuade him, that it is enough to give his children good
counsel, unless his deeds be agreeable thereto: for the children respect
not so much that which the father says, as that which he does: like as the
Crauish sometime did, Who, his mother telling him that it was very unseemly for
him to go arsewarde; as he die; answered: Do you lead me the way
otherwise, and you shall see I will follow you. And therefore he that
desires to amend his Children, must first amend himself, and by the example
of piety, charity, justice, and other virtues, make them charitable, just, and
virtuous, and when he shall walk upright by himself, he may boldlye take up
others for haulting, like as Dionisius sometime did, who taking his son in
a fault, said unto him, Haste thou ever seen me commit the like fault? No
(says his Son) you had no king to your father: whereto he replied, Neither
shall thou have a king to thy son: as it fell out in deed, for in the end,
for his crueltye, and Tyranny, he was driven out of his kingdom, and was
constrained by necessity to go rouing up and down, until he found means
to teach children, and keep a school. Let us now pass to the other
occasions of the unfortunate conversation between the father and the child,
whereof there are two, which now come in my mind: the one is, when the father
is more then a mother: the other, when he is more then a father.


Guaz. How mean you that he should be more then a mother?


Annib. When he is so blinded that he sees not the imperfections of his
child, or if he see them, yet is ready to commend them, or to excuse them,
in such sort, that if his son be haughty, or harebrained, he terms him
courageous: if he be base minded, he counts him modest: if a prating boy,
he will have him, on Gods name, to be an Orator: and in flattering thus
himself, he frames, in his imagination, the best child in the world: with
the which blindness, the fathers of one only child are for the most part
stricken. I must needs in this place mention unto you, a youth of fyfteene or
sixteen years of age, of a ready wit, but otherwise vicious, dissolute,
and lewd of life, by the fault of the father and mother, who are so far from
correcting him, that they dare not so much as threaten him, nor say any
word to him, which may displease him: And I remember, when he was five or
six years old, if any told them that they must rebuke him for some fault
which he had done, they would excuse him by and by, saying he was not yet
of age to know his fault: And being seven or eyghte years old, they would
never beat him, nor threaten him, doubting least through great fear and
perturbation of the spirits, his blood should be chaufed and inflamed,
whereby he might be cast into an ague: No at ten years old, they thought
not good to trouble or molest him, aleaging that strypes and threats might
pull down his courage too much, and take from him his Noble stomache: And
though now for his naughtye conditions he be hated of the whole Town, yet
they leave not to excuse him still, saying, he must first grow, and then
after be wise, and that within these few days they will send him to
School, where he shall learn wit. I look now, when he shall be of age
to be hanged on the Gallows, to hear him before the people to lay the fault
on his Father and mother, and iustlye to curse their foolish love, and
shameful cockering and sufferaunce: attempting, as once one did, to tear
their Noase or their ears of with his teeth.


Guaz. Thereby it is seen, that a child, though of never so good a wit, yet
being ill brought up, proves too bad: but I looked you would have told,
that in the end he had beaten his Father to make him amends: or that he
had driven him out of the house, as the Serpent was by the Irchin: for to give
a child so great liberty, is to put weapons into his hand, which often
times he uses against his parents: but this great cockering and compassion
is proper to the mother, who commonly brings up her children with more
tender affection then discretion. And there are few to be seen at this day,
which, by the example of the Spartane women, have the hearts to say to
their children in delivering them a Tergate, Come no more in my sight, but
either with this retourning victoryous from the field, or upon this, being
brought dead out of the field, but rather go about to withstand the
honorable thoughts and enterprises of their children, and would have them
both in countenance and conditions, like to women.


Annib. It is a hard matter for a mother to be fond of her children, and wise
both together.


Guaz. But the right love is to beat and correct them, when they shall
deserve it, and as the Poet says, The rod does not make less the mothers love.



Annib. If the excess of love be to be blamed in the mother, much more is it
to be reproved in the father: whose part it is to examine and correct his
childrens faults: assuring himself that the only way to spyll them, is to be
too fond and tender over them.


Guaz. But which are those fathers, you call more than fathers?


Annib. Those which are too cruel to their children, and beat them
continually like slaves, for the least fault in the world.


Guaz. Truly those fathers are mislyked of all men: for that without
discretion they measure their children by themselves, and require at their
hands a matter impossible, which is, to have them be old in their youth, not
suffering them to enjoy in any sort, that liberty which is allowed to their
age: And in my mind, they deserve no other name then of Schoolemaisters, for
that they cannot manner their children well, unless they have a rod in their
hand: for if they were right fathers, they would be content that their
children should learn of them, to know that the whole drift of humane laws,
is nothing else but to refrain from doing ill, and to use to do that which is
good and honest, which a child is brought to, rather by love, than by force:
but the authority which some ignorant fathers take upon them, is so great,
that without respecting age, place, time, degree, fashion, or any thing, they
will keep their children under by force, and make them do every thing contrary
to their own minds, yea even to wear their apparel after the fashion of the
good men of the time past.


Annib. It is most certain, that they do amiss in that, whereby they make
their children not to love them so heartily, and to obey them rather for fear,
then affection: besides, they consider not that the beating without measure,
and the keeping them in continual fear, is the cause that a man cannot
judge to what manner of life they are naturally inclined. Moreover, it dulleth
their wits, and represseth their natural vigor, in such sort, that there is
no metal left in them, and by fearing always to fail in their doings, they
never but fail in them, and coming in any company, they know neither which
way to look, nor what to do. Therefore they ought to leave their butchery
beating, and consider rather that for the lack of years their chidren cannot
have perfect understanding and experience in things, whereby they are to be
borne withal, when they do amiss.


Guaz. I like those fathers well, who can keep their children in awe, only
with shaking their head at them, or using some such like sign: and can only
with a word correct them, and make them ashamed of their fault. But I am
persuaded that there are few fathers, that know how to keep the mean, but
that they will either be to rough, or to gentle to their children, whereof as
the one drives them to desperatnesse, so the other brings them to
dissoluteness.


Annib. We must think that a child has given vnt^ him a father and a mother,
to ye end that of the wisdom of the one, and the love of the other, that Mean
which you mean* may be made: and that the severity of the father, may be
somewhat mitigated by the lenity of the mother.


Guaz. You may in my opinyon yet add one occasion more of the disagreement
between the father and the child, which is the partial love of the father
toward his children.


Annib. Do you take that to be a fault?


Guaz. Do you think it reasonable, that he should embrace and love one more
than an other? and that all being of his flesh and blood, he should cast a
merry countenance upon some of them, and a severe look upon other some.


Annib. Of the sonnets, and other co^positions which you have made, is it well
done of you to like some better then other some? yea and perchance those which
are worst, best: And be you assured also, that your father loves not all his
children alike, and yet he of you whom he loves least, cannot justly complain
of him.


Guaz. I give my father no occasion to use me worse then the rest, and
therefore if he should do it, I should have just cause to complain of him
while I lived.


Annib. You have reason, if he use you ill, mary not though he love you less
then he does some other: for inequality of love is permitted to the father,
but not ill usage.


Guaz. How mean you that?


Annib. A father that is a merchant, has one son that is a scholar, another
a soldier, and an other a merchaunt: of those three it is a great chance but
he will love the merchaunt best, for that he sees him like to him self in
life and manners: Where in his other sons are to bear with him, for that by
nature we are led to like those things, which resemble us most: mary if he
shall not give them as good alowance for their diet, apparel, and other
necessaries, as he does to the merchant, they shall have occasion to complain
of him as unjust.


Guaz. O how hard a thing is it for the father, after that partial passion is
once entered into his heart, to minister justice indifferently?


Annib. The greater is the wisdom of the father, who preferring the merits of
his children before his own partial affection makes his senses yield to
reason, and shows him in deeds alike toward all: I will not deny, but
that the father by his authority, ought to distribute his favors as he sees
good, to one more, to another less, according to the demeanor and doings of
his children: for as by gentle usage, he incourageth a child that is well
given, to do well, so by hard handling, he may bring one that is untoward,
to goodness: yea, if he have any child which is quite past grace, without any
hope of recovery, he may lawfullye, not only love him less then the rest, but
quite cast him out of his favor: like as Aristippus did by a lewd son of
his: and being reproved for it by a friend of his, who willed him to consider
that his son was a collup of his own flesh, and came from his Loins: he
answered, That lice, and a great many superfluities come from a man's body, and
yet being il, they are to be cast away. But those fathers are greatly to be
blamed, who with unjust partiality, and without any reasonable consideration,
use one child as legitimate, and the other as a Bastard: whereof it follows,
that he which is so coursely accounted of, does not only fail in affection
toward his father, but begins to fall to secret war with his other
brother: whereby the father, whose chief office is to establish quiet and
concord amongst his children, shall by his indiscreet and unjust partiality,
plant amongst them a root of continual discord. * And therefore the Father
ought to be well advised, how he prefers in good will one child before
another, and not to do it upon every light occasion: As there are some which
will do it, not for any fault which is in them, but for some natural defect:
wherein in my judgment they do much amiss, in making their innocent child
bear the punishment of their own imperfections, who at the time they did beget
him, were no doubt possessed with some infyrmitie of mind or body. *


Guaz. I cannot abide the fo^ly of some fathers, who make some one of their
children their darling and minion, without seeing any towardness in him in the
world: being not ashamed to let every man know their fond and causeless doting.


Annib. The Ape which had two young ones at a litter, whereof she loved the
one, and cared nothing for the other, was upon occasion driven to fly from her
den, and having taken that which she loved in her arms, and tied the other
at her back, in running, she stumbled against somewhat which made her fall, and
against the hard ground to kill her young one which she had in her arms
and loved so well, but the other which was at her back, had no harm at
all: whereby a man may see, that the Father often times does penance for his
doting and fond offense, for that for the most part those children which are
most made of, fall out the worste: Yea, it often falls out, that the
children of the right side, by reason of their wanton and delicate bringing up,
prove doltes, fools, and simple sots, whereas contrariwise, those which come
in at the back door, being banished from their fathers house, and driven to
shifte for themselves, do often times by their own industrye and travail,
auaunce themselves to such estate, that they are in better case then their
father and their lawful brothers, to whom often times they afoorde aid and
succor in their distresses.


Guaz. We may boldlye say then, that the injustice of the father, breeds
disagreement between his children and him, howsoever that unequal love does,
which I proposed.


Annib. Yea hardly, but for that we made mention of a merchaunt, the father of
Doctor^s and scholars, thereupon there comes in my head an other occasion,
which breeds iars between the father and the child, which is, when the
father is inferior in calling to the son: as for example, if ye father be an
ignorant man, or a plain fellow of the country, and the son be learned, or
a brave courtier, you shall find great difficulty to make these two agree
together, for the father, according to his nature, and his calling, gives his
mind to base and vile things, and either knows not, or, esteems not ye
high degree of his son: And though he speak nothing^ of it, yet he is ill
pleased in his mind, to see his son keep his Gravity convenient for his
estate, and to be so sumptuous in his Diet and apparel, and had rather he
would convert his gain into Lands, Cattle, or some other commodity. There
are other some, who are not so foolish, but they know the worthiness of their
Children, and what belongs to their estate, yet for that they are inferyoure
to them, they are grieved in their hearts at it, so that they labor always to
withstand both in word and deed their preferment. On the other side, you shall
see the son, either for that he sees his father not to account of him as
others do, or for that he sees him lead a filthy life, being never desirous
to come out of the mire, withdraws his affection from him, and would not by
his will have him come at any time into his sight, for that he thinks he
does dishonor him, and if he be not so wicked to wish his death, yet at
least he is well apayde, when he sees him for some sickness or infirmity
laid up in some bye corner of the house.


Guaz. To this purpose I heard talk the other day of a wretch, so miserable,
that he would never agree yt his son, being a Doctor, should keep a man to
wait upon him, so that he was feign (when he went abroad) to retain a
poor man that dwelt by, to follow him in steed of a man: and one morning
staying for his man at the gate, to wait on him to Mass, and being very late,
the father bethinking himself of his own miserableness, and seeing how
hardlye his some was bestead, put on his Cloak, and said unto him, Go your
way to mass, and I will follow you: thinking that his son was such a
fool to accept his offer, and to show himself abroad in such shameful
forte.


Annib. I think he offered to wait upon his son, rather for that he would
not give his poor neighbor his dinner, then for any shame he had of his own
misery, or respect of his sons honesty.


Guaz. Now we are fallen upon this Example, I would gladly know of you, in
this difference of degree and calling, which ought to go foremost, of the father
or the son?


Annib. This doubt has been already decided by Taurus the Philosopher, who
being visited by a Roman President, and by the Father of the said President,
and being only one chair set, while they were bringing another, he desired the
Father to sit him down: who answered, that his son ought to sit first, for
that he was President: but for all yt, he requested him still to sit down, and
that he would afterward show which of the two ought to have the upper hand.
The Father being set, and afterward the son, he gave this sentence: That in
public places and affairs, the father being a private person, ought to give
place to the son, who is appointed in office, as he who presents the
majesty of the Prince, or common wealth: but otherwise in private places, and
at the assembly and meeting of friends, the public authority must give place
to the fatherly jurisdiction,


Guaz. By virtue of this sentence, the father to the Doctor of whom we spoke,
should that morning, going to mass, have made his son follow him in his long
gown, for that as then he was not in any office, but only a Doctor: which
would have been a goodly sight, and have made every one laugh at it, albeit it
had been but reason.


Annib. If this were to be laughed at, the example of Sempronius Gracchus,
Consul of Rome, was to be marueyled at: who to keep his state in public,
meeting on Horseback his Father Q. Fab. Maximus, the Proconsull, commanded
his Sergeauntes to go against him, and cause him to alight: which he did
quickly, liking the better of his son, for that he knew so well to maintain
the majesty of the Roman Empire. But to return to our matter: there is one
occasion yet remaining of the disagreement between the Father and the child,
which is, when the Father will never suffer his children to come forth of
their infancy.


Guaz. How understand you that?


Annib. Mary when either through the authority of old age, or through ambition,
or covetousness, or too good opinion in his own sufficiency, the father is so
desirous of keeping his paternall jurisdiction, that though his children be
arrived to man's estate, and be perfectly accomplished every way yet he will
allow them neither more living, nor more liberty then they had when they were
children.


Guaz. I think they have just cause to be mal contents, who knowing
themselves to be sufficient me^, and to be so taken of every man are
nevertheless used by their father like children: and therefore I cannot blame
them greatly, if in stead of loving him, they complain of death for delaying
the execution of that judgment, which so long before was pronounced against
him: To which purpose, I know a gentleman, who has lived this forty years,
under a most rich father, who is so miserable, that he makes him despair, and
to say often to his companions that he is a fool to live so long, and that it
is now high time for him to go to another world: adding, that his living will
do him no good when it falls into his hands, for that, by course of nature,
he shall be constrained to forgo it again.


Annib. A certain country fellow used to say, that he gat by his labor
every day five loaves of bread: and being asked how he distributed the^,
answered in this sort, One I keep for my self, another I throw away, another
I pay home, and the other two I lend forth: being requested to expound his
riddle, he said, I take one for my self, I call away another, in giving it to
my stepmother, I restore home one to my father, and two I lend to my children.
By this example, more noble then rustike, both children ought to learn to be
loving and grateful to their father, and fathers to be liberal to their
children, remembering, that in their age and necessity, that which they have
lent unto their children, shall be restored by their children: whereto the
fathers, we but now spoke of, have had no regard: and a man may well say, that
they are doting old, that they are become children again, and quite void of
judgment.


Guaz. If yt come by the fault of age, I will not say that such men were well
worthy to dwell amongst the Caspians, who when the father is arrived to the
age of threescore and ten, kill him presently and give him to beasts to eat:
but I will say, that they ought to acknowledge their insufficiency and want of
judgment, and to refer the ordering of their house and living to their
children, who are of discretion to deal in such weighty matters. If
covetousness be the cause of it, they ought to consider that it is a
shameful thing in old folk, of all others: for there is nothing more
absurd, or without reason, then for a man to make great provision for his
journey, when he is almost at his iourneyes end: so that if they have heaped
up their wealth for themselves, why a little of it will serve their turns, but
if they have trauayled for their children, it is meets they should let them
have it, so soon as they are of dyscretion to know how to use it. If the
(...) grow of ambition, the poor souls ought to take a pattern, by Princes
and rulers, who seeing their children fit to govern the people, gladly resign
unto them their estates, realms and Empyres: whereof we have many examples.
If they presume too much of themselves, let them learn to know, that
children now adays are borne wise. And as men live not so long in these
days, as they did in times past, so they grow to perfection sooner now then
they did heretofore.


Annib. It is hard for these old folk, to take any profit by these good
admonitions, for that their vices by length of time, have taken too deep root
in them to be pulled up: yet we will not cease to advise the father (if he
render the well doing and aduauncemente of his child) to allow him with
discretion some liberty in matters of the house, suffering him sometime to
inuit, to welcome, and make his companions good cheeres to give intertainment
to strangers, and as occasion shall serve, to use the goods of the house to
serve his turn: but above all things he must both by example and by
admonition, keep from entering into his heart, and insatiable covetousness; which
makes men wicked and unjust, or at least never suffers the^ to live in ^est
and quiet, and especially ye father which is a gentleman, who ought to have in
his mind that king, who coming into his sons lodgeing, and seeing there many
pieces of plate, which he before had given him, said unto him, I see well
thou have no princely mind with thee, seeing of so many things which I gave
thee, thou have yet made thee never a friend: so that the father ought to
stir up his son to liberal and gentlemanly deeds: mary yet so that now
and then (if he be not otherwise affayred) he learn to play the good
husband, and see to things about home: whereby he shall be able to conserve
and augment his estate, and keep himself from falling into decay: hereof
will rise at the least three good effects. The first is the love of the son,
who seeing his father withdraw him self by little and little, from the
government of the house, to the intent to put him in his room, receives
thereby wonderful contentment, thinks himself in his mind much bound unto
him, and not only honors him, but wishes him long to live on earth. The
second, is the commodity of the son, who by this means after his fathers
death, shall have no need to seek counsel and aid at his freindes and
kynsfolkes hands, nor to put himself to the discretion of his servants, for
the ordering of his house, having by the goodness and foresight of his father,
all things long before in his own hands: so that the gouermnent of his house,
shall not to be strange or troublesome unto him, as it is to many when they
have lost their father. The third, is the sweet rest and contentment, which the
father inioieth in his old years, both for yt he feels himself rid of all
incombrance and vexation, and besides sees his son by his example govern
his house orderly. For my part I count it the greatest felicity in the world,
for a man to have about him a number of goodly children, which are grown to
perfection, whom he may well term the light of his eyes * and the staff of
his age: * and I marvel nothing, that the most prudent dame Cornelia showed
to her neighbor, that asked for her chains and jewels, her learned and
virtuous children: and methinkes it must needs be a greater comfort to ye
father, to see a proof of his child, and how discreetly he can dispose of his
living, and order his househould, then to do it himself: now when the father
shall be arrived to the Haven of such happiness, and consolation, methinkes he
may joyfully look for the last hour of his life, and dye most contentedly.


Guaz. It is (no question) far better to make place for their children of their
own accord, then to stay till they must needs do it, spite of their teeth.
Like as Ptolomei did, who gave ye Realm of Aegipt to his son, saying, that a
Realm was nothing so honorable nor acceptable a thing, as to be the father
of a King: which thing also above all his other acts increased the immortal
glory of Charles the fifth.


Annib. Albeit in holy Scripture it be written, Give no authority over thee,
neither to thy son, neither to a woman, nor to a brother, nor a friend, and,
give not away thy living to another while thou art alive, least thou
afterward repent it: yet there have been in time past, and are at this day,
many wise fathers, which depart both with authority and living to their
children, and yet incur no inconvenience by it, mary they do it in such
sort, that they neither bring themselves into subjection to them, nor into
such case, that they are not able to live without them. * For the inheritance
belonging by right unto the child, when he shall see the father keep it wholly
to himself, he does not only desire to obtain it, but seeks to recover it
(as it were) as his due. And when he is driven to stay for it until his father
be dead, he makes his account he has it at death his hand, not at his fathers
hand, and never thanketh him for it.


Guaz. All the occasions which you have hitherto rehearsed, of the disagreeme^t
between the father and the children, arise of the fault of the father: now it
were well we should see what occasions come by the childs fault.


Annib. When the father shall deal in such sort, that on his part none of
those occasions we have spoken of be given, I think the child shall have no
cause to be at variance with him: and this saying shall have place, that ye
son for the most part is like unto the father: and this other also, that the
daughter commonly follows the steps of the mother: but for that there are
some children which are untoward enough without any fault of the father, I
think good that we briefly set down to the child, a form of conversation
with his father, so that on his part there may be no occasion of disorder or
disagreement given.


Guaz. Though by the discourse already made, I have partly learned, how the
father ought to behave himself toward the child: yet I would gladly have you
briefly gather together the chief points belonging to the father, and after to
descend to the duties of the child, as you have now made offer to do.


Annib. I will do so: and first I give the father to understand, that there is
nothing in this world wherein there ought more care and diligence to be
bestowed, then in the nurture and education of children, for thereof proceeds
for the most part, the maintenance or the decay of houses: That he begin betime
to furnish their tender minds with the fear and knowledge of God, of justice,
and truth, and with virtue, and good conditions, in such sort, that they learn
to live as if they were still at the point to dye: That he endeavor to keep
them in obedience, rather by love, then by fear, and to cause them to do well,
rather of their own accord, then by others inforcement, for it is unseemly
for one that is free, to live in bondage, neither is fear any good keeper of
virtue: That in teaching them, he rather dally with them, then terrify them,
for no art or dysciplyne stycketh in the mind firmly, which is driven into
it forcibly: That how forward soever they be, yet, that he cease not to
encourage and prick them forward, knowing that there is no horse but needs
the spur: That he suffer them not to be idle, but to inure them to labor,
whereby they may be able to endure labor, as Milo was able to carry a bull,
because he used to carry him a calfe: That he enter not into rages with his
children, for a good father uses wisdom in stead of anger, and awardeth a
small punishment, to a great fault, and yet is not so foolish pitiful
altogether to pardon it: knowing that as by sparing the rod he may seem to
hate his child, so by wearing it the much, he may abate his courage, and make
him dull and desperate: That he provide them of good masters, and
gouernoures, continually to attend them, for young children must be propped up
like young trees, least the tempest of vices either break them, or bow them
crooked: That he suffer them not in any wise to haunt the company of servants
and of the base sort, of whom they will get such corrupt speeches and naughty
conditiones, as they will never after forget: That he be careful to mark in
their childehood to what kind of life they are naturally inclined, that he may
diligently set them to it, for an untoward beginning, has ever an unlucky
ending: That he teach the^ to govern themselves with the bridle and the spur, yt
is, with shame in dishonest things, and desire of glory in good things: That
without just occasion he use no partiality amongst his children, unless he be
willing to set them together by the ears: That in all his doings he show
himself grave and modest, and by doing well himself, give his children an
example to do the like, remembering how shameful a thing it is, that he should
be defiled with vice, of whom others should take example of virtue: That in his
old age, when his sons are men grown, through covetousness he withhold not
from them reasonable stipends to live by, but deal so with them, that they may
think they inioye their patrimony, no less in his life time, then if he were
dead, otherwise in stead of honoring him, they will wish him buried: Finally,
that he be so careful over his children, that at his death, he feel not his
conscience charged, in having to make accounte for his negligence in their
behalf: persuading himself, that amongst all the abuses of the world
(resited by an excellent author in this sort, A wise manne without works, an
old man without religion, a young man without obedience, a rich man without
charity, a woman without honesty, a master without virtue, a Christian
contentious, a poor man proud, a King unjust) there is none worse then a
negligent father. And therefore being mou^e by nature, pricked in conscience,
and bound in honor and honesty to cast a care for his children, let him not in
(...) wise cast of that care, but follow the example of good Aeneas, His son
Ascanius was his only care.


Guaz. I pray you now that for your greater ease, you will likewise breifely
comprehend the duty of the child.


Annib. If the child consider well the great and extreme love of the father
toward him, there should need no form of conversation to be prescribed
unto him, for that consideration would contain him in his duty, and make him
conform himself to the will and pleasure of his father, in all things. I
could bring many examples of pitiful fathers, who upon some mishap befalle^
to their children have showed their excessive love, either by voluntary death,
or by some other dolorous effect^ but let us here only consider the grief of
King David, who at the death of his son Absolon, was vanquished of his
affections (which in all other accidents he used to master) that shedding
tears abundantly by the grief which he felt, he was driven to break out
into these complaints: My son Absolon, Absolon my son, who will give me
leave to die for thee. Thus sorrowful was he for the death of his son,
notwithstanding this his son had before slain his other son Amon, and had
done him a thousand outrages, yea and finally conspired against him and his
Realm: but for ye children have no such regard to this tender love of their
parents, as they ought to have, doing as you would have me, I say briefly that
they ought to know that the first law of nature, is to honor the father and
the mother: and that the Spartanes used to do reverence to their elders, to the
end yt being accustomed to reverence those, whom they had nothing to do
withal, they might have their parents in the more honor and reverence. If the
Panims observed ye law so inuiolably, much more ought Christians to keep it,
who have received it out of Gods own mouth: who gives his blessing, and
promises the reward of long life to those yt honor their father and mother,
that no child should be so graceles and grateles, amo^gste infinite other, to
forget these three (...) received of ye father, to wit, his being, his
nourishing, and his instructing: for every one of those is sufficient to
persuade them, that next unto God, there is nothing more to be honored then
the Father and mother. If the father be churlish and cursed unto them, let the
manifold benefits received of him, counteruayle that crueltye, and continue
them in their duetye, by the example of the young man^, who, as one cast in his
teeth that his Father spoke ill of him, answered, That he would not do it, if
he had not cause: Let them take heed of molesting their parents any way,
or contending with them, but to overcome them with patience, for they shall be
sure never to find surer friend then their father, and they must always
carry in their minds, that he which stubbornly strives with his father,
provoke the wrath of God against him, so yt he shall neither pass away his
life quietly, nor yet make his end honestly: let them so behave themselves, yt
their father have no cause to curse them, and wish ill of them, as Oedipus did
to his Children, for it is a thing most certain, that God hears the prayers
of the Father against his children: let them not think by any deed or service,
to be able to require their Fathers goodness toward them, neither fear to be
found flatterers, for any praise they can give him or for any kindness they
can show him, for when they have done their duetye, to the uttermost they can
yet shall they not have done al which they should* Lastly* let them stick to
their parents, in all troubles and aduersitye, assuring themselves, that they
which shall abandon their parents, shall be forsaken of God, and that is the
greatest offense that may be committed.


Guaz. A man may gather by your most godly admonitio^s, that ye wise Solomon
was not to be found fault withal, who being demanded why he made no law
against murderers of their parents, answered: That he thought no man (how
wicked so ever he were) would over commit any such monstrous impiety. Have you
any more to say, touching the conversation between the Father and the son?


Annib. Nothing else, but that he shall have the same measure made him by his
children, as he shall meat to his Father: like as there was a Father, who was
driven out of his own house by his son, and was feign to take up his lodging
in the spittle house, and seeing his son one day go by the door, prayed him,
for charity sake, at least, to send him a pair of sheets to lie in. The
son, moved with his Fathers request, was no sooner come home, but he
commanded one of his sons to carry a pair of sheets to the Hospital to
his Grandfather: but the child delivered but one of them, which his Father
blaming him for at his return, he answered, I will keep the other for you,
when in your old age you shall go to the Hospital, as my Graundfather now
does. Whereby we may learn that our Children will deal with us, as we deal
with our parents. And this shall serve to cloase up our discourse, touching
this conversation.


Guaz. I shall think your discourse more perfect, if it shall please you to
make some particular mention of Daughters: for that the father is to use
himself otherwise toward them, then toward his sons.


Annib. I fear me, I cannot satisfy you in that point, for that at this day,
the manner of bringing them up, is so different, I say not of one country from
another, but of one Countye, yea, and of one City, that a man can set down
no certain determinate rule of it: for some fathers will not suffer their
Daughters to set their foot forth of doors, not past once or twice in the
year, at some solemn feasts: some will allow them, not only to keep company
with their friends and kinsfolk at home in the house, but also to visit
their friends abroad, and to be present at banquets and meeting of friends:
some will have them taught to write and read, and to have skill in Poetry,
music, and painting: others will have them learn nothing but to spinne with
the dis^affe, and govern the house: do you now think it possible to set down
one law which shall be agreeable to all these diversities.


Guaz. I remember I have read of a good wise Paynter, who having to draw the
singular bewties of Hellene, assembled together a company of the fairest women
he could get, and taking of every one of them yt part which was most
excellent in them, he reduced al those bewties into the shape of Hellen, so I
would have you if every one of those fashions by you rehearsed, like you not
of it self, by the pensil of your judgment to draw forth those parts out of
every of those customs, which like you best, and thereof to compose the
form and manners of a perfect virgin.


Annib. I had rather you would persuade me to fly, rather then follow the
example of the painter, for whereas he drew Helene, I think I should do
better to represent Lucrece or Virginia.


Guaz. You have taken me at a vauntage, but I would have you answer me,
according to the simple meaning of my words.


Annib. Though I do so, I must not follow the painter, for that his painting
tended only to one end, but Fathers do not so in the bringing up of their
Daughters: and yet perchance every one of those diuersittes is commendable, if
it be well understood.


Guaz. I see not how those extremities can be commendable: for not to suffer a
maid to go abroad but once or twice in the year, and to keep her enclosed
like a holy relic, is the way to make her become foolish, fearful, and out
of countenance in company, and more easy to be caughte in a net: for being
not accustomed to see the sun, so soon as she sets her foot forth of the
house, her eyes dazell with the least beams thereof, and down she falls
backward. Now the other, which goes abroad every day with her mother, and
haunteth feasts and banquets, melts away like wax in the fire: and driving by
little and little, the maidenly modestye out of her looks and gestures, there
appears in her licentious and lascivious behavior, so that she is taken
rather for a mother, then a maid: and if there come no worse of it, ye mother
ought to assure her self of this at least, that as some folk pressed by poverty
and need, bring into the public place the moveable goods of their house, and
sell the^ for less then they are worth, so the mother bringing her daughter so
often abroad into public places, makes her thereby less prised, and worse
bestowed, the^ otherwise she might be. I say nothing of those which are taught
in their cha^bers, to read, to sing, and to make verses, and will never come
down into ye kitchen, but I will leave that charge to the poor husbands, whose
house goes to decay, and often times honor too, and al for having so learned a
wife: Then if you cast your eyes upon one of those which can do nothing but
spin and sow, you shall see in attire, in talk, in behavior, ye very figure of
a milkmaid of ye country, who will have as good a grace amongst other women,
as a Satyr would have amongst ye Nymphs. Wherefore I should think it good,
that out of every one you should take the best part, and make thereof one
perfect one, according to your fancy.


Annib. I will do it in few words: replying unto you, yt all those different
manners are commendable, when they tend to a commendable end. It behooves then,
discreet fathers, who are to bestow their daughters, to measure first their
degree, and disposition, and then to dispose of them accordingly: And if they
think them fit to enter into religion, the mother, who ought to have chief
charge of them, must seek to wayne them from al worldly vanities, and to inure
them to such sincerity of thoughts, and purity of life, that the vow which
they shall make above the possibility of nature, and contrary to the liberty
allowed to mankind, may not be so broken as it is daily, and that that estate
may not be polluted with whoredom and other fylthinesse, as it has been by
Rhea, that Roman vestall virgin, and diverse other Romish votaries, since her
time. If they mean to bestow them in Marriage, the father must consider of
what calling, and of what country his son in law is like to be, and so to
frame his daughter accordingly: As if he purpose to marry her into a country
where the wives are enjoined to a strict life, and mued up by their husbands
like hawks, for fear least they should stoop at some pray which they should
not, then it behooves the father to abridge her of liberty, to keep her within
doors, and to accustom her to such a hard and solitary life, yt it may not
seem strange or grievous unto her, when her husband shall bind her to the
like. Contrary, if she be to be married into a more free country, such as
Piemont is, or our Montferrat, the father must somewhat slake the bridle hand,
and give her more liberty, yt she may be fit for that life which the wives
there lead, and not taken for a fool and a clown.


Guaz. The father has not always his son in law in his sleeue, marriages
(as they say) are made in heaven, and are guided by destiny: so that the father
may be ten years in bruyng a matter, which in a moment he may be driven
to change.


Annib. You have prevented me, I thought to have said as much: And therefore I
think that the father being in no certaynetye for the marriage, ought in this
doubt to carry a heavy hand, rather than a light, on the bridle: For it is much
more easy to let loose the raines afterward, than to take them up, being once
fallen on the neck.


Guaz. Seeing you are fallen upon this point of restrayning of liberty, I
cannot be restrained from speaking of the abuse of this City, where a man
shall see nothing else all the day long, but women in the streets, which go
from house to house, visityng some of courtesy, and other some (who before
have vysited them) of duty, though without occasion: not by reason of some
marriage, or of some freindes death, but (as I have heard) if some one have had
but a fit of an ague, or have kept her chamber for a few days, all the women
in the town run thither of a rank, as it were in procession.


Annib. The chances of these visitations in deed are so often, and so many,
that they spend six days of the week in them: in so much, that you shall
hear some of them complain that they have scarce leisure on the saturday, to
wash their head: but I will say thus much, that they are worthy of excuse,
yea, and of praise, if they do it of charity, and not of purpose to show
themselves in their bravery, and to iet up and down from this place to that,
to make report and ieastes of the faults of other houses: it is most certain
that the Gentlewomen of Mantua which are in this city, mocking, or at least
maruayling at that fashion, yet because they will not seem to be il brought
up, they do nothing but run and trot up and down, framing themselves to the
usage of our Country women.


Guaz. If that custom were to be allowed, it were good also, for the universal
benefit, to bring in another custom, that while the wives go gossipping
about, the husbands should keep home to sow and spin, and to see to other
things about the house, in their absence.


Annib. I think good that we let the wives walk abroad at their pleasure, and
that we go home to the daughters: whom it is needful to instruct in things
meet to get the favor of their Mistress, if the father mean to set them
to the court to the service of some Princess, so that it behooves them to
learn to read, to write, to discourse, to sing, to play on Instruments, to
dance, and to be able to perform all that which belongs to a Courtier to
do: As that Venetian Lady could, who was commended, for that she knew how to
use in steed of wool a book, in steed of a spindle, a pen, in steed of
sowing, inditing, things which happen at this day to few women, and yet were
common to many in times past: for I am sure, I have seen the role of more
then a thousand, who have been excellently seen in Divinity, in Philosophy,
in Physic, in Music, in painting, and in all Sciences.


Guaz. I saw about the French Queen certain mean Gentlewomen, enter into
such credit, only by some one of those good parts by you rehearsed, that they
are now come to be married to the chief Gentlemen in France, without any penny
given them in dowrye by their father: but a private Gentleman has no need in
his house of singing or daunsing.


Annib. You say well, and therefore if the Father be not like to bestow his
daughter (...) some man of great calling, he ought to practice her rather in
spinning on the wheel, then in playing on instruments.


Guaz. And how think you of the daughters not only of Gentlemen, but of
Merchants and artificers, which learn to write and read?


Annib. Seeing these things are at the least commodious, if they be not
altogether necessary, I do not mislike them, so that they be well employed.


Guaz. I would think you had reason, if the women of Italy did follow suits in
law, and frequented the houses of Judges and Advocates, to make them priuye to
their case, or in Merchandise kept the books of account, as diverse women in
France do: but in teaching our women to write and read, we do but give them
occasion to turn over the hundred Nouelles of Boccace, and to write amorous
and lascivious letters.


Annib. We give them also occasion to read the lives of Saints, to keep the
accountes of the house, and. to write their minds to their absent husbands,
without disclosing their secrets to any Secretary: besides, you may assure
your self, that those women which cannot write, nor make love by Letters,
will do it, if they be disposed, by words, yea, and if their tongue should
fail them, they would fall to it by signs: but to end this matter, I
conclude touching Daughters, that in such diversities as are used at this day
in their education, I can give no fitter aduertisemente then this, that the
Fathers bestow all their study and industrye to bring them up chaste, as well
in body as in mind, for a man wayeth it not much to have the flesh unspotted,
if the thought be defiled: And therefore it is needful to put into their
hearts Godly imaginations, that from their inward puritye, there may shine
outwardlye in their face and countenance, the brighte beams of modestye. And
for that bewtye is a frail and dangerous thing, those which are bewtifull
have so much the more need of that virtue, to keep their bewtye unblemished,
for bewtye in an unchaste woman, serves to no more purpose, then a Gold Ring
in a Swines, Snoute, and to make it short, they must understand that as the
Poet says: A woman void of honesty, can make no brags of bewty.



Guaz. Before you pass to the conversation between Brothers, I would gladlye
have you set down the difference which ought to be between sons and
Daughters in conversation.


Annib. I know not whether in tossing over your books, you have light upon
that place where Cicero gives a nippe to his Daughter and his son in Law,
both at once.


Guaz. I do not know that I have read it, and if I have, I have forgotten it.


Annib. His son in law was so delicate of nature, that in his gate he used a
slow and mincing pace, like a woman: his Daughter on the other side, ^iryd out
lustilye like a man, which her Father seeing, fayde merrilye unto her,
Daughter, go as your Husband does: which is to be understood, not only of
going, but of all other doings, wherein it is an indecent thing for a woman to
resemble a man, or a man a woman. And therefore a Maid ought to frame ^er
behauyour in such sort, that above all things she show both inwardlye and
outwardly, that maydenlye modestye which is proper to maids: for it is a
monstrous and naughtye thing, to see a young Gyrle use such liberty and
boldness in her Gesture, looks, and talk, as is proper to men: and
therefore let maids learn in all their behauioure to express that modesty,
which is so seemly for their estate, assuring themselves, that though they be
furnished with all other bewties, graces, and virtues of the world, yet if that
bright sun shine not in the^. all the other as stars borrowing light of that,
will make no show at all. And as Goldesmiths sometime cover their ware and
jewels with a Glass, to make them show the better, so a maid under the veil
of modesty, ought to incloase all her other perfections, to increase the
brightness of them, and the more forcibly to draw the eyes and the hearts of
others, to have her in admiration. On the other side, it is the worst sight
that may be, to see sons, who by their womanly gestures and countenance,
make men doubt whether they are males or Females: which makes me return to
say, that the father understands it ill, who with too great rigor makes
his son as fearful as a Cony: whereby, coming before his betters, he
shows that he has no tongue in his mouth, or else he speaks and answers
so foolishly, that he makes himself to be laughed at: by reason* whereof, he
will not willingly come in any company, but hides himself, and according to
the saying of the Poet: In thickets he him shrowds, as dear pursued with
hou^ds.



Guaz. In my judgment, the French men in that point use great discretion: who
in their childrens infancye, begin to embolden them before their betters, and
to make the^ talk with them: whereby they come to have a good audacitie, and to
be resolute in their behavior: neither are they any more abashed at the
presence of the King himself, then of their equals.


Annib. That boldness is not too be found in many Italians, for I have known
of them many excellent and worthy men, who coming before princes, have been so
astonish^^, and so timorous, that their coolour has changed, the (...) has
run down their face, their voice has trembled, their body has quiuered,
and their words have come out so foolishly, that they have plainly showed in
what troublesome taking they have been in: And though wise men like well of it,
and take it for a token of a good nature, yea, and in respect thereof bear them
the greater affection, yet oftentimes such perturbations hinder a man much, and
are mocked at, as unmeet for men. And thereof we may gather the great wrong
that fathers, mothers, and nurces, do to young children, when they will make it
a sport to put their children in fear with tales of Robin good fellow, and
such like, whereby they offend God, and make their children fearful and
dastardlye. It behooves us therefore to make our children bold, and to use
them at the beginning to withstand those things which breed any such
fearfulness in them: otherwise the proverb will be verified in them, That the
wolf is cruel to the gentle dog: wherefore we ought to make them take
example of the fox, who at the first sight of the Lion, was at his wits end for
fear, but seeing him again, he began to fear him but a little, and at length
came before him very boldly. And therefore we will conclude, that boldness is
good in all things, and that nothing is well done, which is doubtfully and
fearfully done.


Guaz. If it were ever time to set a good face on the matter, and to be
audacious, it is no doubt now: for that this great respect and modesty in
deeds, is thought fitter for men of the Church, then for courtiers: and though
it be acceptable to those toward whom it is used, yet (as you say) it is
prejudicial to those who shall use it: whereas contrariwyse he that is bold in
company (so that it be with dyscretion) is more esteemed, and makes himself
place in all places, so yt neither the precepts of Cato, nor the rules of the
Philosophers do now days stand us in more steed then you say for.


Annib. I will not say that they are to be contemned, but I say that in things
pertaining to manners and behavior (so long as they are not repugnant to
honesty) we ought to frame our selves to the fashio^s of the countries and
times we live in: making such answer to those obseruers of antiquity, as was
made to Politian: who meeting a friend of his going a great pace in the streat,
stayed him by the lap of his cloak, aduising him to go more softly: for that
Aristotle says, A slow pace is a sign of gravity, who staying and looking him
in the face, answered, I merueile of you, if Aristotle had had but half the
business that I have, he would have run still, and yet he would not have
dispatched the third part of them: we will say then to end this matter, that
seeing neither men ought to be Sardanapales, nor women Amazones, the charge of
the father is, to see that in any wise, there be a difference in conversation
between the son and the daughter, he in audacity, and she in modesty.


Guaz. Now I think it not amiss, that you prescribe to widows a form of
conversation.


Annib. If we shall bring wydowes into company, how shall they be wydowes? yet
we will propose unto them, either yt conversation of a second husband, or else a
solitary life meet for widows, and if we shall say any thing touching this
master, let us content our selves to show that ye estate of widows, is of all
others most unfortunate: for not only those which live licentiously, but even
the wisest and the honestest of them, serve for a mark for ill tongues to
shoot at, and it seems yt ye more they cover their face and their eyes with
their maskes, the more busily men labor to discover in them some fa^^tes.
Wherefore if they will exempt themselves from such injuries, they must take
heed (the young ones especially) either in talk, countenance, apparel, or
behavior, to give the least suspicion of vanity that may be: and if reasonable
occasion inforceth them not, they ought not to come in any company, but to
keep them both in name and in deed honest: they ought above all things to
banish idleness and ease, and to apply themselves continually to some
commendable exercise, remembering this saying, That a wyddowe living in
voluptuousness is dead, * and laying before them the example of the renowned
widow Judith, whom though her great riches, her young years, and her
singular bewty, persuaded to marry again: yet she was content to prefer her
wyddowhood before wedlock, her woollen garments, before gorgeous apparel,
abstinency before gluttony, watching before sleeping, praying before loytring,
and armed with these weapons, she cut of the head of Holofe^^es, that is, the
devil *.


Guaz. I look now that according to the order of your division, you speak of
the conversation between brothers.


Annib. You will then that I shall expres^^ speak of that, which is
necessarily insp^yed (...) that which I have already spoken for if ye father
use such eat^ in the educatio^ of his children, and the children such diligence
in following ye instructions of the Father as we have advised them to do, it is
not possible but that the brothers should live in unity and amity, and govern
themselves together in one mind and consent, and therefore we have no need to
speak much of it.


Guaz. If you consider the sieldome agreement* and the often contentions
between brothers, you shall want us matter to speak of, if you want no time
to speak in.


Annib. As it troubles the Physician most to find out the cause of the
disease, which once being found, he soon finds a medecin to cure it: so
according to our custom we must first have recourse to the occasions which
breed this discord amongst brothers, and those once known, we shall qui^ly find
a remedy for it.


Guaz. It is needful that we seek out the causes of it, for that the effects
thereof are so horrible and wonderful* For in my fancy, ye rage between
savage beasts is not so great, as the hate and ^ancour between brothers living
in dissension.


Annib. For proof of your opinion* it is said, yt the ^^mity between E^eocles
and Pol^^ces was so great, yt their bodies being burnt together, the flames
were ^eene most miraculously to part one from another: showing plainly, that
death was not able to take up their controversies, or set an end to their (...)
hatred.


Guaz. I knew in France two brothers, Italians, of great valor and prowess,
both men at arms, and in pay with the King: who, upon a very small occasion,
fell out in such sort, that they not only left lying together in one lodgeing,
as they had ^ane (...) ye spare of ten years before, but also talking
together, and saluting one another: yea their hatred did fester in their hearts
in such sort, that if any upon good will went about to make them friends,
as soon dealing with one, as soon with another, he got nothing by it, but
their ill will. At that same time, the Count Hercules S^rozze* Ambassador of
Mantua, kept house at Paris, where to maintain his degree, and of his own
bountiful nature, he gave entertainment to gentlmen of all countries, but he
was most of all visited by Italian men at arms, of whom, a man should see
somtymes at his tay^^ to the number of ten: so that he seemed to be their
Captain. Thither often resorted the one or the other of those brothers,
whereupon Easter day approaching, this Earl thought in these days of penitence,
he should be able to bring them to confess their fault, to reconcile
themselves one to another, and to live brotherly together, and beginning to
try the mind of the younger brother, in showing him, that he ought to humble
him self to his elder brother, he found his heart so hardened, that he would
relent nothing at all. Afterward he addressed himself to the other, and went
about by many pleasant devises to make him understand, that it was his part
being elder and dyscreeter, to supplye the default of his brother, which he
interpreted so wronglye, that he said to the Count, he understood by the half
word, what the whole men^, and that he was content, to forbear his house, to
the end that those who were so far in his books, might have free access unto
it. To be short all his affaultes were in vain, as if they had been made
against an invincible fort: and the best composition which he could bring him
to, was that he was content in respect of him, to be friends with his
brother, but he would afterward kill him if he could: which he failed to
do, for that within few days after, in that ill mind he was in, he was slain
at the battle at S. Quinten.


Annib. He thought to show the Count some curtes^e, in deferring the death of
his brother so long. And truly it is a desperate cure, to go about to quench
the fire of discord, when it is once kindled in the hearts of two Brothers:
which makes me much muse how it should be so, being a thing so far
from all reason.


Guaz. But I think it rather a reasonable thing, that (...) man should find
himself most grieved with him, which ought least to grieve him.


Annib. And I think it reasonable, that a man should be least offended with
him, who ought to be most bold with him.


Guaz. Know you not that where is great love, from thence proceeds great
hate?


Annib. Know you not, that where is great love, there ought also to be great
patience?


Guaz. You see yet by experience, effects contrary thereto.


Annib. Brothers are in deed often times at discord, for that they were never at
accord: but brothers which from their infancy have lived in love together, will
put up any injury or displeasure, rather then they will fall out among
themselves.


Guaz. You mean then, that the cause why brothers fall out, is for lack of
love.


Annib. If I should set down that, for yt cause, I should be counted as very a
fool as he, who being asked, why the dog followed his master, answered, for
yt his master went before: and you might say yt, according to the proverb, I
went about to fill your mouth, with an empty spoone: That is, to seem to teach,
and not to teach. Wherefore if you will have me come to ye right occasions of
this discord, I say, I have noted the two chief causes thereof: the one, by ye
fault of the fathers, the other, by ye fault of the brothers. Touching ye
discord growing by the fathers fault, we have spoken sufficiently of it
already: For the other, it happens when brothers take more care for the
parts, then for the whole body. I mean by the body, all the brothers
together, and by the parts, each one of them: for that brothers stand us in
the like stead as our eyes, hands, and feet do. Yea if we consider the matter
thoroughly, we shall find that brothers are framed more fitly for the mutual
aid one of another, then the parts of our body are: for one hand, can but
help the other hand which is present, and one foot the other foot which is
hard by it, but the mutual aid of brothers stretches farther: for being far
distant one from another, they cease not to succor and assist one another. If
then brothers, according to their nature, were cheeflye addicted to the
conversation of this body, without casting their only care for their own
peculier part, there is no doubt of their brotherly love, and good agreement
together.


Guaz. Indeed that naughty passion of bearing our selves to great affection,
will not suffer us to love others as we ought to do, though they be never so
nere unto us.


Annib. It is true: and that is the cause there are so few brothers, which will
prefer the common honor and profit of them all, before their own
partyculer advancement, and that we daily see things common, commonly
neglected, whereof for the most part, grows the decay of houses: for by the
division of goods, the forces of brothers are weakened, and by the division of
hearts, they come somtymes to receive injuries, which every one by himself
has his hands full to repulse. Which that wise King showed manifestly, who by
the bundell of rods, gave his children to understand, how inuyncible their
force was, so long as they held together. Wherefore it is requisite, that above
all things, brothers lay before them the common honor and profit, and that
all of them both in deeds and in counsel, be careful for the conservation
of the honor of their house: and let no one of them persuade himself by his
sufficiency to supply the defects of the other, and to carye away all the
honor and credit from them.


Guaz. Soft I pray you, so long as I shall live virtuously and well, do you
think my honor any thing impaired, though some of my brothers live ill?


Annib. Your particular honor shall be nothing diminyshed, but the common
honor of your house shall, wherein you have part.


Guaz. And why? shall not my commendable behavior, counteruaile their lewd
demeanor?


Annib. Howsoever it counteruaile it, it cannot wype away the dishonor, which
your house sustaineth by it: which receives as much shame by their ill doing,
as honor by your well doing. And therefore they are greatly to blame, which
take not as great care of their Brothers as of themselves: for the brothers
being, as we have said, members of one body, any one of them cannot be stained,
but the whole body will be spotted: and thereupon it is said, That the nose
cannot be cut without bloodying the mouth. This neerenesse which ought to be
between brothers, is likewise employed in the name of brother, which in latin
signifies as it were another, to give us to understand, that a brother to a
brother is as another himself: whereof I cannot at this time bring a more
plain example then of a work, or book, whereof there are prynted in one
press diverse volumes, which may perhaps dyffer in the covering and outward
trymming, and yet are but one thing, having one self beginning and ending: so
that the faults which are in one of these volumes, are common to them al,
whereof I infer, that the fault which is in one brother, is common to all
the rest. Wherefore for ye honor of their house, brothers ought to support one
another, and when the one falls, the other ought to help him up again, or
else to confess that he him self is fallen to the ground: besides, it is an
unseemly thing for a man, to see himself raised to high degree, and looking
toward the ground, to behold his brother in low estate. And a man may be
bold to say, that he which has no care of his brothers honor, has no care of
his own. Of this common honor, Scipio Africanus was very careful, who having
subdued Spain, vanquished Annibal, and conquered Afrique, thought he had done
nothing, if he might not see likewise ye honor and renown of his brother to
increase: whereof he was so jealous, that he not only procured that he was
chosen by the people of Rome for ye exploit of Asia, but spoiling himself of
his own authority, he was content to follow his brother as a man at arms, and
as a private Souldyer, and honoring him openly as Captain general, and
counsayling him secretly as a brother, he wrought so with him, that pricked
forward with the honor his brother did him, furthered by ye advise he gave
him, and encouraged by ye example he before had shown him, he won to himself
the name of Asiatique, to his immortal glory, and to the people of Romes
singular benefit.


Guaz. That Asiatique might well say of Africane.

My father he was in honor, my son in love, my brother in years.

And truly this was notable love, and worthy eternal memory, to the shame of
those who are so far from procuring the honor and advancement of their
brothers, that they rejoice at their misery and misfortune.


Annib. I could rehearse unto you many examples of such brothers, who through
malice and discord have been so lead awry, ye seking continually to disgrace
one another, they have shamed themselves both: making some to laugh at the^,
and some to pity them. But it is a thing worthy commendation, and admiration,
to see concord and amity surely established amongst brothers: so that none
of the^ go about any thing for their own private commodity, but by the
consent of the rest, for the common honor and advancement of their house: and
so long as ye bond of brotherhood is kuit in such sort, it may well be said
that the sword which undid Gordians knot, shall not be able to undo it. To be
short, there is nothing which so much maintains the honor of houses, as the
agreement amongst brothers: and here I must say, that those houses are far more
happy and fortunate where there are many brothers agreeing well together, then
where there is but one only: for as no man has ye force of Atlas to bear up
heaven with his shoulders, so there is no burden so heavy, which being
sustained by many, becomes not light: besides, the natures, degrees, and
professions of brothers, being diverse, and all of them referring al their care
to the advancement of their house, they will, like workmen about a building,
diligently apply themselves to it, ye one by learning, the other by arms,
some by temporal or spiritual promotions, some by some profitable trade of
life, or by some other mean: al which things cannot be in one man alone.


Guaz. Now you have showed how necessary concord is amongst brothers, I would
gladly have you set down some order of conversation, whereby they may keep
and mayntaine themselves in concord.


Annib. The form of their conversation depends first, of the prudency and
authority of the Father, who ought to labor to knit them fast in good will
together, and to admonish them to honor and aid one another, when afterward
they shall come to years of discretion, it is their parts so long as they shall
live in common, to beware of appropriating to themselves any thing
particulerly: for that besides the offense to Godward, ye cracking of their
credit, there is nothing yt makes their brothers so soon to fall out with
the^, as that does: Moreover, it is their parts to observe ye order of nature,
so yt the younger (if inequality in degree be not let) do honor to his elder
brother: A custom introduced by the Romans amongst friends, much more ought
it to take place amongst brothers, but for all yt, the elder brother is not
quite discharged, for it is his part to recompense the humility of his younger
Brother, with such good will and liberality, that he may have the better will to
do him honor. It belongs also to the elder Brother, to have more discretion
with him, and to bear with his younger Brother, when he shall chance to fail
in his duty toward him, letting him to understand his fault in a gentle sort,
and at convenient time: so that his admonition may not be ill taken, but be
thought to proceed of good will, whereby his Brother shall bear him the
greater affection: but above all other things, I think it needful for the
maynteynaunce of concord between brothers living together, that they be not
over bold one with another, either in words or deeds: which often times
breeds debate amongste them, but to use such modest respect in their
doings, that they give no occasyon of myslyke any way.


Guaz. Of the one side, this advertisement likes me well, for that over
broad speech, and too homelye dealing without any respect, make sometimes so
deep a wound, that the smarte of it being intolerable, they seek the
revenge of it with their tongues, yea and sometimes with their hands: but on
the other side I consider, that in using this respect which you spoke of, the
brothers will not dare to use these reprehensions and admonitions amongst
themselves, which you have proposed, for fear of offending one another:
whereof shall follow rightly that which the Poet says: He does not well, who
does contend,
Nor he who dares not reprehende.



Annib. I am not of your mind, but in my judgment, it falls out clean
contrary: for the reprehension which comes from a foul mouthed person, has
no such great force, and is imputed rather to his naughtye nature, then to any
desire he has to amend his Brother: but the admonition which comes from a
discreet man, is well taken, and the party which receives it, persuades
himself it is upon great cause, and of great good will that the other (being so
wise and so honest) uses it. But you must not think that in making mention of
a modest respect to be used, I meante a distrustful fearfulness, which
makes us we dare not freelye utter the truth, as it is the fashyon toward
Princes, Magistrates, and other our Superiors: for that fear would quite
quench out the fire of love which is requisite amongst right brothers: but I
meant that grave and discreet manner, whereby we do honor to others, and
cause others to do honor to us: which lets us not to reprehende our
friend, much less our brother.


Guaz. Yet I am of opinion, there are some brothers which forbear to do it,
for fear to offend one another, in the same respect yt servants are afearde
to speak to their masters.


Annib. Say rather, that want of good will keeps them from doing it: whereof
it comes, that one brother seeks not to amend the other, but takes
pleasure to backbyte one another.


Guaz. Our reverend brother Bernardin Maccia, reader of the Institutes, used to
make mention thereof: recounting that he knew two brothers, the one a studient,
ye other a courtyer, who though they were counted honest men, yet because they
were too talkatiue, the preciser sort could not away with their company, and as
it was his chance one day to go visit the student who was not well at ease,
entering into the house, he met the other brother coming forth, whom he asked
how the sick man did? who answered, reasonable well, but go I pray you and see
him, I warrant you he will weery you with his babbling. Being entered the
Chamber, after many words of comfort to the sick party, he said unto him, I
you not how your brother does, for I saw him but now very merry as I came in
hither: whereto the sick man answered, Men having the world at will, as he has,
are never but merry, and if you stayed long with him, I believe he has made
you almost deaf with prattling.


Annib. In truth if brothers would agree to tell one another of their faults
privily, they should avoid the mockes and scoffs of others openly: And for
that it seems to me we have spoken enough of this matter, we will conclude,
that as one hand washes another, and both of them the face, so one brother
ought to support another, and all of them to procure the honor of their house:
for the maynteinaunce whereof, there is required amongst them a concord,
composed of love, discretion, honorable respect, and friendly reprehension.


Guaz. We are at point, as far as I see, to make an end of this days
discourse, seeing we have no more to speak of, but of the conversation
between the master and the servant: yet I am afearde least it be grievous
unto you to spend the time here to your loss, which in other places you might
bestow to your gain.


Annib. I frequent other places to pleasure others, and there in deed I spend
the time: but I am with you for mine own pleasure, and therefore here I get the
time: wherefore let us go forward cherefully, for if my servant be no more
grieved to attend me without, then I am to be here within, it is not possible
to find a master and servant better content the^ we are,


Guaz. I will answer for your man, that he is content where he is at this
present: for he is with our servants, where they pass the time together in
three things, which they take singular pleasure in.


Annib. Which be those?


Guaz. In drinking, playing, and speaking ill.


Annib. Those things cannot be done, but to the disprofite and dispraise of
the masters.


Guaz. Though they should want those three, yet I dare warrant you, your manne
is content, in that he is out of your sight.


Annib. I believe it without an oath: but whereof think you proceeds that
coffeehouse of servants?


Guaz. Of the lack of love, for if they loved their master, they would love
his presence, and would come to be continually in his sight.


Annib. And whereof may we think that lack of love in servants proceeds?


Guaz. Perchance of the difference of life, of minds, and of manners* which is
between them: what say you of it?


Annib. I am of yt opinion likewise, but the very servitude it self may also
be a cause of this lack of love (yt I may not say hatred) of the servants
toward the masters, for that men serve commonly rather of necessitye, then
of free will: for so much as a man knowing himself to be borne free, when
he puts himself in service; he forces his nature, and though voluntarilye
he makes himself a prisoner, yet it is not to be said, that he is content
with it, or that he hates not him which keeps him in subjection. There is
no doubt of it, but though he have with his mouth promised and sworn
fidelity to his Master, yet nevertheless, in heart he rebelleth against
his service: And therefore it is no marvel though he fly his presence, and
like better to be his servant a far of, then to do him service hard by. For
so long as he is out of his masters sight, he forgets in a manner that he
is a seruante, and he thinks he has recovered his liberty: whereas
contrariwise, when he comes before his master, he holds down his head, and
persuades himself he retourneth to the collar like a dog, that for a time
has been let loose.


Guaz. It were good here that we came to the distinction of servants: for
that which you say of servants which fly their masters presence, is not
general, and is to be understood of yt nature of vile and base servants, not
of the good and such as are gentlemen: who for the most part, are never
well, but when they are in their Masters presence, and serve him louinglye and
willinglye. Whereupon it is said, That the gentleman loves, and the slave
fears.


Annib. In the distinction which may be made between Gentlemen Courtiers
which serve Princes, and the base sort, which serve Gentlemen, is, that the
chains or Fetters of the baser sort, are of iron, and those of the Gentlemen,
of Gold.


Guaz. I hold well with that difference, and I make good moreover, that the
chayns of Gold, bynd more strongly then those of iron, but I think you will
not say that Gentlemen, and common Seruingmen, serve with one mind, or propose
to themselves one self end of their service.


Annib. I say unto you, that common Seruingmen hate both their Master and the
Chain, where the other love their Masters, but cannot away with the chain.


Guaz. I cannot see how it can be said, that Gentlemen cannot away with the
Chain, seeing they seek not intertainement upon constraynt or necessity, as
the baser sort do, but are naturally given that way, not pitching their mark
at vile gain, as the other do, but at honor and renown: I will not speak
of others, but of my self only, assuring you, that the Duke, my master,
seeing that I am unfit to serve him, by reason of my sicklynesse, has
appointed me a better pension to live by hereafter in my house, then I had
heretofore when I followed his Court: yet for all that (to confess unto you my
ambition) I reason this with my self, that when I shall live in rest at my
fathers house, I shall be no more then others of my neighbors are, and I shall
take my self to be as unprofitable to the world, whereas being about that
Prince, I am in case every hour to pleasure a number of persons, to get
friends daily, and to make my self honored of the most honorable in the
court: by reason whereof, I curse my infirmitye, which will not suffer me
long to be bound to this chain of Gold, which I like above all things in the
world.


Annib. All men endued with noble minds, are in love with that Chain, not for
it self, but for the honor which is annexed unto it: and I remember I have
heard your brother say, that he loved my Lady his Mistress well, but he
could not well away with service: and I can tell you, he had shrunk his
head out of the cotler of those insupportable pains long before that
Princess dyed, if her exceeding bountye and extraordinary favors toward
him, had not kept him from it. And in truth that constraynt to eat, to
speak, and to go, by the mouth, by ye tongue, and by the feet of others,
that estate never to have rest either of body or mind, to loose ones self in
the service of his Master, to be short, those incommodityes, vexations,
troubles, and annoyes, rehearsed in a Letter of yours, whereof you have endured
in your own person a great part, fill up the Cup with so bitter a potion,
that the smell of it, yea, the very rememberaunce of it, offends nature.


Guaz. You know well, that a man wins not the wager without running.


Annib. Yet you know there are many which run, but only one wins* and
for one which you see recompensed for his service, you shall hear a number
complain, that they have consumed their goods, and hazarded their lives in the
service of Princes, without gayning other thing then a miserable old age, with
(...) late repentance, and (...) there are of them which are not made to
burste either with travail, or with grief. That Golden Chain never liked
me, and I have always counted all service unsure and miserable, unless it
were one kind of service of a Spanish ^^^tleman, who after he had long time
served his king, made himself a monk, writing forthwith to the king, that he
was preferred to the service of a greater Prince then h^e was, of whom he
looked for better wages, then he received at his masters hands. These
Servants which enter into the Ministerye and Service of GOD; ^^e no doubt
l^u^ well both the Master and the Chain, and they are only they, amongst
all others which ^^^e in serving: but for that our purpose is ^^ spe^ke of
this earthlye and uncertain service retourning to Gentlemen Seruingmen, I
grant, that for the most part they love their masters, to whom they are
like, in life, in mind, and in manners: and therefore they think themselves
happy, when they are in their presence, and when they have occasion offered to
do them some acceptable service: And as the baser sort of servant,
withdraw themselves so much as they may, out of their masters sight, to
the end they may not be set about any thing: so contrarylye, the better
sort, think themselves in great favor, if they be oftener employed by their
Masters, then their Fellows are.


Guaz. It is for no other cause that Princes are said to be better served then
we are, but for that their servants are Gentlemen, and ours are otherwise: but
I should think good, you came now to show the manner of conversation between
the master and the servant.


Annib. Let us always follow the rule observed by us in our discourses, and
first let us show the occasion of the discord and inconveniences, which arise
every day amongst the^, and afterward we will seek the mean to make all
well, and to agree them together.


Guaz. I think we have already declared one occasion of it, when we made
mention of the difference between the^ in life and manners.


Annib. You say true, but as that occasion is common to the master and the
servant: for here are two others, whereof the one depends of the master,
the other of the servant* To the one it belongs to command, to the other to
serve, so that if either of them fail in their charge, there grows between
them trouble and disorder. The master commits a fault when he knows not
how to command, and therefore the Philosopher said well, That it behooves
the Master first to know, how to command those things which the servant
ought to do: but it is not so easy a matter to know how to command, as it
is to be a master.


Guaz. You must then prescribe unto the master, the manner of commanding.


Annib. The manner is set down, if that he set service before commanding,
that is, if he learn to serve before he begin to command.


Guaz. I am of that mind, for I think it a matter impossible* that he should
know how to play the master well, who never had master: and for that cause I
would not change the Duke my Master for the Emperor, for being used even
from his infancy to do continual service, first to king Henry, and then to
king Frauncis and king Charles, his children and successors in the kingdom,
and knowing of what importance it is to possess as well the hearts, as the
persons of his servants, he uses a wise, and a gentle kind of commanding
over his Gentlemen. And of the service which he does himself, I have noted two
good effects, the one in that enduring much travail both in mind and body, he
knows by himself the pain of his own servants, by reason whereof, moved
with pittye, he beholds them with a more gracious eye, and commands them
more gentlye. The other, for that (notwithstanding he is a great Prince, and
may live at his ease) his servants seeing him serve continuallye, are stirred
up by his example, to render him obedience, making no account of the pain
which they endure in his service.


Annib. To say the truth, he shows himself so worthy and courteous a
prince, that he has mo servants thorowout all Europe, then in his own
court: but these times are so unfortunate, that there is no Homer to set
forth the doings of such an Achilles. Now returning to the fault of
Masters, we will say once again, that those only know well how to command,
which know well how to obaye. And for that few masters can do that, there
are found almost in every house, masters that are indiscreet, proud,
fantastical, and insolent, which entreat their servants no otherwise then
if they were slaves, speaking imperiously to them, being not content, unless
they see the^ tremble in their presence, using no speech unto them but full of
terrifying, threatening, and reuiling.


Guaz. Of such manner of dealing, it comes that servants, though good and
sufficient, begin to grow naught, and to wax cold in goodwill, and negligent
in duty toward their masters: but those masters are more indiscreet, which
braule and chide with their servants before strangers: whereby in my mind
they make the strangers think they are scarce welcome to their house, and
besides, spite thereby their servants, the most of any thing in the world. For
proof whereof, when a servant seeks a master, he never inquireth whether he
be covetous or of an ill life, but whether he be cruel and hard to please.


Annib. Those are yet worse which speak to their Servants with their hands:
who belike have been beaten by their masters, if they have served, and
therefore they will revenge it upon their servant: or else perchance they
persuade themselves that their servants can not help them selves with their
Poignadoes, whereof I saw an example at Padua. Truly there is nothing that
angreth me more then that, for I cannot but think very ill of those which
triumph tyrannously over their poor servants, from iniuring of whom, they
ought rather to abstain, then of their equals: for that it is an act of great
bountye, to keep ones self from oppressing those whom he may easily
oppress. And therefore it behooves wise masters to forbear beating their
Servants, remembering that the supreme master is not well pleased with him, who
will take revenge out of his hands, and not leave the punishment of his
servants to his divine pleasure, unless it be for such offenses as are
punishable by humane laws. Other masters are of this fond humor, that they
will have their servants understand their mind, in making only a sign, as
if themselves were dumme, and their servants Diuiners. Some will have their
servant do three or four things at once, not having the judgment to
consider that as a sextine said, a man cannot carry the cross, and ring the
bells altogether. Some are so curious, that if they had a thousand servants,
they would trouble them all, and yet would never be content, for that none of
them all can please them, whose fashion it is every month to change a servant.


Guaz. We have at the court a gentleman, who about six months since, bestowed
upon a servant of his a livery cloak, which since that time he has
bestowed upon four others, and taken it still from them again: and a little
before our departure out of France, he sent unto me in the Evening his
servant to sollicyte a letter of favor, which I should wryght in the Dukes
name about certain business of his: and willing him to return the next
morning to have the letter, the next day there came another to demand it: to
whom as I said he was not the same who came the day before, he answered,
Though I be not he, yet I am in his apparel, which my master this Morning
pulled from his back to put upon me.


Annib. That in my judgment is a shameful thing, and though it be no
dyshonoure to the master to vncloathe Peter to cloth Paul, yet at the least
he receaueth dishonor in changing so often his servants, for he thereby shows
himself an impatient manne, and hard to please, and besides spreads his
secrets and doings the farther abroad: for when a servant departs from
his Master, in what sort soever it be, whether contented or dyscontented,
he cannot refrain from reporting where soever he go, the life and
beehauyoure of his former Master: and though with one truth he myngle a
hundredth lies, yet there be ynowe that will believe him: And besides, the
Master is troubled to time his new servants to his fancye. Amongst other
ill Masters may also be comprehended some so impatient and so unreasonable,
that they will inioyne their servants to impossibilityes, yea, and exact
things at their hands, before they are commanded them: but the worst of all
are those who will burden their servants wrongfully with some naughtye
dealing, and thereupon turn them away, keeping * their sweet, * and the sweet
which is due unto them for it.


Guaz. It is an easy matter to find a staff to beat a dog.


Annib. It would be too long to rehearse all ye imperfections which are in
those masters which never served.


Guaz. Yea but those same have served and do serve daily, for that they are
servants to their own vices.


Annib. I hold well with your saying: I will therefore pass to the occasion
of disagreement between the master and the servant: which comes by the
servants when they know not how to serve and obey. I mean by the unfit to
serve, not only fools and ignorant Asses, but also dishonest and knauishe
Companions, who though they are sufficient to execute any thing committed to
their charge, yet they have some notable fault, whereby their Masters have
just cause to put them away, but it is as hard a matter to find Servants
without faults, as Dropsye Patients without thyrst: and though their faults
be inumerable, yet their cheifest ornaments are the three properties of a
Dog, to wit, the gullet, for that they are Gluttons: barking, for that the
master can do nothing, but they will forthwith report it abroad: which the
servant in the Commedie showed, saying he was full of chinkes, whereat went
out every thing which entered in at his ears: next, biting, which is so
natural unto the^, that let their masters do never so well by them, yet they
will not stick to call them ungrateful, and to speak the worst word in their
belly by them: according to the saying of the Poet: Of sorry servants, the
worst part is the tongue.
But they are worse then dogs, for that besides the properties before spoken
of, they are proud and arrogant, whereupon it is said, Of surly servants,
every court is full.
That vice is accompanied with lying (a thing of all others most servile)
framing themselves never to tell the truth to their masters, nor perchance
to their ghostly fathers: but that were a small matter, if their faythlesnesse
were not so great, that not content with fetching from their masters in
disbursing of their money, and with proloyning from them otherwise, they will
not be faithful in matters touching their honor and credit. I conclude, that
their least fault deserves the Gally, and that according to the saying, We
have so many enemies as we have servants: but this is to be understood of the
base and rascal sort, for it is not to be said, but that as there are good
masters, so likewise are there good servants.


Guaz. I think it well, but to take away all disorder, it is requisite that
the good master and the good servant be matched together: for if they be not
both good, it is hard for ye wisdom of the one, to supply the want of
discretion in ye other.


Annib. I think so, but we must here call to mind, that which we have
already said, That the golden world being gone, the master and servant must
think, that there is not absolute perfection to be found in any person: and
that some imperfections must be borne withal on both sides, so that the best
and most necessary parts be not wanting: which consideration not only the
servant ought to have, remembering that it is his duty, to submit himself to
the will and pleasure of his master, but the master much more, knowing that
servants being for the most part of base condition, and naturally inclined to
do ill, will not have that fidelity, diligence, and affection toward him, as
he would have toward any Prince that he should serve: and considering that
it were better for him to wink at some faults in his servants, then to
disquiet himself in going about to refourme them.


Guaz. I pray you then, tell me which are those imperfections, which are to be
tolerated in servants.


Annib Your demand puts me in mind of a fault I committed the other day,
in rehersing the imperfections of others: for that which I said unto you
generally of tolerable men, suffers this exception, that it extends not to
persons of the house, who are under the jurisdiction of the master of the
house: who ought not to open the way of vices to those to whom he may stop
it, but rather to show himself more severe toward his own folk, then
toward others: by the example of Cato, who said, He pardoned every one but
himself. And it may well be said, that the faults of the servant belong in a
manner to the Master: for if the proverb be true, That like man like master,
and that a fish begins first to smell at the head, there is no doubt, but
ye faults of our servants will be laid upon us: either for that we have
taught them, or else that we take delighte in their naughtiness. The servant
then shall be intolerable to his Master in those imperfections, which
nevertheless may be tolerable to others: in so much that the Master ought
not in any wise to bear with him, but either to turn him away, or else to
make him to amend his faults.


Guaz. I doubt me least you will restrain too much the rules of servants, and
the bond of masters: for if the father for that he is let^ed with other
affairs, causes his children to be instructed by Masters and gouernoures, to
whom he gives them in charge, there is no reason in it that he should become
a teacher of his servants who being for the most part peruersly given, he
should have much to do to order them: so that he should be the servant, and
not they. And for my part, I have somewhat else to do, the^ to go ouerlooke my
servants, being assured that they are occupied about no goodness.


Annib. I know in deed there are some servants, who in their masters
presence, look as though butter would not melte in their mouth, but out of
their sight, they will play their parts kindly, yea and will not stick to
make moes at their master behind his back: but the master must not in any
wise suffer his servants to commit, either in word or deed, any fault whereby
God himself, or his neighbor may be dishonored, giving them to understand,
that he will entertain no naughtiness in his house, but that he hates it
mortally: whereby though he be not able thoroughly to root out their wickedness,
yet at least he shall make them counterfeyte to be honest, for fear to
displease him. Touching some other natural imperfections of small importance,
as to be rude, indiscreet, foolish, negligent, forgetful, crafty,
quarrelous, spiteful, gluttonous, importunate, stouthfull, bragging, and such
like, they ought to be borne withal, if they cannot be reclaymed from them:
though for my part I think such servants better lost then found, and the
house the worse that they are in: yet I know some honest gentlemen, who so
long as their servants are faithful, and trusty, care not though they be
fools, vain talkers, or iesters to make them merry.


Guaz. There was a gentleman at Parris, who going forth of his Lodgyng, wylled
his servant to go to a Butcher named David, to buy of him some tripes, but the
Butcher having soulde all his tripes, he returned to his Master, who was at
the Church hearing a sermon, and by chance as he entered in at the Church,
the Preacher (meaning to all ^ad gei^o^^e text of (...) out of the Psalms of
David) said, what says David? mary says he, that he has sold all his
tripes, I know not whether that ought to be termed foolishness, or
pleasantness.


Annib. There are likewise some Masters, who when their servants take their
pleasure of them with mockes and scoffs, rather take pleasure in i^, then
seem angry with them: like as he, who called his servant King of fools, who
answered, I would to God I were King of fools, I would not doubt then, but I
should hear rule over him which is better then my self.


Guaz. I could not play the Philosopher so with my servants.


Annib. No more could I, but perchance that seruante was so profitable to him
otherwise, that he was content to bear that scoff at his hands: but for that
all Masters are not so meek minded, to be served with such men, nor all
servants so happy, to meet with Masters that can like of them: let us set
down some such order that the Master and the servant may live and continue
long time quietly together.


Guaz. That is it I long to hear.


Annib. First of all I think it necessary that he which does desire to be
well served, require in his servant three special things, that is to say,
love, loyalty, and sufficiency: and such a one that master shall easily come
by, which shall dispose himself to be a good and loving Master, following
the commandment of the wise man, Love him whom thou nourishest, which he
shall be forced to do, if he will but think with himself that Servants
(though they serve) are men, that they are dwellers with us, ye^ that they are
our humble friends, and which is more, (...) fellow Se^^auntes whereby he
shall known that it is his part to li^^ g^nt^y (...) with them, by doing
whereof he shall (...) the good will of his Servants unto him, and (...) that
the (...) of that saying, That so many Servants (...) have, so many (...)
(...) to accused the master, (...) the serua^^es for that we (...) not
enemies, but we awake the (...) be so by (...) them.


Guaz. Y^^ but (...) how those which put that precept in practice finds (...)
of that you say, and know (...), yt there is (...) more (...) and glorious,
often the (...) of the master: you know well the proverb.

Claw a Clown he will thee Scratch.
Scratch a Clown he will thee clawe.

Annib. And for my part (...) not away to make my (...) my companyons, in being
too sani^^ with them I like well to love them, but not to embrace them.


Annib. We must set bounds and limits to all our doings, which we must not
go beyond: I hold well with you yt the master keep his state and degree, for
being as you say hai^e fellow well met has his servant, he should show
himself to low minded, and not fit to command, and to be as it were a
servant with servants, which would redound to his reproach: besides, he
should (...) perceive that too much familiarity would breed contempt. And
therefore men of judgment behave themselves with their servants in such
sort, that they neither make them to saucye by over much familiarity,
neither to fearful by over much s^ueritye: for in no wise let a master be
terrible to his Servant, least in frowning still upon him, he make him
think that neither he loves him, nor likes of his service, which is the way
quite to discourage him: And yet in giving good cuntenaunce to his servant, he
must be wary to observe fit time and place, and if I may lawfully say it, he
must have two faces in one personage, immitating the Sun, which running his
course in the sky, one while shows a face covered with clouds, and when
those misty vapors are blown away, it shows it self clear and brighte.
And as it beseems the master, abroad and in the presence of Strangers, to
cast a grave and sad look upon his servants: so it is his part, being
retired into his own house, to look more pleasauntlye upon them, and to
speak more familiarlie unto them: which is a thing they love of life, and are
thereby encouraged to do him good service. And if the master be a gentleman
that has in his time done service to some Prince, he ought to call to mind
how glad Courtiers are only of ^ good word, or of some such like small
favor of their Prince. You see then how a Master may with his honor show
curtesye to his Servants, and thereby get their good will and love, whereby
also ioyntlye is purchased their loyalty and fidelity, a thing most
necessary for his honor and profit: but for so much as sufficiency (as we
have said) must be joined to love* and fydelitie, I commit the charge to the
master to instruct his servant in it.


Guaz. Why then you will make the master a schoolemayster of his servant.


Annib. Nay rather of himself, and that he learn to command, for if he can
command well, he shall be served well: neither must he persuade himself
that his Servants ought to discharge him of all his affairs, but that he
must take part with the^, and consider that it is no easy matter to govern
servants, and that the greater number of them he shall have, the greater will
his trouble be to guide them: for there fall out many household quarrels and
contentions where there are many servants.


Guaz. Wherein I pray you consists the manner of commanding well?


Annib. In two things* whereof the one lies in words, the other in deeds:
Touching words, he must think that there is no servant so well framed to
the service of other Masters, but that he must be feign to receive new Laws
of his new Lord: and to know of him how he shall proceed in his doings,
that he do nothing contrary to his will and pleasure, and therefore he must
not think that at ye first dash, his servant is made to his bow, but he
must leysurely and patiently let him understand his mind, and speak freely
unto him, as well to make him leave his old fashions, which perchance he
likes not, as to frame him to his own fancye. And if I were to take a
Servant, I would rather choose a fresh water Souldyer, which never had
served, then one accustomed of long time to service: for those which have
served in many houses, have for the most part gotten the habit of some ill
quality, which they will hardly be brought to leave: but one yt is but raw in
service, shows himself more tractable, more gentle, and more fit for all
manner of service, and the master commonly will be better pleased with his
good will, then with the others skill.


Guaz. I allow well of your opinion, for it is a thing too hard to change the
manners of an old seruingman: who sooner changes his hair, then his habyte
which he has gotten: and yet a master for a time, must be feign to use great
patience, and take great pain with a young seruingman.


Annib. It is true* but to be less troubled, let him be sure to choose one of
a good wit, and fit for service.


Guaz. The Count Hector Miroglio our friend had one day good trial of the good
wit of a new come servant: for having sent his other servants about other
business, after he had made him dress up the house, he willed him to cover
the t^ble, which he did, and though that day he ^yned alone in his Chamber, yet
his servant set two trenchers on the table, and two stools, by one against
the other. The Count said nothing to it, but suspecting the meaning of his
man, attended the end of the play: meat being brought in, so soon as his man
had given him water, he sat him down, which he had no sooner done, but his
man having likewise washte, sat him down right over against him. The Count
being as you know, naturallye given to be merry, yet he kept his
countenance, and let his man alone. Having eaten a while friendly together,
the man began to bethink him how his master might perchance be athirst,
whereupon he said unto him, Master when you will drink* I pray you make
no courtesy to command me, whereat the Count began to laugh so hartilye,
that the poor ^oole knowing his fault, rose to fetch him drink, but would
sit down no more.


Annib. This Country surely in my opinyon, brings forth no good seruingmen.


Guaz. I think the cause of it is, for that in this place Princes ^^^ldome
keep their Courts where Seruingmen ^heefelye learn good behavior: besides
that our nature is such, that we make our selves more familier with our
Servants then they do in other places, neither take we any great care to
be served honorably, neatly, and reuerentlye, whereof it comes, that
Servant are unskillful and untoward in their behavior.


Annib. Yet I must say this for our Servants, though they be no^ all of the
ciuillest, yet they are faithful and trusty: which is a thing more to be set
by, then civility, fynenesse, or bravery. We perceive then (to return to our
purpose) that the Master who will be well served, must not be sparing of his
speech, as well to command what he will have done, as gently to instruct his
servant in that wherein he is ignorant, by telling him of his fault. Now
having touched the commanding of Masters in words, we must speak of their
commanding in deeds. The Master commands his Servant in deeds, so
often as by his example and deeds he inuiteth him to immitate him: And
therefore if he will have his Servant careful and dilige^^e in his service,
he must likewise be careful about his business: for there is nothing that
more awaketh the Servants, then the diligence of the Master, as on the other
side it is impossible the Servants should be diligent if the master be
negligent. And thereupon it is said, That the eye of the master fatteth the
Horse: Touching which purpose, a Philosopher being askte which was the way
to make Laud bring good store of Corn: answered, For the master to walk
often about it, for the Master must think that his servants will think
their labor light, when they shall see him take such part as they do.
Moreover, he must make his account that they will follow him as well in
naughtiness as in goodness: and therefore he must be as fearful to give
them ill example, as careful to give them good example. The Master also
commands well when he knows to use his authority in such sort, that he
is better served with the turning of his eye, then others are with injurious
and threatening words, wherewith they make all the house to shake: not knowing
that (as the Poet says) Great force lies hid in gentle Sovereignty.
And therefore let Masters to take heed of contrarying this saying, I will
not like a Lion either dysorder thy househoulde servants, or oppress thy
subjects. Now when the Master knows he has gotten the love, the fidelity,
and the sufficiency of his servant, he must be careful ^^ any wise to keep
that which he has gotten, whereto there is nothing of more efficacy then to
use him courteously: ayding him in his troubles, visiting him in his sickness,
and bestowing on him when occasion shall serve, that which shall cost the
Master little, and pleasure the servant much, who thinks himself nothing
beholding to his Master for the wages which he has for his travail, but
only for that which he shall upon his courtesy liberallye bestow upon him:
And that Master is greatly deceived which thinks that his servant, whether
he be a Gentleman or not, serves him only for wages without hope of other
recompense. And therefore let him not forget to reward the good Servant, and
keep him always about him as a precious thing: remembering that the servant
is in a certain sort one part of the master, and that there is nothing in
this life more necessary then a good Servant: Whereupon it is written, if
thou have a trusty servant, let him be unto thee as thine own soul. Let
not the master take scorn to hear his reasons sometimes to consult with him,
and to govern himself according to his faithful advise: for that there have
been found Servants, who have more advanced and profyted their masters
house, then his Brothers or Children have. To conclude, the master ought to
use his servant familiarlye, remembering to entreat his inferiors, as he
would be entreated by his Superioures: which having regard unto, he will
always fly that detestable vice of ingratitude, and according as he shall
increase in habilitye, he will advance the state of his Servant, and besides
his promised hyre, not fail to recompense liberally, according to his power,
the long and faithful service which he has done him.


Guaz. You have as far as I see by one self mean, instructed both the master
and the servant, yet I should think it not amiss, that the servant had some
special charge given him.


Annib. I give in charge to the servant to learn the meaning of this old
proverb, It is a hard matter to make a bed for a dog: for as a man cannot
tell on which side he will lie, when he goes turning round being ready to lie
down, so a servant cannot tell what service he may do acceptable and agreeable
to his master, being for the most heart variable and diverse. And therefore the
master being of so delicate a nature, he must determyne with himself to
take any pain in service, and yet all will be scarce enough to contene him
but he must take heed of falling into the common error of servants, who like
a new broom which sweepeth the house clean, serve diligently at the first,
but after grow slothful: That is not the way to get favor, for not he
which begins well, is worthy of recompense, but he which perseuereth in well
doing. And the servant must think that his master will look that he should
rather heat then cool himself in service. Let the servant also conform
all his thoughts and doings to the will and pleasure of his Master, and to
tie the Ass (as they say) where his master will have him tied, without any
contradiction: for there is nothing that spites a man more, then to see him who
is bound unto him, and who ought to obey him, to make resistaunce against him.
That he go not about to creep in credit with his master by flattery or
hypocrisy, but to serve and obaye him with an unfeigned heart: for by faygned
words men gather an argument of faythlesse deeds, whereby his master
begins to suspect him, and to think that he had more need be ouerlooked,
then instructed: but in any wise let him not forget to do his faithful and
true intent, not for fear, but for duties sake: like as a good wise fellow
answered to one, who said unto him, If I take thee to my service, will thou be
an honest man? Yea, said he, though you take me not. And for that all service
is ill bestowed, which is not well accepted, and that there is no greater
grief then to serve and not to please, when after certain proof he sees
that he cannot frame himself to his masters fancy, let him seek to depart
from him rather with his good will then his ill: And when he sees that he is
in his masters books, let him there hold him, saying in his heart, Happy is
he, who serves the happy, and not seek change, remembering that the rolling
stone gets no moss. To be short, let there be no want found in him of love,
of reverence, of faithfulness, of diligence, of wariness, of readiness, of
secretnesse, let him not accounte of his own life, being in his masters
service, and let him persuade with himself either (as the proverb is) To
serve like a hind, or run away like a heart.


Guaz. It now comes in my head, that we have not ordered our matters as we
should have done, for that we have spoken of the conversation of private
masters with the basest sort of servants, whereas we should first have
spoken of the Conversation between the Prince and the Courtyer.


Annib. We fayd yesterday, that Princes had no need of our instructions, and
therefore it is not needful to prescribe unto them any orders how to
entertayne their train: for they behave themselves in their courts
honorably* peacibly, and quietly, they injury not their servant, either in
words or deeds: neither are those disorders to be seen in Princes, Courts,
as are commonly in pryuate houses: to be ^reeft, they are every way faultlesse.


Guaz. Seeing you are so loath (whatsoever the matter be) to set down any form
of co^uersatio^ to princes, yet would it might please you to prescribe some
order at least to their servants, that our discourse may be no way defectuous.


Annib. Besides that it is now late, and that I am called away to other
business, you know we are eased of this labor by him who with his learned
pen has most perfectly fourmed the Courtier.


Guaz. That Gentleman by the excellencye of that work has no doubt won to
himself immortal fame, neither has he omitted any thing belonging to the
duty of a right courtyer, but for all that I would it might please you to
observe the order of a diligent Physician, who besides the receytes of other
Physicians, will be sure to minister to his Patient somewhat of himself.


Annib. I will not stick to give you two receites, if one be not enough: And
for that it were to do wrong to gentlemen to propose unto them those simple
and common things, to wit, the love, fidelity, diligence, and reverence,
which is due to Princes, I give to a Courtyer this receyte, that the Prince
being as we said yesterdaye, a God on earth, it behooves him to do him
honor as to a sacred thing: remembering that when the Athenians denied
Alexander divine honors, this voice was heard, though but Heathenish: Take
heed least while you behold Heaven, you loose the earth. Behold the first
receipte. The other is compounded of two drougs which I have fetched out of the
shop of an excellent Philosopher, the one of which or both, the Courtier
using, may long time maintain himself in his princes favor: These are
abstinence, or else sugar soppes.


Guaz. I pray you expound your compound more plainlye.


Annib. I will do so in these two verses.

Before their Prince let Courtiers silent be,
Or let their words be faust with pleasant glee.

Guaz. O how short pleasures are, I did not think it had been so late. Now
after the delicate meats you have made me taste this three days, I hope it
will please you to morrow to close up my stomach with that Collation or
Banquet which you have already promised me, that with that Sugar in my
mouth, I may depart after to morrow to the Duke my Master: who by his
Letters has sent for me for some affairs of importance.


Annib. I will be with you to morrow not as you say to sweeten your mouth, but
to take my leave of you: which would be very sower to me, but that you have
put me in hope of your speedy return.


Guaz. I doubt not but that you take pleasure in my presence, for that you know
I honor your singular virtues: but you may well think the pleasure which I
receive by your presence, is so much greater, by how much the patient has
more need of the ph^sition, then the physician of the Patient: I will not say
I have any longer need of you for to be healed, but to keep me in health,
which by your means I have recovered.


Annib. I have perceived rather by the discourses passed between us, that you
are rather a Physician then a Patient.


Guaz. You are not ignorant how in this my sickness I used solitariness in
steeede of a remedy, whereby I could not have chosen but have shortne^ my
days: and therefore you made me know my fault, whereby I went about to make my
self a grave, and letting me understand that conversation is ye right medecin
for such diseases, you taught me to discern good company from ill, you put me
in mind of the general points which all men might to observe in their
behavior, and (...) the perti^uler poin^s agreeing to every one in
conversation and company, as well abroad as in the house, by the operation of
which medecin feeling (God be thanked and you) my heart healed and lightened, I
may be bold to say that I have likewise recovered the health of my body.


Annib. I know I have neither fully satisfied you nor my self in these
discourses, but I am sure you are not deceived in affirming that civil
conversation helps much the infirmity of the mind, for there is nothing in
the world which teaches us more wit or better manners, or which stirs us
more to well doing, or keeps us back from ill doing, then ye company and
conversation with good and virtuous men: neither are you deceived, in saying yt
the health of the body often proceeds of the health of the mind, for our
Galen says, The disquiet of the mind breeds the disease of the body: and
that he has cured many diseases by bringing the pulses into good temper, and
by quieting the mind: but being not so well skilled in curing diseased minds
as I should be, and knowing my self to have need of Physic, I will be with
you to morrow to delighte you, though I be not able to do you good.


Guaz. I will attend you with great devotion: but I pray you come sooner then
you did to day.


Finis.
Here ends the third and last Book.

