HAVVKING, Hunting, Fouling, and Fishing, with the true measures of blowing. A
work right pleasant and profitable for all estates, who so loves it to
practice, and exceeding delightful, to refresh the irksomeness of tedious
time. Whereunto is annexed, the manner and order in keeping of Hawks, their
diseases, and cures: and all such special points, as any wise, appertain to
so Gentlemanlike quality. Now newly collected by W. G. Faulkener.

Publicum comodum priuato preferendum. Imprinted at London by Adam Islip, and
are to be sold by Richard Olive. 1596.

To the Courteous and friendly Readers, the Author hereof wishes their good
acceptance of his pains.
I AM not ignorant (Gentlemen) how hard a matter it is for any one man to write
that which should please and satisfy all persons, we being commonly of so
diverse opinions, and contrary judgments. Again, Tully affirms it to be a
very difficult thing to find out any matter, which in his own kind may be in
all respects perfect: wherefore I trust, of your own judgments J ought the
rather to be pardoned, in that I seek to please many with the variety of
matter: the Discourses being four in number: Hawking, Hunting, Fowling, and
Fishing: being so briefly set down, for the recreation of tedious time, and
especially for all those that take pleasure or delight therein: which if it
please you to accept my good will, you shall not only encourage me to amend
that's amiss, but also hereafter present you with such matter, as shall better
counteruaile your courtesies, and save mine own credit. Thus being loath to be
ouerlong in so breife a matter, I commend you to the protection of the
celestial powers, and this to your friendly acceptance.

Yours in all humility, William Gryndall, Faulkner.

Hawking, Hunting, Fowling, and Fishing, with the true measures of blowing:
Whereunto is annexed the manner and order in keeping of Hawks, their diseases
and cures: and all such special points, as in any wise appertain to so
Gentlemanlike quality.
TO entreat first of Hawks from their beginnings being Eggs, after they are
disclosed, Hawks, but Goshawkes be commonly disclosed as soon as Choughes, and
in some places sooner, according to the temperature of the Country, and timely
breeding: You are to understand that Hawks, do air and not breed in Woods:
and further, that Hawks do draw, when they bear timbring to their nestes, and
not that they build, or make their nestes: and in time of their love, they call,
and not cauke, and you must say that they tread: and when they be unclosed and
begin for to feather any thing of length, by kind they will draw out of their
nestes, and come to the boughs, and come again to their nestes, and then they
be called Bowesses: and after S. Margarets day, they fly from tree to tree:
and when they are called Braunchers, then it is time for to take them, and
seven days after S. Margerets day, is the best taking of Sparowhawkes.

How you shall behave you in taking of Hawks, and with what Instruments, and
how you shall call them.
HE that will take Hawks, must have Nets which are called Vrines, and those
must be made of good small thread, and it must be dyed either green or blewe,
that it be not espied, and you must take with you needle and thread, to insile
the Hawks that are taken, and in this manner they must be insiled: Take the
needle and thread and put it through the upper eye lid, and so of the other, and
make them fast under the beak that she see not: when she is insiled, bear
her home on thy fist, and cast her on the Perch, and let her stand there a
night and a day, and the next day take and cut the thread away, softly for
breaking the eye lids, then gently begin to reclaim her, and deal easily with
her, till she will sit upon thy fist, for fear of hurting of her wings, and
the same night after the teding, wake her all night and all the next day, then
she will be easily enough to be reclaimed, and the first meat that she eats
let it be hot, and give her enough thereof.

How your Hawke may be drawn to claim, and the manner of her diet.
ANd if your Hawke be hard penned she may be drawn to be reclaimed: for
while she is tender penned, she is not able to be reclaimed: and if she be a
Goshawke or Tercell, that is reclaymed, ever feed her with washed meat at the
drawing and at the reclayming, but let it be whot, and in this manner wash it:
Put the meat into the water, and strike it up and down in the water, and
wring the water out of it, and feed her therewith, if she be a Brauncher: and
if it be an Eyesse, you must wash it cleaner then ye do to a Brauncher, and
with a linen cloth wipe it and feed her: and evermore the third day when she
is flying give her casting, and if she be a Goshawke or Tercell in this
manner: Take new Blanket cloth, and cut five morselles, and with a knives
point make a hole in every morsel, and put in the pellets of cloth, and put
them in a fair dish of water, then take the Hawke and give her a morsel of
whote meat, the quantity of half her supper, then take that which lies in
the water and feed her for all night.

How you shall feed your Hawke, and to know her infirmities, and of the
diversities of them.
IF your Hawke be a Sparhawke, ever feed her with unwashed meat, and look
that her casting be plumage, then look it be clean under the Perch, and the
next day you shall find her casting under the Perch, and thereby you shall
know whether she be clean or not: for some piece will be yellowe, and some
green, and some glamos and some clear: and if it be yeallowe she ingendreth
the frounce, which is an evil that will rise in the mouth, or in the cheek:
and if it be green she ingendreth the rye: the condition of this evil is
this, it will arise in the head and make the head swell, and in the eye glamos
and dark, and if it be not helped it will fall down into the legs and make
them ranckle, and if it go into the head again, then the Hawke is lost, she
ingendreth an evil called the Cray, which is when she may not mutise.

Mark well you Medisines here following.
FOr the Frounce in the mouth, take the small end of a silver spoone and put it
into the fire, till it be hot, then open the beak and burn the sore, and
annoint it with the marrow of a Goose that has lien long, and it will help
her: if the frounce be great, then there is a grube in it, which you must cut
with a Raser, hold the Hawke and slit the place where the sore is, and you
shall find in it as it were the mawe of a Pigion, take a pair of sheeres and
snip the sore, and make it as clean as you can with a linen cloth, and
anoint the sore four days with Balm, and afterward with Pampilion till it
be whole: The frounce comes when a man feeds his Hawke with Porke or Horse
flesh four days together.

For default of hot meat the diseases of the Rye comes.

How the Cray comes.
THe Cray comes of washed meat, which is washed with hot water, for lack of
hot meat, and it comes of threads which is in the flesh that the Hawke is fed
with, and though ye pick the flesh never so clean, ye shall find threads
therein.

When your Hawke shall bathe her.
EVery third day let your Hawke bathe her during Summer, if it be fair
weather, and once in a week in Winter, if it be warm, and not else, and when
you bathe your Hawke ever give here some hot meat unwashed, although she be
a Goshawke.

How you shall make your Hawke fly with a good courage in the morning.
IF you will have her fly in the morning, feed her the night before with hot
meat, and wash the meat in Urine, and wring out the water clean, and that
will make her have a lusty courage to fly after the best manner.

How you shall guide your Hawke if she be full gorged, and that you would
gladly have a flight.
IF your Hawke be full gorged, and that you would speedily have her fly,
take four corns of wheat, and put them in a morsel of flesh, and give it
her to eat, and she will quickly cast all that is within her, and after that
she has cast, look that you have some hot meat to give her.

A medisine for the Rye.
TAke Dasie leaves and stamp them in a Mortar, and wring out the juice, and
with a pen put it into the Hookemares once or twice, when the Hawke is small
gorged, and anon after let her lyre, and she shall be as whole as a fish.

Also, and you give your Hawke fresh Butter, or Marrow of Hogs that is in the
bone of the leg of Porke, it will make her cast water at the mares; but it will
make her hawty and proud.

A medisine for the Cray.
TAke and chafe the fundament of your Hawk with your hand and warm water a
good while, and after that take the powder of Saxifrage, or else the powder of
Rewe, and a quantity of May butter, and temper them well together, then put it
in a little Box and stop it close, and every meal when you feed your Hawk
anoint her meat therewith, and for the love of the ointment she will eat her
meat the better. This experiment will keep her from the Cray, and many other
sicknesses that often engender in Hawks. Also take the whole heart of a Pig, and
feed her therewith two days, and it will make her whole.

Also take Porke and put it into whote Milk, and feed your Hawk therewith,
and that will make your Hawk mute after the best manner: And Porke with the
Marrow of the Leg of Porke will make her do the like. Also use her to fresh
butter, and it will do the same. Also one or two meals of a Pigs liver whot
will make her mute, but let her not have too great a gorge thereof, for it is a
perrilous meat. Also take the white of an Egg, and beat it that it be as
thin as water: put the same in the vessel, and steep the meat therein all a
day before you give it her, and at night feed her therewith, and that which
shall be for her dinner the next day let it lie in steep all night: but in any
wise see that you have fresh whites of Eggs, and if her feeding be of Porke it
is the better. This is proved.

The perfect and kindly terms for a Faulkner belonging to Hawks.
THe first is hold fast at all times, and especially when she baiteth, it is
called baiting: for she baiteth with her self most often causeless. The
second is, rebate your Hawk to your fist, and that is when your Hawk baiteth,
the least moving that you can make of your fist, she will rebate again on your
fist. The third is, feed your Hawk: and not give her meat. The fourth, she
sniteth or sueth her beak, and not wipeth. The fist, your Hawke iouketh, and
not sleeps. The sixth, she proyneth, and not pecketh: and she proyneth not but
when she begins at her legs, and fetches moisture like Oil ather tail,
and bawmeth her feet, and stroketh the feathers of her wings through her
beak: it is called the note, when she fetches such oil. A Hawke would never
be let of her proyning: for when she proyneth her self she is lusty and of
good liking, and when she has done she will rouse her self mightily: and
sometime she countenanceth as she picketh her, and yet she proyneth her not,
and then you must say she reformeth her feathers, and not pick her feathers.
The seventh, your Hawke colieth, and not becketh. The viii. rouseth, and not
shakes her. The ninth, she stretches, and not claweth nor scratcheth. The
tenth, she mantelleth, and not stretches: when she puts forth her legs
from her one after another, and her wings follow her legs, then she does
mantell her, and when she has mantelled and brings forth her wings
together over her back, you must say she warbleth her wings, and that is a
term fit for it. The xi. your Hawke mutesseth, or mutteth, and not shiteth.
The xii. you cast your Hawke upon the Perch, and not set her upon the Perch.

For special terms belonging to Hawks, when you shall have any cause to
commend them for diverse of their properties.
FIrst, you must say she is a fair Hawke, a huge Hawke, a long Hawke, a short
thick Hawke: and not to say, a great Hawke: Also she has a large beak, or a
short beak: and not call it a bill: and a huge head, or a small head, fair
seasoned. You must say your Hawke is full gorged, and not cropped: and your
Hawke puts over and endueth, and yet she does both diversely.

How your Hawke puts over.
SHe puts over when she remooueth her meat from her gorge into her
bowelles: and thus ye shall know: when she has put it over, she trauersseth
with her body, and specially with neck, as a Craine does or other bird.

When you shall say she endueth and embowelleth.
SHe never endueth so long as her bowelles be full at her feeding, but as soon
as she is fed and rests, she indueth by little and little: and if her gorge
and her bowelles in any thing stiffeth, you shall say she is embowelled, and
have not fully endued: and as long as ye may find any thing in her bowelles,
it is very dangerous to give her any meat.

Mark well these terms.
SAy your Hawke has a long wing, a fair long tail with six bars out, and
stands upon the seventh. This Hawke is interpened, that is to say, where the
feathers of the wings be between the body and thighs: this Hawke has an
huge leg or a flat leg, or a round leg, or a fair infered leg.

To know the mayle of an Hawke.
Hawks have white mayle, Canuas mayle, or red mayle, and some call red mayle
iron mayle: which mayle is soon known. Canuas mayle is between white mayle
and iron mayle, and iron mayle is very red.

Plumage and cast your Hawk.
A Goshawke nor Tercell, in their sore age have not their mayles named, but is
called their plumage: and after the cote, it is called their mayle: And if your
Hawke reward to any Hawke by countenance for to fly thereto, you shall say
cast your Hawke thereto, and not fly thereto.

Noume or fenced.
AND if your Hawke noume a foul, and the foul break from her, she has
discomfited many feathers of the foul, and is broken away: but in kindly
speech you shall say, your Hawke has noumed or seized a foul, and not taken
it.

Wherefore a Hawke is called a Rifler.
OFtentimes it happens with a Hawk, that for egernesse when she should noume
a foul, she seaseth but the feathers, and therefore such Hawks be called
Riflers if they do often so.

The names of all the members of your Hawks, with their convenient terms.
FIrst, Cleys behind that straineth the back of the hand, ye shall call them
Talons.

The Cleys within the foot, you shall call them her pounses.

But the Cleys that are upon the middle stretchers, you shall call them the
long sengles.

And the uttermost Cleys, you shall call them petty sengles.

The Key or closer.
THe long sengles are called the Key of the foot or the closer: for what thing
soever a Hawke streineth, is upon the sengle, and the strength thereof
fortefieth all the foot.

Seres of watery or waxy colors.
YOu shall understand, that the skin about the Hawks legs and her feet, is
called the Seres of her legs, and her feet whether they be watery or waxy
color are yellow.

The beam feathers.
A Hawke has twelve feathers on her tail, and one principal feather of the
same in the midst, and in a manner all the rest are covered under the said
feather, and that is called the beam feather of the tail, and there is black
bars overthwart the tail, and those bars will tell you when she is full
summed or full fermed: for when she is full barred she stands upon seven, and
then she is perfect ready to be reclaimed: as long as a Hawke stands under
the number of seven bars, and she be in her sore age, you may say she is not
full summed, for so long she is but tender penned, whether she be Brauncher
or Eyes: and if she be a mewed Hawke and stand within seven bars, you may say
she is not full fermed, for she is not able to be reclaimed, because she is
drawn too soon out of the mew, for she is not penned no harder then a sore
Hawke.

Brayles or Braylefeathers.
AN Hawke has long small white feathers, hanging under her tail from her
bowelles downward, and it is called the Braylefeather: and commonly every
G^shawke and every Tercelles brailes be besprinckled with black speckes like
armies, but for all that they be accounted never the better: But and a
Sparrahawke be so armied upon the brailes or Musket, you shall say she is
degouted to the uttermost braile, and it betokens great hardiness.

Breast feathers, Plumage, Barbe feathers, Pendant feathers.
THe feathers above the former part of an Hawke, be called breast feathers,
and the feathers under the wings are Plumage: the feathers under the beak be
called Barbe feathers: the feathers that be at the joint of the knee, that are
hanging and sharp at the ends, those be called the Pendant feathers.

Flage or flagges feathers.
THe feathers at the wings next to the body, be the flages, or flagges
feathers.

Beam feathers of the wing.
THe long feather of the wing are called the Beam feather, and the feather
that some call the pinion of other fowls, of an Hawke it is called a sercell:
and if she be in mewe, the same feather will be the last that she will cast,
and till that be casted she is never mewed. I have heard some say that she
has cast that first, but the other rule is more common: and when she has cast
her sercell in mewe, then is it time to feed her with washed meat, and to begin
to ensayme her.

Ensayme.
ENsayme of an Hawke is the grease, and if that be taken away with feeding of
washed meat (as it is declared hereafter) she will gender a panell, which will
be her utter confusion, if she fly therewith and take cold thereupon.

Couerts, or covert feathers.
THere be feathers upon the Sercelles, and those be called covert feathers,
and so all the feathers be called that be next over the beam feathers, are the
sage feathers of the wings.

Back feathers.
THe feathers upon the back, half be called back feathers.

Beak, Clap, Nares, Sere.
THe Beak of the Hawke is the upper part that is crooked: the nether part is
called the Clap of a Hawke: the holes in the Hawks beak be called the Nares:
the yeallow betweeene the beak and the eye is called the Sere.

Cryuets.
THere be long small black feathers like hears about the Seres, and those be
called Cryuets of the Hawk.

Sore age.
YOu shall understand that the first year of a Hawke, whether she be a
Brauncher or Eyesse, the first is called her sore age, and all that year she
is called a sore Hawke: and if she escape that year, with good feeding she is
like to endure long.

To reclaim a Hawke.
IF you will reclaim your Hawke, you must divide one meal into three, until
that she will come to reclaim: and when she will come to reclaim, make her
that she sore not, though she be well reclaymed, it may fall out that she
will sore too high, that ye shall never see nor find her: And if your Hawke
fly to the Partrich, look that ye ensayme her before she fly, whether she be
a Brauncher, Eyesse, or mued Hawke.

When a Hawke is called an Eyesse.
A Hawke yt is called an Eyesse, is for her eyes: for a Hawke that is brought
up under a Busserd or Puttocke, as many have watrie eyne: for when they be
disclosed and kept in ferme till they be full summed, ye shall know that by her
watrie eyes, and also her look will not be so quick as a Braunchers is: and
so because the best knowledge is by the eye, they be called Eyessed: ye may
know an Eyesse by the palenesse of the seres of her legs, or the sere over
the beak: also by the taintes that be upon her tail and her wings: which
taintes come for lack of feeding when they be Eyesses.

What a Taint is.
A Taint is a thing that goes overthwart the feathers of the wings of the
tail, like as it were eaten with worms, and it begins first to breed at
the body in the pen, and the same pen shall fret asunder and fall away through
the same Taint, and then is the Hawke desperaged for all that year.

Medisines to Ensayme your Hawke.
TAke the root of Rasne, and put into clean water, and lay your flesh therein
to temper a great while, and give it to your Hawke to eat: and if she eat
thereof dread not but it will abate her grease, but in three days she will not
greatly abate. Also take Puliall and Garlic, and stamp it well together, and
wring out the juice in a dish, and then wet the flesh therein, and feed your
Hawke therewith: Ensayme your Hawke within four days, but look every day
that you make new juice, and when you feed her wet your meat therein: Also
take juice of Merslie mores, otherwise called Persley roots, and the same of
Isope, and wash your flesh therein, and your Hawke shall be ensaymed kindly,
and no great abate to the Hawke. Some use to lay their flesh in water almost a
day, and give the same to the Hawke at supper, and let that lie all night to
give her in the morning, and thus to feed them in the mewe, or ere they be
drawn about a month or six weeks, and to ensayme them ere they come on the
fist, and as soon as they cast their sercell, then is it time to feed them so.

How your Hawke ensaymeth.
YOu shall further understand, that so long as your Hawks feet look black
and rough, he is full of grease, and ever as she ensaymeth, her feet will ware
yellow and look smooth.

How you shall behave your self in putting up the Partrich.
WHen you have ensaymed your Hawke and reclaimed her, and that she is ready
to fly to the Partrich, you must take a Partrich in your bag and go into
the field, and let your Spannelles find a couie of Partriches, and when they
be up and begin to scatter, you must mark them and couple up your Spannelles:
and when you have so done, let him that has the Partrich in the bag take and
tey a cryance to her leg, and cast her up as high as you can, and as soon as
your Hawke sees her she will fly thereto: and if your Partrich sease upon her
above, give her a reward thereupon: this done, go to the Partriches that you
have marked, do as hereafter follows: and if you have a chastised Spannell
that is rebuked and is a retrauer, uncouple him alone and go and single out
one of the Partriches of the couie, and go as nigh to the rising of him as you
can, and if your Hawke have a desire cast her to it: and if she take it, them
your Hawke is made for that year, and of the same Partrich that she sleyeth
you must thus reward her as follows.

How you shall revvard your Havvke.
TAke the Partrich, and cut the head and neck from the body, and strip the
skin from the neck, and give it her to eat, and cover the body of the
Foul with a hat, and lay the said head and the neck thereupon, and if she
will forsake the Foul that she plumeth on and come to the reward, then
secretly take away the Partrich and reward your Hawke with the brain and the
neck, but beware that she eat no bones, for it will make her unlusty for to
fly: and thus must you serve her of as many as she flies at, but let her
reward be the less, or else she will be quickly full gorged, and then she
will not fly a good while.

How your Hawk shall rejoice her self.
When your Hawke has slain a Foul, and that you have rewarded her as
before, let her fly no more till she has reioiced her: that is to say, till
she has sewed or snited her beak, or else roused her: and when she has done
any of all these, go and retrine more, and she will noume plenty.

When your Hawk has noumed a Foul, what you shall do that you rebuke not
the Hawk.
Learn this thing when she does noume a Foul, stand a good way from her, and
take away your Spannelles for rebuking of her, for diverse Hawks cannot abide
the Spanniels, and when your Hawke plumeth, come softly toward her near and
near, and if she leave pluming and look upon you, stand still and chearke her
and whistell her until she plume again, and serve her thus until you be
nigh her, then softly fall on your Knees, and privily while she plumeth, set
your hand and be sure of the gosse, and then ye may guide all things as you
will, and if you do the contrary, she will for fear carry game, or let it
go quick, with loss both to you and to your Hawke also.

A Medson for an Hawk that is lovvsie.
TAke quicksiluer, and put it into a Basin of brass, and put into it Salindine
and Ashes, and mingle it well together till the quicksiluer be dead, and put
thereto fat of bones, and anoint the Hawke therewith, and it will kill the
lise: also powder of Orpement blown upon the Hawke with a Quill will kill the
Lice.

The opinion of Ostregiors.
AFter the opinion of many Ostregiors, and you feed your Hawke continually
with Porke, with Rays or Pies, or carry her much in rainie whether, she will be
lousy.

Ostregers, Speruiters, Favvkners.
BEcause I spoke of Ostregers, you shall understand that they be called
Ostregers that keep Goshawkes or Tercels, and those that keep Sparhawkes and
Muskets be called Speruiters, and keepers of all other Hawks be called
Faulkners.

You shall call the long Line wherewith you call your Hawke withal, your
Creance, whatsoever it be.

A Medson for an Hawk that casts her flesh.
PUT the flesh that you feed your Hawke withal in fair water, and feed her
therewith three days, and it will keep her in flesh.

A Medson for an Hawk that has lost her courage.
YOu may know when your Hawke has lost her courage, for when you cast her to
the Foul she flies awayward, as though she knew not the Foul, or else she
will fly a little after her and then give her up, and this is a very good
remedy for such a Hawke. Take Oil of Spain, and temper it with clear Wine
and the yolke of an Egg, and put into it some Beef, and give her thereof five
morsels, and then set her in the Sun, and at night feed her with an old hot
Culuer, and if you feed her thus three times: and then your Hawke was never so
lusty and jolly before, as she will be after and come to her courage again.

A Medisine that an Hawk shall not lie in Mevv for vnlustinesse.
TAke Fearne roots that grow within an Oak, and Oak apples, and make juice of
them, and wet her flesh therein that she eats, and feed her three or four
times, and it will make her leave that.

A Medisine for an Hawk that has the Tanie.
A Hawke that has the Tanie a man may soon know if he take heed: for this is
her manner, for she will pant more for one baiting then some will do for three
or four, and if she should fly a little while, she would almost lose her
breath, whether she be fat or lean, and she will be always heavy, and this
is the remedy. Take a quantity of the redness of Hasell, and a little of the
powder of Rosen, of Pepper, and somewhat of Ginger, and make thereof with fresh
grease three pellets, and hold your Hawke to the fire, and when she feels the
heat, make her swallow the three pellets by force, and knit her beak fast
that she cast it not out again, and this do three times and she shall be
safe.

Also take Alisander, and the Roots of Primroses, and the root Grongnaulles,
and sees them in Butter, and give her three morselles every day until she
be whole, and look that she be void when ye give the medisine.

How you shall take your Hawk from the air.
Who so takes his Hawke from the air, it behooves him to be wise in bringing
her easily, and to keep her from cold, and from hurting of her bones for they
be tender, and she must have great rest, and they must have as clean air as
can be, and always give her clean and hot meat, and give her a little and
often, and change her meat often, and cut her meat into small morselles, for
they should not lyre on bones: and then when she begins to pen and plumeth,
and palketh and picketh her self, put her into a close warm place where no
vermin may come into her, and let the place be sure from wind and rain, and
then she will preue her self: and evermore give her good hot meats, for it
is better for a man to feed his Hawke while she is tender with meat, and to
make her good with some cost, then to feed her with evil meats to make her
unthrifty with little cost: and look when she begins to ferme, then give
her baiting.

A Medisine for worms in an Hawk, which sickness is called the sylanders.
BEware of this sickness, the remedy for it is this. Take an herb that is
called Neppe, and put it into the gut of a Capon, or of an Hen, and knit it
with a thread and let her receive it whole, and she will be whole and safe.

Thus you shall know when your Hawke has worms in her belly: look when she
has casted, and then ye shall find one or two about her casting place, if
she has been with any.

A Medisine for an Hawke that casts worms at her fundament, and what
worms they be.
TAke the bymaile of iron, and mingle it with the flesh of Pork, and give it
two days to the Hawke to eat, and she shall be whole.

A Medisine for an Hawk that has a sickness, called the Aggersteyne.
WHen you see your Hawke hurt her feet with her beak and pulls her tail,
then she has the Aggersteyne: For this disease, take the dung of a Dove, and
the dung of a Sheep, and strong vinegar, and mingle them softly in a brazen
basen, and mingle them will together to serve for three days after, and give
her flesh of a Culuer with honey, and with powder of Pepper, and set her in a
dark place nine days, and when you see new feathers on her tail, wash her
with Verose nine days, and she will be whole.

A Medisine for an Hawk that has the Crampe in her vvings, and how it
comes.
TAke a white loaf of bread somewhat colder then it comes out of the Oven, and
hold the Hawke softly for hurting, and cut the loaf almost through, and
display her wing easily, and hold it between the two parts of the loaf, and
let it be held so the space of half an hour, and it will help her.

The Crampe comes to an Hawke by taking cold in her youth: therefore it is
good for an Hawke to keep her warm whether she be young or old.

Let not your Hawk be put into mevv to fat, but in this manner as follovveth if
you love her.
Keep her well and put her not late in mew: for who so for covetousness of
flying, loses the time of his Hawks mewing, and withholdeth her too long from
it, he may after put her to mewe at adventure, for then a part of her mewing
time is past. Who so puts his Hawke in mew in the beginning of Lent, if she
be kept as she ought to be, she should be mewed in the beginning of August.

How you shall dispose and ordain your mevv.
SEt and dispose your Mewe in this manner, so that no Wesell nor Polcat, nor no
other Vermin, nor that it be windy or cold, nor that it be over hot, let one
part of it stand toward the Sun, so that the most part of the day the Sun
may come to it. Also you must took that she be not troubled with noise or
the singing of men, and that no man come to her but only he that feeds her:
you must let her have a feeding stock in her mewe, and a long string to bind
her meat, or else she will carry her meat about the house and beray it with
dust, and paraduenture she will hide it till it stincke and then feed on it:
which if she should do, it would be her death. And therefore when it is bound
to the feeding stock, then she will neither at feeding, neither at lyring,
nor at liking, nor at rising hurt her self: and when she has fed, take away
that she leaves, and look that she have fresh at every meal: for of stale
and evil meats she will engender many diseases, and look that you never go
to the mewe but when you carry her meat or water to bathe her. Suffer no
rain to wet her at any time if you may: and as for her baiting, that will
nothing hinder her mewing.

The manner how a man shall put his Hawke into the Mevv: and is proved.
ONe thing you must beware of, that she have no sickness before you put her
in Mew: for as I have proved, a sick Hawke shall never mewe well, but though
she mewe she shall not endure: but when she is great and fat, for at the
bating of her estate, she will no longer endure. Sometime without any medisine
many men devise how they might mewe their Hawks: for some put them in at high
estate, and some when they be very low, and some when they are empty and
lean: but it makes no matter for that, if she be whole: nevertheless, you
shall hear mine advise as I have seen and proved.

Whosoever puts a Goshawke, a Tercell, or Sparrehawke into Mewe, so high
that she may be no higher, she will hold her long ere she lose and leave
any feathers: and who so puts her into mewe lean, it will be long ere she
remount: and who so puts her in mew too lean and hungry, if she have
meat at her will, she will eat too much, because of hunger, and she is
likely to kill her self therewith, as has been often seen: but who so will
have his Hawke endure and mew kindly, my counsel is that she be neither too
high nor to low, nor in destresse of hunger, but as she should best fly: but
take heed the first day of too much dealing till the time that she be
stanched, and after you may take her such meat as I shall describe you
hereafter.

In what manner you shall feed your Hawk in your mevv.
Look what meat she has been most used to be fed with, and feed her
therewith eight days together, and give her Birds enough morning and evening,
and let her plume upon them well, and take casting of the plumage, and that
will tallant her well, and cause her to have good appetite, and it will cleanse
her bowelles well, and when she is well cleansed, you may give her what meat
you will, so it be clean and fresh. But the best meat to make her mewe
soonest without any medisine, is the flesh of a Kid, of a young Swanne, and of
a young Chicken, and of a young Goose: for such meat is whole of it self.

Also take pieces of great fresh Eeles, and especially the colpen next the
navel, and wet in hot blood of Mutton, it is good to make her to mewe, but
especially it will make her wight after her sore age. These said fleshes be
good to mewe a Hawke, and to keep her in state, but look that she have
plenty every day that she rather leave then lack, and every third day let
her bath if she will: and when she is waxed near farm, then let her eat
Hens and fat Porke: and of a Hound is passing good.

To make a Hawk mevv quickly without any hurting of her.
THe experiment is thus approved. Take an Addar that is red of nature, and
also there be Snakes of the same kind, and they be very bitter; take two or
three of them and smite off their heads and their tails: then take a new
earthen pot that was never used, and cut them in small pieces, and put them
into the pot to sees, and let them sees at leisure, and let the pott be
covered close that no air come out of it nor no breath, and let them sees so
long that the pieces turn to grease, and put it into a clean vessel, and as
often as you feed your Hawke anoint her meat therewith, and let her eat as
much as she will, and that will mew her at your will.

Who so would have his Hawk mevv, and that her feathers should not fall.
TAke powder of Cauell, and the juice of Franeke costs, and the juice of
Paraine, and take three or four morsels of meat, and wet them therein, and
make your Hawke swallow them, and serve her so many times.

Also take the skin of a Snake and of an Adder, and cut them into small
pieces, and temper it with hot blood, and make your Hawke to eat thereof, and
she shall not mew.

For the Gout in the throat.
When you see your Hawke blow many times, and that it comes of no baiting,
you may be sure she has the Gout in her throat: and for that disease, take
the blood of a Pecocke, and Eneense, Myrabolana, and cloves of Gelofte, and
Cauell, and Ginger: and take of all these every evening and mingle them with
Pecockes blood, and sees it till they be thick, and thereof make morselles,
and give the Hawke morning and at noone.

For the Gout in the head and in the reins.
WHen you see your Hawke may not endure her meat nor remove her estate, she
has the Gowte in the head and in the reins. Take Nomin, (among the
Apothicaries you may have it,) and the skin of an Hare, and give it to your
Hawke to eat nine times with the flesh of a Cat, and if she hold the meat she
shall be safe.

A medisine for the Crampe in the thigh, in the leg, or in the foot of an Hawk.
WHen you see your Hawke lay one foot upon another, then she is taken with
the Crampe, then draw her blood, and upon the foot that lies on the other
foot, and upon the leg, and it will help her.

For the Cough or the Pose.
TAke the powder of Bays and put it on the flesh of a Dove, and give it often to
your Hawke, and it will help her.

A Medisine for the sickness within the body of any Hawk, if it show not
outward, how she shall be helped and in what manner.
A Man may know by the countenance of an Hawke partly her infirmities: but it
is strange to know a man's disease, when he knows not whereof nor how it
comes: For this disease feed your Hawke well of an Hen, and then make her
fast two days after, that she may empty her body: the third day take Honey
and sees it, and fill her full, and bind her beak that she cast it not out
again, and then set her out of the Sun, and when it draws toward night
feed her of a whote Foul: and if this will not help her never look for
other medisine.

For the passion that Goshaukes have fasting.
TAke the root of small Rushes, and make juice of them, and wet her meat
therein and make her eat thereof.

For Hawks that be wounded.
TAke away the feathers about the wound, and take the white of an Egg, and
Oil of Olive, and mingle them together, and anoint the wound, and keep it
with white wine, until the time that you see dead flesh, and then put into the
wound Escompe, until the time that the dead flesh be wasted: after take
Ensence, and take as much of the one as of the other, and mingle them together:
and when you will anoint the sore, heat your ointment, and anoint it with a
pen, till the time the skin grow again, and if you see dead flesh about it
and that you would have it away, take Vinegar, and then annoint it with this
ointment aforesaid, and she shall be whole.

A medisine for an Hawke that has the Artelick.
When you perceive that your Hawke is fat about the heart, you may trust to it
she has the Artelicke, therefore let her blood in the orignall vain, and
after that give her a Frog to eat, and she will be whole.

A medisine for an Hawk that is troubled in the bowelles.
WHen your Hawke is troubled in her bowelles, you shall know it by her eyes,
for her eyes will be dark, and she will look drowselie, and her mutising
will defile her fundament, then take Hawks meat, and anoint it with the
powder of Cauell, and give it her to eat and she shall be whole.

A medisine for an Hawk that has the Gout.
Feed your Hawke once or twice with an Irchin, and it shall help her.

A medisine for an Hawk that has Mites.
TAke the juice of wormwood, and put it where they be, and they will die.

A medisine for an Hawk that has the Stone.
Annoint her Fundament, and put in the powder of Allom with a hollow Straw:
Also take an herb called Christ's Ladder, and annoint her mouth therewith,
and she will be whole.

A medisine for Vermin.
TAke the juice of the root Fennel, and put it where the Vermin, be, and they
will die.

A medisine for the Rewme that Hawks have.
When you see your Hawke close her eyes, and shake her head, give her Larde of
a Got the first day, and the second day give her Epaticke with the flesh of a
Chicken, and she shall be whole.

A medisine for Hawks that be dry and desire to drink, to keep them moist.
TAke the juice of Horehound, and wet the Hawks meat therein, and feed her
therewith once or twice, and she shall be whole.

A medisine for diseases in the Entrails.
TAke yolks of Eggs raw, when they be well beaten together, put to it
Spanish Salt, and as much Honey, and wet therein thy Hawks meat, and feed her
therewith three days together: and if she make deintie in eating of it, then
make her of force to swallow three or four morselles a day, and presently she
shall be whole. Yet I will tell you another thing: Take Honey at the change of
the Moon, and a sharp Nettle, and make thereof small powder, and when it is
well ground, take the breast bone of an Hen, and another of a Culuer, and make
it small with a knife, and do away the skin, and put powder thereon, and all
hot with the powder feed her three days and she will be whole.

For sickness of swelling.
IF a Fellon be swollen in such sort that a man may heal it, the Hawke shall
not die. Thus a man may help her and lengthen her life, but the Hawke will be
very eger and grievous of sickness: therefore ye must take the root of
comfort, and of Sugar like much, then sees it in fresh grease with the third
part of Honey, and then draw it through a fair cloth, and then often give it to
the Hawke and she shall be whole.

A Medisine for Blaynes in Hawks mouths called frounces.
THe frounce is a fearful disease and draws her to death, and withholdeth
her strength, and it comes of cold: for cold does a Hawke much harm. To cure
her, take Fennel, Mariall and Serses alike much, and sees them and strain
them through a cloth, and sometimes wash her head therewith, and put some on
the roufe of her mouth, and she shall be safe.

A Medisine for an Hawk that casts her flesh.
Sees Raysons in water and weete her flesh therein when it boyleth.

A Medisine for the Agrum.
WHen you see your Hawke have blobbed cheeks, then she has this disease
called Agrum: therefore take a Needle of Silver, and heat in the fire, and
burn the narrelles throughout, then anoint it with oil Olive.

A Medisine to make a Hawk fat.
TAke a quantity of Porke and Honey, and Butter alike much, and purged grease,
take away the Skin, sees them together, and anoint the flesh therewith, and
she will increase mightily.

For botches that grow in a Hawks iavv.
CVt the botches with a Knife, and let out the matter, and cleanse it with a
silver Spoone, or else fill the hole with the powder of Arne Melit burned into
powder, and upon the powder do a little cloth bespred with hot wax, and so it
will away.

A medisine for an Hawk that will not come to reclayme.
TAke fresh Butter, and put into it Sugar, and put it in a clean cloth, and
reclaim her to that, and keep it in a box and put it into your bag.

A Medisine for Hawks that be refrained.
When you see your Hawke to Neese and to cast water through her Nostriles, then
doubtless she is refrained, for this disease take the greines of Chaflegre
and of pepper, and grind it well and temper it with strong vinegar, and put it
to the roufe of her mouth, and give her flesh to eat, and she shall be whole.

A Medisine for Hawks that have pains in their Croppes.
TAke fair Morfumum, and powder of Gilouer, and mingle them together and give
it her to eat, and if she hold it past the second day, after she shall be
whole.

A medisine for the stone in the fundament.
When your Hawke cannot mute: then she has this disease called the Stone: and
for this sickness you shall take the heart of a Swine, and the grease of a
Swine, and cut it with the flesh of the heart, and she shall be whole.

A medisine for the dry Frounce.
FOr this sickness, take the root of Polipode that grows upon Oaks, and
sees it a great while, then take it from the fire and let it stand till it be
luke warm, then wash your Hawks flesh therein three times when you feed her,
and it will help her.

A medisine for worms called the Angules.
TAke pressure of a Lamb that was eyned before his time, and make thereof
three morselles, and put it into the gut of a Culuer, and feed her therewith,
and look that the Hawke be empty when you give her the medisine, and take the
juice of Dragons and fill the gut of a Pigion, and then cut it as the Hawke may
swallow it, and knit his beak for casting it up again, and give her the
ballocks of a Bucke as hot as they be int^^t, and make powder of the pissell,
and cast it upon the flesh and and she shall be whole.

Proper terms used in keeping of Hawks.
AN Hawke tyreth, feeds, gorgeth, beaketh, rouseth, endueth, muteth,
percheth, and iouketh, puketh over, proyneth, plumeth, she warbeleth, and
mantelleth: she tyreth upon rumpes, she feeds on al manner of flesh: she
gorgeth when she fills her gorge full of meat: she beaketh when she sueth,
that is to say, when she wipeth her beak: she rouseth when she shakes her
feathers and her body together: she endueth when the meat in her bowelles
fall to disgestion: she muteth when she auoydeth her order: she perches when
she stands on any bow or Perch: she iouketh when she sleeps: she puketh
when she auoydeth her meat out of her gorge into her bowelles: she proyneth
when she fetches Oil over the tail and annoyneth her feet and her
feathers: she plumeth when she pulls off the feathers of any Foul, or any
thing, and casts it from her: she warbeleth when she draws her wings over
the midst of her back, and softly shakes them and lets them fall again:
she mantelleth when she stretches out one wing alone, and afterward the
other wing, and most commonly she does that before she warbleth her.

The names of Sparhawkes, as Ostregers and Speruiters have determined.
THere is a question asked whether a man shall call a Spear or a Sparrehawke,
or an Asper Hawke, and Ostregers and Speruiters say, she may be called all
three names: for these reasons, she may be called a Sparrehawke: for of all
Hawks that there are, she is most spear that is to say, most tender to keep:
For the least misoieting and evil tending of her, kills her, and she may
be called an Asperre Hawke of sharpness of her courage, and of her looking
quick, and also of her flying. For she is most aspere and sharp in all thing
that belong unto her. Of all Hawks she may may be called a Sparralike, for
two reasons: one is, she spares Goshawkes and Tarcels until they time they
be reclaymed to fly, and till they be fully mewed and clean ensaymed, for
all the while they be unable, the Sparhawke occupies that season, and flies
the Partrich well, from Saint Margarets day until it be Lammas, and she will
slay young Feasants, Hichcocks, in the beginning of the year: And I have seen
them slay the Teale, the black bird, the Wodcocke and the Thrush, although the
Wodcocke be combrose to kill: And therefore when you come to a Grove of Trees,
or a Thicket of Bushes, cast your Spharhawke into the tree and beat the
bushes, and at the rising of the Foul she will be sure to have her. Further,
if that there were a ship fraught full of Hawks: if there were but one
Sparrehawke amongst them, there should be no custom paid for any of them,
and therefore she is in diverse respects a Sparhawke.

An Hawke flies to the vewe, to the Beak, to the Toll, not a crewe, Ouerre,
far Iutty.
AN Hawke flies to the river diverse ways, and she sleyeth the foul
diversely, that is to say, to the view or to the beak, or the toll: and all is
but one as ye shall understand hereafter. She sleieth also to the querre, to
the creep, and no more ways but those three, and she nimmeth the foul at
the far Iute, or at the Iuttie far.

Now ye shall know the meaning of these terms, Randon, Creep, Emewed.
YOur Goshawke or tercell that shall fly, to the vewe, to the toll, or to the
beak: in this manner she must be taught. You must find a Foul in the River or
in the Pit, and set your Hawke a good space from you upon a Molehill, or upon
the ground, and creep softly to the foul, and when you come near where the
foul lies, look backward to the hawke, and with your hand beck your Hawke
to come to you, and when she is on wing, and comes low by the ground, and is
almost at you, then smite your tabre and cry huffe, huffe, huffe, and make the
foul spring, and then the Hawke will nime her.

And now take heed, if your Hawke nyme the foul at far side of the river,
or at the pit from you, that she slaie the foul at the far Iutte, and if
she slay it upon that side ye be on, as it may hap diverse times, then you
shall say she has slain the foul at the far Iutte. If your Hawke slay the
Foul aloft, ye will say she took it at the mount or at the souce.

And if the Foul spring not but fly along after the River and the Hawke nyme
her, then ye shall say she slew it at randon. And if your Hawke flees at or to
the Creep, when you have your Hawke on your fist, and that you creep softly to
the River or to the pit, and steals to the brincke thereof, and then cry
huffe, and then by that mean nyme the Foul, then she is slain at the Creep,
at the far Iutte, or Iutte far: and if it happen, as it does often, that
the Foul for fear of your Hawke will spring and fall into the River again, or
ere the Hawke see her, and so lie still and dare not arise, then you shall say
your Hawke has renewed the Foul into the River, and there be more Fowls in
the River then your Hawke plumeth, and they dare not arise for fear of your
Hawke.

A Theffe.
YOu shall understand that your Goshawke must not fly to the River with belles
in no wise: and therefore a Goshawke is called a Theffe.

Querre.
WHen your Hawke slieth to the Querre, when there be in the stubbe time,
Sardes of Mallards in the field, and when she espieth them and comes covert
her self, and fly priuelie to the hedges or low by the ground, and nyme one
of them ere they rise, then you may say that the Foul was slain at the Querre.

Mark this term draw.
SOme misuse this term draw, and say that their Hawke will draw to the River:
and that term draw, is properly assigned to that Hawke that will slay a
Rooke, or a Crow, or a Raven upon the land sitting: and then it may be said
that such an Hawke does draw well to a Rooke.

If you will make your Hawke to the Querre, you must use her in this manner.
TAke a tame Mallarde and set him in a plain field, and let him go where he
will, then set your Hawke upon your fist, and go to that plain and hold up
your hand a pretty way off from the Mallard, and look if your Hawke can epsy
it by her own courage: and if she have found the Foul and desire to fly to
it, let her kill her, and plume well upon her, and erue her so three or four
times, and then she is made to the Querre.

I have known Gentlemen that when they have seen any tame Duckes, that if
their Hawks have desired to fly at them, they have let them fly to the
encouraging of them another time, and so have won them to the Querre.

A pretty device to take a Hawk that is broken out of Mew, and all manner of
other Fowls that sit in trees, or that has taken up their perch all night in
any place.
YOu must in the night do it. Climb up softly with a Skonce or a Lantern,
and you must have but one light in your hand, and let the light be toward the
Hawke or Foul that she see not your face, and you may take her by the legs
or any other place of her as you list. This is approved: for I have known
diverse that have taken many Fowls after this same manner.

Of the Belles for Hawks.
Look that the Bells that your Hawke shall wear, that they be not too
heavy, nor that they be above her power to bear, and that they be not one
heavier then an other, but that they be both of a weight: also look that they
have a good sound and shrill, and not both of one sound, but that one be of a
semy tune above the other, and that they be whole and not broken, especially
in the sounding place: for if they be any whit broken they will sound fully.

Of Sparhawkes belles there is diverse choice, and little charge of them, for
there is plenty of them: and for Goshawkes, the belles of Millaine were
coumpted the best, and they are very good: for commonly they are sounded with
Silver, and therefore they are sold thereafter. There are now used of Duchland
belles made in a town called Dordright, and they are excellent good belles,
for they are well sorted, and well sounded, very good in ringing of Shrilnes,
and passing well lasting.

Here ends the Book of Hauking, and hereafter insueth the names of all manner
of Hawks, and to whom they belong.
THese Hawks belong to an Emperor, and these be their names: and Eagle, a
Bautere, a Melion: the simplest of these three will slay a Calfe, a Fawn, a
Roe, a Kid, a Crane, a Bustarde, a Stroke, a Swanne, or a Fore on the plain
ground: and these are not in lure nor reclaimed, because they be so ponderous
to the Perch protatife: and these three by their nature belongs to an Emperor.

These Hawks belong to a King. A Gerfaulcon, a Tercell of a Gerfaulcon, are
due to a King. For a Prince. THere is a Faulcon gentle, and a Tercell gentle,
and these be for a Prince. For a Duke. THere is a Faulcon of the Rock, and
that is for a Duke. For an Earl. THere is a Faulcon Perigrine, and that is for
an Earl. For a Barron. THere is a Basterd, and that is for a Barron. Hawks
for a Knight. THere is a Sacre and a Sacret, and those be for a Knight. Hawks
for a Squier. THere is a Lauer, and a Laueret, and those be for a Squier. For a
Lady. THere is a Merlion, and that Hawke is for a Lady. An Hawk for a young
man. THere is an Hobbie, and that is for a young man.
And these be Hawks of the Tower, and be both illured, and be called and
reclaimed.

FINIS.
The Book of Hunting, whereunto is added the measures of blowing, very
pleasant to be read, for all those that have delight in the Art of Venerie.
AS in the Book of Hawking is discoursed and noted the proper terms
belonging to that gentelmanlike exercise: So in like manner is showed in this
treatise of Hunting, for all sorts of beasts of Venerie, and also is showed
all convenient terms, as well of Hounds as of the beasts, or any other that
appartaine to the Art of Venerie.

Of Beasts of Venery there be four sorts.
THe Heart, the Bore, the Wolf, and the Hare.

Beasts of Chase there be five kinds.
THe Bucke, the Row, the Martyron, the Fox and the Dowe, and these are the
five beasts of Chase, and if you chance to find any other, you shall call them
Rascal.

Of the age of an Heart.
THe first year he is a Calfe, the second year a Broket, the third year a
Spayd, the fourth year a Stagge, and the fifth year a great Stagge, and at the
sixth year an Heart.

Of a Heard, a Beuy, a Sounder, or a Rout.
THe Bucke, the Dowe, the Heart and the Hind,
They are called a heard when or where ye them find.
And a Beuy of Rows whersoeuer they be:
And a Sounder of Swine when ye them see.
And a Rout of Wolves where they pass in:
So shall ye them call as many as they bin.
A middle heard, a little heard, a great heard.
Twenty is a little heard though it be of Hinds,
And threescore is a middle heard, so call them by kinds.
And fourscore a great heard, call ye them so:
Be they Heart, be they Hind, be they Buck or Dowe.
You must say a great Heart and not a fair Heart.
A Great Heart so shall ye him call,
But not a fair Heart whatsoever befall.
A great Bucke, a great Hind, and a great Dowe,
Wheresoever ye find them call ye them so.
Of a Beuy of Rows great or small.
Six is a Beuy of Rows, and a middle Beuy is ten, and a great Beuy is twelve:
and wheresoever you see the number to be the many, the bigger is the Beuy.

What a Sounder of Swine is great or small.
Twelve make a Sounder of wild Swine, and fifteen a middle Sounder, and
twenty a great Sounder.

Of the hunting of the Row, the breaking and dressing.
When ye hunt at the Row, then ye must say,
He crosses and trauerseth over the way.
A great Row bucke call him not so,
But a fair Row bucke, or a fair Dowe.
With the bowelles and with the blood,
Reward your Hounds that be so good.
And each foot you shall cut in four as you ken,
Take the bowelles and the blood and put together then,
And give it to your Hounds so,
And much the gladder will they go,
The Row shall be herdled as I wene,
The two fore legs the head laid between:
And take the one hinder leg up I you pray,
And the other farther leg right as I say:
Upon that other farther leg up ye them pit,
And with the other farther leg up them knit.
On this manner when ye have wrought,
Up into the Kitchen it shall be brought:
Save that your Hounds eat the bowelles and the feet.
Of the age and undoing of the Bore.
NOw to speak of the age of the Bore, the first year he is
A Pigge of the Sounder, so called as I gis.
The second year a Hog, and so shall he be,
And a Hog stere when he is of years three.
And when he is of four years a Bore he shall be,
From the Sounder of Swine then goes he.
When ye have slain the Bore then do him right,
You shall vnflay him before it be night:
Thirty parts and two, of him ye shall make.
As by the law of Venery I dare undertake.
Though your Hounds by strength has made him dead,
They shall have the bowelles boiled with bread,
Cast upon the ground where the Bore was slain:
And that is calde a reward as Hunters said,
Upon the earth as I gis,
Because it so eaten is.
Of the Hare.
NOw to speak of the Hare presently,
That beast King shall be called of all Venery.
For all the speaking and blowing so fair,
That comes of seeking and finding the Hare:
For my dear friends I take it in hand,
He is the maruelloust beast in all this land.
For he femayeth, croketh, and rungeth evermore,
And bears tallow and grease and above has teeth before*
And otherwhile he is male, and so ye shall him find,
And sometime female and kindly by kind.
And when he is female and kindeleth him within,
In three degrees he bareth them, or he with them twin:
Two rough and two smooth who so will them see,
And two knots also that kindles will be.
The reward for the Hounds.
WHen the Hounds has taken her and put her to death,
The Huntsman shall reward the^ while they are in breath:
With the shoulders, and the sides, and the bowelles all,
And all things within her save only the gall.
Then the loins of the Hare look ye do not forget,
But bring them to the Kitchen for thy Lords meat.
The descriuing of a Bucke.
ANd ye speak of a Bucke, the first year he is
A Fawn sucking on his damme, say as I you wish.
The second year a Pricket, the third year a Sorrel,
A Soar at the fourth year the truth I you tell:
The fifth year call him a Bucke of the first head,
The sixth year a Bucke, do as I you bid.
Of the Row Bucke.
ANd if ye of Row bucke will know the same,
The first year he is a Kid sucking his dame:
The second year a Girl and so be they all,
The third year a Hemuse look ye him call,
Row bucke of the first head, he is at the fourth year,
The fifth year a Row bucke call him without fear.
At S. Androwes, his horn he will cast,
In Moure or in Moss he will hide them fast:
So that no man can them soon find,
Or else certainly he does not his kind.
At S. John's day where so ye go,
Then shall the Row bucke gender with the Row.
Of the Heart and the Hind.
OF the Heart and the Hind learn well ye may,
That they draw to the heard at Hollyrood day:
To the stepe then they go each hot day at noone:
Which stepe they use without any fear,
Until it be Midsommer at the least very near.
The cause of the stepe is to keep them from the fly,
Who so comes to the place may soon it epsy:
And other things use they my friends also,
The same time of the year to the soil they go.
Of the crying of these Beasts.
A Heart belloweth, and a Bucke groneth I find,
And every Row bucke certainly belloweth by kind.
The noise of these Beasts thus ye shall call,
For pride of their make they use it all.
Say friend where you go, I taught you say so.
Mark well these seasons following.
TIme of grease begins at Midsommer day,
And till Hollyrood day lasts as you may say.
The season of the Fox is from the Nativity,
Till the Annuntiation of our Lady.
Season of the Row bucke at Easter does begin,
And till Michalmas lasts near ere it lin.
The season of the Row bucke begins at Michalmas,
And it does endure till it be Candlemas.
At Michalmas begins the hunting of the Hare,
And lasts till Midsommer no man will him spare.
The season of the Wolf is used in each Country,
As the season of the Fox and evermore will be.
The season of the Bore is from the Nativity,
Until the Purification of our Lady.
For at the Nativity of our Lady sweet,
Ye may find where he goes by his feet:
Both in woods and fields for Corn and other fruit,
Where that after food he makes any suit.
Crabbes, Acornes and Nuttes where they grow,
And Hawes and Hippes with other things mow.
And till the Purification as ye may see,
And then the Bore in season will be:
For while the fruit does last, his time is never past.
NOw to speak of the Hare, how all shall be wrought,
When that she has with Hounds bin sought:
The first word that the Hunter to the Hounds pit,
Is at the kenell door when he opens it,
That all may him hear, he shall say arere.
For else his Hounds will come to hastily,
And this is the first word of Venerie.
And when he has coupled his Hounds each one,
And that forth into the field he is gone:
And when he has cast off his couples at will,
Then shall he speak and say them until.
Horse de couple auaunt se auaunt twice so,
And then so ho so ho thrice and no mo.
And then say sacy auaunt so ho I thee pray.
And if you see your Hounds have good will to rene,
And draw away from you say as I you learn:
Here ho again them call so,
Then swefe mon amy swefe to make them soft tho.
And if any find that the Hare there does go,
And he a hight Richard or beamond cry so.
And if ye see that the Hare a pasture has been,
If it be in the time of the Corn that is green:
And if your Hounds chase well at your will,
Then you shall blow three notes loud and shrill.
And any Hound find her musing on her mace,
Where as she has been and is gone from that place:
Hasitouz cyeslile, so shall ye say,
Veny arere so ho say as loud as you may.
All manner of Beasts whatsoever chased be,
Have one manner of word so ho I tell thee:
To fulfill or until all manner of chase,
The Hunter in his mouth that word hase.
And if your Hounds chase at Heart or Hare,
And they ren at default thus ye shall them fare:
I^o so how, assayne, assayne, stow ho ho,
Say astayne arere, so ho these words and no mo.
And if your Hound run well at the Fox or Do,
And so fail at defaute, say further ere ye go,
Ho ho sweffe aluy douce aluy, that they here
Ho hoy assayne sa arere.
So ho so ho venes a coupler, and do as I ken,
The more credise may you have among all men.
Your art let not be hid, and do as I you bid,
All my friends that be,
This game may know of me.
The Master Hunter makes his report to his man, as follows.
THe master to the man makes his bost,
That he knows by kind what the Heart cost,
At Hunting evermore when goes.
Quoth the master to the man that were good
For to know what he does the Hounds before.
What does he before? (quoth the master to the man)
He does (quoth he) as ever thou may see,
Break, and so does no beast but he.
When breaks he, quoth the man, what is that you say,
With his feet he opens the earth when he goes away.
What is the cause master (quoth the man) I thee pray,
When the Heart before the Hounds run his way,
That then to the River he desires to go.
Quoth the master to the man there are causes two.
For two causes the Heart desires to go to the River: mark well these terms
follovveth, that is, dessend and other.
ONe cause for the River desend he is aye,
And so he is to the water when he takes the way.
Why call thou him desend (master) I thee pray,
For he pays of his might the sooth for to say.
And another is to the water why he goes otherwhile,
The Hounds that him sue of purpose to be guile.
Yet quoth the man to the master when or where,
Into the water he leapeth, what makes he there?
He proffereth quoth the master, and so you shall say,
For he wotteth not himself how to get away:
Whether over the water he can forth pass,
Or turn again the same way where he was.
And therefore it is proffer as the Hunters saine,
And reproffer if the same way he turn again.
At the other side of the water if he vpstart,
Then you shall call it the soil of the Heart.
Now of the numbles, mark well the terms.
THe man to his master requesteth his mind,
That the numbles of the Heart he would forth find,
How many ends there is them within:
Quoth the master but one thicken or thin,
The auaunters, the forcers:
Yet would I wit and thou would me lere,
The crookes and the roundles, of the numbles of the Dear.
One crook of the numbles lies evermore
Under the throtebole of the beast before:
That called is auaunters who does them ken,
And the hindermost part of their numbles then:
That is to say, the forcers lies ever between
The two thighs of the beast that over crookes even
In the midret that called is the rondell also
For the sides round about coruen it is fro.
My dear friends bold, say of game thus I told.
Yet would I learn master why these Hounds all,
Bayen and cry when they him see shall:
For they would have help that is their skill.
For to flea the beast they run until.
Tell me master (quoth the man) what does it skill,
Why the Hare would so feign run against the hill?
Quoth the master for her legs be shorter before,
And therefore she desires to run that way evermore.
What is the cause ( quoth. the man to the master, yt you say of this best,
That she always sits when she takes rest?
Because other beasts lien as commonly men said,
For two causes (quoth the master) I tell thee plain:
A cause there is and that is no less,
For she bears sewet and pure grease.
Yet would I (quoth the man) feign know more,
Where the sewet of the Hare lies behind or before?
Over the loine (quoth the master) of that Hare thou do take,
Between the tail and the chine, even on the back,
Yet I would of thee Master of these leare,
When thou walk in the field with thy lymere:
There as an Hare pastered has or thou him see,
To know fat or lean whether he be?
I can quoth the master well tell thee this case,
Wait well where he lay and where he fumed hase:
Yellow and englamed if it be,
Then is he fat, learn this of me.
And if it be black and hard and clean,
Then is he megre larbre and lean.
And of this same thing learn of me,
Take heed in the winter and thou shall it see.
Yet master, of the Hare feign would I learn more,
What he does when he goes the Hounds before?
He soreth and resoreth, and there he goes away,
Pricketh and repricketh the truth for to say.
What Is that quoth the man when they so done?
That shall I quoth the master tell thee full seen.
In the fields where he goes there no ways been,
There he soreth when he steppeth and may not be seen:
And after when he doubleth and turns not again,
Then he resoreth as good Hunters saine.
And when he runs in way dry or wet,
Then may you find footstalkes of cleys or feet:
Then pricketh the Hare when he does so,
And repricketh when again he does go.
A vaunt, Lay, and Relay.
Master yet quoth the man what is that to say?
That will I tell thee in words full feet:
When the Hounds are set an heart for to meet,
And other chaseth and follows him for to take:
Then all these lays upon him do thou make.
Even at his coming if thou let thy Hounds go,
While the other behind be far of him fro:
That is auaunt relay, and so shall thou it call,
For they are before those other Hounds all,
And an hindering great all other until,
For after that they have lost their will.
And hold thy Hounds still if thou will do,
Till all the Hounds that behind, be come to,
Then let thy Hounds altogether go,
That called is an alay, and look thou say so:
And that yet is a hindering to them behind,
For the rested will ever ouergoe them by kind.
A relay is after when all the Hounds be past,
For before with the Heart that hieth him fast.
What is afforlone.
Master, yet would I feign this at you leare,
What is afforlone? for that is good to hear,
That shall I tell (quoth he) the south at the least,
When the Hounds in the wood seeks any beast,
And the beast is stole away out of the Frieth:
Or the Hounds that thou have meet there with,
And any other Hounds before then may with them meet,
These other Hounds then for learnd I thee tell.
For the Beast and the Hounts be so far before,
That the Hounds behind be weary and sore:
So that they may not have the beast at their will,
The Hounds before forlorn, and that is their skill:
They be so far before if you will me trust,
And this is called forlorn if you learn lust.
What three thing causes the Hounds to endure.
YEt would I master know thy will,
When the Hounds run an Heart until,
And the further they go the gladder they will be:
For three causes quoth he as often thou shall see.
One is when the Heart runs fast on his raise,
He sweateth that it runs down through his clayes:
The Hounds when they find of that his sweat,
Then had they rather run and the lother to let.
And another cause when the Heart no more may,
Then will he white froth cast where he goes away:
And when the Hounds find of that then they are glad,
In hope they shall have him, and run as they were mad,
The third cause when the Heart is nigh dead,
Then out of his mouth he casts froth and blood red:
The Hounds know that he shall be taken soon then,
And ever the further they go the gladder they ren.
These are the causes three, which makes them glad to be:
Which beast a slow Hound takes as soon as a swift.
What beast yet master I ask it for none ill,
That most while all Hounds run until:
And as soon the slowest shall him overtake,
As the swiftest shall do what way so he make.
That beast a Bauson hight, a Brocke or a Gray,
These three names he has the sooth for to say:
And this is the cause thereof, for he will by kind
Go through thorns always the thickest he can find.
There as the swift Hound may no further go,
Then the flowest of foot be he never so throe.
To undo the vvild Bore.
YEt my friends of the wild Bore to speak more,
When you shall him undo I tell you before,
Two and thirty pieces ye shall of him make.
The first is the head what ever befall,
Another is the collar, and so ye shall it call.
The shield and the shoulder thereof shall two be,
Then every side of the Swine depart in three.
The pestelles and the gammons depart them in two,
And two fillets he has, forget not tho.
Then take the legs and his feet and show your slight,
For they shall of his bredes be counted for eight.
Take the thine and depart it in four pieces and no mo,
And take there your bredes thirty and two:
And fair put the grease when it is taken away,
Into the bladder of the Bore my friend I pray:
For it is medisine for many manner of things.
How you shall break up an Heart.
TO speak of the Heart while we think on,
My friend first him serve and that done,
And that is to say or ever ye him dight,
Within his horns to lay him upright.
Anon fat or lean whether that he be,
At the assay cut him that Lords may him see.
Then cut off the Cods the belly him fro
Or ye begin him to flea, and then ye go
At the chaules to begin as soon as ye may,
And slit him down to the assay:
And fro the assay over down to the belly ye shall slit,
To the pissell where the Cod was away kit.
Then slit the left leg even before,
And then the left leg behind or ye do more:
And these other legs that upon the right side,
Upon the same manner slit ye that tide.
Ind to the cheeks look that ye be pressed,
And so flay him down even to the breast:
And so flay him forth right even to the assay,
Even to the place where the Cod was cut away.
Then flay the same likewise on the other side,
But let the tail of the beast still abide.
Then shall ye him undo my friend I you read,
Right on his own skin and lay it abrede:
Take heed of the cutting of the same Dear,
And begin first to make thy erbere.
Then take out the shoulders slitting anon,
The belly to the side to the corbin bone,
That is Corbins fee, at the death he will be.
Then take out the suet that it be not staft,
For that my friend is good for leach craft:
Then put thy hand softly under the breast bone,
And there shall ye take out the erber anon.
Then put out the paunch and from the paunch chase
Away lightly the rate and such as he hase
Hold it with a finger, do as I you ken,
And with the blood and the grease fill it then.
Look third that ye have and needle thereto,
For to sow it withal ere ye more undo:
The small guts ye shall out pit,
From them take the mawe forget not it.
Then take out the liver and lay it on the skin,
And after that the bladder without more din.
Then dress the numbles first that ye reake
Down the auauncers, kerue that cleaves to the neck,
And down with the bole throat put them anon,
And kerue up the flesh there unto the back bone:
And so forth to the fillets that ye up arere,
That falls to the numbles and shall be there:
With the neres also and the suet that there is,
Even to the midrife that upon him is.
Then take down the midrife from the sides hot,
And heave up the numbles whole by the bolethrote.
In thine hand then hold and look and see.
That all that belongs to them together be,
Then take them to hold whom you trist.
Whiles that thou them doubles and dress at thy list.
Take away the lights and on the skin them lay,
To abide the Querre my friend I you pray.
Then shall ye slit the slough where the heart lies,
And take away the hears from it and flies:
For such hears has his heart it upon,
As men see in the beast when he is undone:
And in the midst of the heart a bone ye shall find,
Look ye give it to the Lord my friend by kind.
For it is precious for many malladies,
And in the midst of the heart evermore it lies.
Then shall ye cut the shirts the teeth even fro.
And after the ridge bone cut even so.
The forches and the sides ever between,
And look that your knives ay tharpe ben.
Then turn up the forches and frote them with blood.
For to save grease, so do men of good.
Then shall ye cut the neck the sides even fro,
And the head from the neck cut also.
The tung, the brain, the paunch and the neck,
When they washed be well with the water of the beak:
The small guts to the lights in the Deeres,
Above the heart of the beast when thou them tears.
With all the blood that ye may get and win,
Altogether take and lay on the skin,
To give your Hounds that called is I wis,
The Querre above the skin for it eaten is:
And who dresseth so by my counsel,
Shall have the best shoulder for his travail.
And the right shoulder wheresoever he be,
Give it to the foster that is his fee.
And the liver also of the same beast,
To the Fosters knave give it at the least.
The numbles trusse in the skin and the herdle fast,
The sides and the forches that they together last:
With the hinder legs, be done so it shall,
Then bring it home and the skin withal.
The numbles and the horns at thy Lords gates.
Then boldly blow the price thereat,
Your play for to nune or ye come in.
Beasts of the Chase of sweet foot and of stinking.
ANd those are the Bucke, the Dowe the Bear, the Raynder, the Eylke, the
Spikerd, the Ottor and the Martrone.

There be beasts of the Chase of the stinckling foot: the Roe bucke, and the
Roe, the Fulmard, the Iches, the Baude, the Gray, the Fox, the Squirrell, the
white Rat, the Sotte, and the Polcat.

The names of diverse Hounds.
FIrst there is a Greyhound, a Basterd, a Mungrell, a Mastiffe, a Lemor, a
Spanniell, Raches, Kenets, Terrors, Butchers Hounds, Dunghill dogs, Trindle
tails, and prick eared Curres, and small Lady Puppies, that bear away the
fleas and diverse small faults.

The properties of a good Greyhound.
HEaded like a Snake, necked like a Drake, footed like a Cat, tailed like a
Rat, sided like a Breame, and chined like a Beam: The first year he learneth
to feed, the second year to field him lead, the third he is fellow like
the forth: the fourth year he is good enough, the fifth year he is none
like, the sixth year he shall hold the Plough, the seventh year he will
avail great Biches to assail, the eight year lick ladle, the ninth year
cart saddle: and when he is come to that year, have him to the Tanner.

For the best Hound that ever you had,
At the ninth year he is full bad.
The proper terms and names of companies of Beasts and Fowls, with others.
AN heard of Hares. An heard of all manner of Dear. An heard of Swannes. An
heard of Craines. An heard of Curlewes. An heard of Wrenes. An heard of
Harlots. Any of Fesants. A Beuie of Ladis. A cete of Greys. A Berry of Conies.
A Riches of Matrons. A Besenes of Firets. A brace of Greyhounds. ij. A lease of
Greyhounds. iij. A couple of Spannielles. A couple of running Hounds. A litter
of Whelps. A Kindle of young Cats. A Beuy of Roes. A Beuy of Quails. A siege of
Herons. A siege of Bytours. A sore or a suce of Mallards. A muster of Pecockes.
A walk of Snites. A congregation of people. An exalting of Larkes. A watch of
Nitinggales. An host of men. A fellowship of Yemon. A cherine of Goldfinches. A
cast of bread. A couple or pair of Bottles. A flight of Doves. An unkindness of
Ravens. A clattering of Choughes. A dissimulation of Birds. A rout of Knights.
A pride of Lions. A sieuth of Bears. A draught of Butlers. A proud showing of
Tailors. A temperance of Cooks. A stalk of Fosters. A bost of Soldiers. A
laughter of Ostlers. A glosing of Tauerners. A Malepertnes of Pedlers. A thraue
of Threshers. A squat of Dawbers. A fighting of Beggars. A singular of Bores. A
drift of tame Swine. A harrase of Horse. A ragge of colthor or arake. A Baren
of Mules. A trip of Gotes. A gaggle of Geese. A brood of Hens. A badling of
Duckes. A nonpatients of wives. A state of Princes, A though of Barons. A
prudence of Vicaries. A superfluity of Nuns. A school of Clerks. A
doctrine of Doctors. A converting of Preachers. A sentence of Judges. A damning
of Jurors. An obeisance of servants. A seat of Vshers. A tygenes of Pies. A
host of Sparrows. A swarm of Bees. A cast of Hawks of the Tewer, two. A lease
of the same Hawks. A flight of Goshawkes. A flight of Swallows. A bilding of
Rookes. A murmuration of Stares. A rout of Wolves. An untruth of Sonners. A
melody of Harpers. A poverty of Pipers. A subtlety of Sergeants. A
Tabernacle of Bakers. A drift of Fishers. A disguising of Tailers. A bleach of
Souters. A smere of Curriours. A cluster of Grapes. A cluster of Churles. A
ragge of Maidens. A raufull of knaves. A blush of Boys. An vncredibilitie of
Cokcolds. A couie of Partriches. A spring of Eeles. A desert of Lapwings. A
fall of Wodcocks. A congregation of Plouers. A covert of Cotes. A dule of
Turtles. A scull of Friars. Abominable sight of Monks A scale of fish. An
example of Marters. A observance of Hermites. An eloquence of Lawyers. A faith
of Merchants. A provision of Stewards of houses. A kerfe of Painters. A
credence of Sewers. A leap of Lybards. A shrewdnes of apes. A sculke of Foxes.
A neast of Rabits. A labor of Moles. A mute of Hounds. A kenell of Raches. A
suit of Lyam. A cowardnes of Curres. A sourd of wild Swine. A stod of Mares. A
pace of asses. A drove of Nece. A flock of Sheep. A gaggle of women. A peep
of Chickens. A multiply of Husband. A pontifica of Prelates. A dignity of
Chanons. A charge of Curates. A discretion of Priests. A disworship of Scots.
Here follovveth the proper terms belonging to the breaking up or dressing
of diverse kinds of Beasts, and Fowls, and Fishes.
A Dear broken. A Goose reared. An embruing of Caruers. A safeguard of Porters.
A blast of Hunters. A threatening of Courteours. A promise of Tapsters. A lying
of Pardoners. A misbeleeue of Painters. A lash of Carters. A scolding of
Gamesters. A wondering of Tinckers. A waywardnes of Haywards. A worship of
Writers. A neuerthriuing of Iuglers. A fraunch of Millers, A feast of Brewars.
A goring of Butchers. A trinket of Coruisers. A pluck of Shooturners. A
drunkenship of Cobblers. A cluster of Nuts. A roge of teeth. A rascal of Boys,
And Egg tired. A Friar trimbred.
Of Fishes.
A Salmon chined. A Pike splated. A Hadocke sided. A Cheuin finned. A Sole
loined. A Gurnard chined. A Tench sawsed. An Eele trounchened. A Breame splayd,
A Barble tusked. A Trout gobbetted. A Pig headed and sided. A Capon sawsed. A
Cheuin frushed. A Conie vnlased. A Craine displaied. A Curlew vniointed. A
Fesant alete. A Quail winged. A Plouer cuinsed. A Pigion thied. A Brawne
leched. A Swanne lift. A Lamb shouldered. A Kid shouldered, A Hen spoiled. A
Mallard vnbrased. A Heron dismembered. A Pecocke disfigured. A Butter vntached.
A Partrich alet. A Rail breasted. A Woodcocke thied.
You shall say thus.
A Heart harboreth. A Quier loggeth. A Tyman beddeth. Shouldring or leaving. A
Woodcocke breaking. A Bucke lodges. A Roe bedeth. An Hare in his form. A
Conie sitting.
The true and perfect measure of blowing.
FIrst when you go into the field, blow with one wind one short, one long, and
a longer.

To blow to the coupling of the Hounds at the Kennell door, blow with one, one
long and three short.

The second wind one long, and short, and a short.

To blow to the field.
BLow with two winds: with the first one short, and long, and two short.

With the second wind, one short, one long, and a longer.

To blow in the field.
WIth two winds, the first two short, one long and two short.

The second, one short, one long and a longer.

To uncouple thy Hounds in the Field: three long notes, and with three winds.

To blow to seek.
TWo Winds: The first a long and a short, the second a long.

When the Hounds hunt after a game unknown blow thus.
BLow the Veline, one long, and six short: the second wind, two short and one
long. The third wind one long, and two short.

To draw from Covert to Covert.
THree winds, two short, one long and two short. The second, one long and a
short. The third, one long.

To blow the earthing of the Fox when he is couerable.
Four notes with four winds. The relief, one long, six short.

To blow if the Fox be not couerable.
TWo winds, one long and three short. The second wind long.

To blow the death of the Fox in field or covert.
THree notes, with three winds, the rechate upon the same with three winds.

THe first wind, one long and six short. The second, one short and one long.
The third, one long and five short.

The death of the Fox at the Lords gate.
Two notes, and then the relife three times.

The death of the Bucke either with Bowor Hounds, or gray hounds.
ONe long Note.

The knowledge upon the same.
TWo short and one long.

The death of the Bucke with hounds.
TWo long notes and the rechait.

The price of an Heart ryall.
NIne Notes with three restes. The Rechale with three winds. The first, one
long and five short. The second, one long and one short. The third, one long
and six short.

To blow the call of the keepers of any Park or forest.
ONe short, one long, and a longer. If the Keeper answer you, blow two short
with one wind, and draw toward him. And after that blow one short.

When the game breaks couerd.
Four with three winds, and the Rechale upon the same,

The stent when the bounds can hunt no further.

With three winds, the first, one long and six short. The second, one long and
one short. The third, one long.

Where the Fox is earthed blow for the Terriers after this manner.
ONe Long and two short. The second wind one long and two short.

Note this, for it is the chiefest and principallest point to be noted.

Every long contains in blowing seven quauers, one Minome and one quauer.

One Minome contains four quauers.

One short contains three quauers.

The end of the measures of blowing.
A breife Treatis of Fowling. Wherein is contained diverse proper devises both
of Bayts and others, with the making of Byrdlime, the manner and order in using
of it on your Limerods: with many other special points appertaining to that
Exercise.

A brief Treatise of Fouling: wherein is contained diverse proper Devises both
of Baits and others: with the making of Birdlime, the manner and order in using
of it one your Limerods: with many other special points. as appertains to
that Exercise.
AS to the ornament of the air belongs birds and fowls, (as Beda says)
which I mean in this Treatise to set forth. Birds be called Aues, as it were
divide without way: (as Pliny says) for their ways in the air are not
distinguished in certain, and birds with moving of their wings divide and
depart the air: but anon after the flight, the air closes it self, and
leaves no sign or token of their passage and flight. And fowls be called
Volucres, and have that name of Volary to fligh: for birds fligh with wings,
(as Isodore says) and therefore they be called Alites, as it were Alates:
that is, moving and rearing up themselves with wings: for they fligh not
without wings, nor arere themselves from the earth up into the air without
the benefit of their wings: or else a bird is called Ales, and has that name
of Alendo, feeding: for he is fed of himself that feeds birds and fowls
of heaven, and gives meat to all flesh. (as Isidore says.)

The condition and properties of birds be known by diverse things, by their
substance and complexion: for the substance of birds* and fowls be made of
two middle Elements that be between the two Elements that be most heavy and
most light: for in their compositions and making, air and water has most
mastrie? and therefore they have less of earthly heavens, and more of
lightness of the air then beasts that go on land and swim on water. By
lightness of the substance they be borne up into the air, (as Isidore says)
and the air that is closed in the hallownes of pens and feathers, makes a
bird light, and disposes and makes him able and helps him to move upward.
Also the condition of birds is known by generation, for they have a feminall
virtue of kind plight in them, and by virtue thereof they be kindly moved to
increase their kind by deed of generation, and to keep their kind in order:
As it is said of Aristotle, all birds (says he) and fowls when they bring
forth birds lay Eggs, though it cannot be seen in all for scarcity: and
the beginning of a generation of a bird, as it is said, it comes of the
white, and his meat is the yolke: and after ten days of the generation a bird
is full shapen in all parts, and the parts be openly distinguished and known,
but then his head is greater then all his body: and if the Egg shell were
then broken, the head should be found bowed upon the right thigh, and his
wings spread upon the head.

When the generation of all the members is perfectly made, and liniation and
shape of the members, the shell breaks sometime the eighteenth day, or the
twentieth day, as it fares in Hens, and then the Chickins come out of the
shell alive, being full shapt, and sometime twain out of one shell. Among all
beasts that be in order of generation, birds and Fowls be most honest of
kind: for by order of kind, Males seek Females with business, and love them
when they be found, and fight, and put them in peril for them, and be joined
to them only as it were by covenant and wedding, love and nourish, and feed
only the birds that they get, and so kindly they deem and know between
sex and sex, male and female, except few, (whom kind goes out of kind) as
Aristotle shows an example of the Partredge, that forgets his sex, that
is, to understand the dissolution of male and female, and so he says, that
the male leapeth upon the male, and the female upon the female. But of the
Eggs that come of such treading, come no Birds, but they be as wind Eggs,
and take an evil savor of such treading, and an evil stinch. And Birds and
Fowls ingendering keep couenable time, for in spring time when the generation
comes in, birds cry and sing, males draw to company of females, and desire
each other of love, and woo with beakes and voice, and build Nests, and lay
Eggs, and bring forth birds, and when the birds be gendered, they feed and
nourish them, and bring them up, but when the office of generation is full
ended, then they cease of song, and depart from each other, and come not
together till the time of generation comes again.

Also birds and fowls be known by the places that they dwell in, for some
birds and fowls as me seems, love company, and dwells nigh men, as Hens,
Geese, Sparrowes, Storkes and Swallows, and some dread and fligh, and be
afraid of conversation of men, as fowls of woods, of mountains and marries,
for by their diverse complexious, they seek and challenge diverse manners of
places to inhabit in.

As we may see in our own country of England, some fowls use some sheires
more then other some, and in some sheires there come none of some Fowls at
all, as they do in other sheires. For those that be cold and moist of kind
use marrish and rivers for gathering of meat, and making of Nestes for sitting
abroad, and for to bring up and nourish their young Birds: and Fowls that be
of more hot and dry kind, dwell on Mountains and on high Rocks and stones,
as Birds and Fowls that live by pray: as Eagles and Faulkons, and other such,
to the which, kind gives crooked Claws and strong feet.

Also some wood fowls use and dwell in Woods and thick tops of trees, and
some of those be more mild then other, as Birds that sing in summer time with
sweet notes in woods and trees.

And other birds there be that live only in fields, and use to be therein,
and get their meat, and eat continually of the fruit of the earth, as Cranes
and Geese both wild and tame, and such fowls love to dwell together, both on
the ground and on the air, and go and fly together in herds, and leave
their own kind, and make a King among them.

Seeing I have declared the nature and property of fowls in the air, I
thought good to set down some rules belonging to Fouling, to help to further
some in that practice, which would feign learn and has no teacher: which
both to the pleasuring of them and small labor of my self, I have done my
good will.

First of fouling with Limetwigges, and how we should set our Limetwigs for
sorts of Foul. You must choose Limetwigs of those twigges that grow on the
body of the tree, and not of no bow twigs, for that they be britell and will
not hold, but will snap a two, but the twigges that grow on the body of the
tree are young bending twigges, and you must have to your whole set a thousand
just: there is also diverse other manners of fouling, as with Nets, Springes,
baits and snares, with diverse others. But to speak first of fouling with
Limetwigges, as some are set low and some high, and that is as we know the
haunt of the foul that uses to that place, whether they be Geese, Duckes,
Sknipes, or Hearnes, or Craines, or any other manner of foul that uses to the
place that you set your Limerods in. If you set your Rods for Wild Geese,
you must stick them in a manner upright, and half a yard asunder, which is
almost narrow enough for a Sknipe: but if you should stick them any closer,
there would no foul venture at all, for the wild Goose is the suttlest foul
of any, for when she lights, she lights most commonly in the deepest
waters for fear of deceit, and if she come out of the water to come to land,
she will spy to see if she can spy any thing before her: if she spy any
thing she will into the water again: but ever when you stick your Rods,
stick them so that the tails of your Rods may be toward the water, (if you
stick them by any River side) and the heads of your Rods scooping from the
River, that the foul may come with the Rods: for there is no foul that will
come against the Rods, nor is not able almost if they would: but being your
Rods turned from the River, they will be the bolder to go onwards, and then
they can no way escape. And so likewise set your Rods about the whole plat
that you set, with their tails outward, and their heads stooping inward, for
the foul will be the bolder to go amongst your Rods, if they chance to
light beside them: but you must give good attendance upon your Rods, least that
the foul which is tangled do pick themselves and get away again, but you
must lie very close least that the foul do chance to spy you: but if it
be somewhat darkish that you cannot epsy whether there be any foul lighted
among your Rods, then go to your Rods and give ashue, and if that there
be any they will flutter straight and fligh upward: and if that there be
none, then take your staff and beat the Rivers and Lakes within half a mile
compass once or twice, if you be able to compass it, or more, and then shall
you have them resort to you Limerods very thick: for he that minds to catch
any, must so travel that he leave no Lakes or Springes unsearched, and see
that your Limerods be set some what low round about at the very entering, for
that is good for all manner of foul: but if that they be set high within, it
is good reason that the foul does shut her wings before she is altogether at
the ground, and see that you do set your Rods within one another about three
quarters or half a yard asunder almost: and if it freese hard, you must trim
them with a little new Lime and Goose grease mingled together, and that will
keep them long from freesing. And if there be any special place which
fowls do resort to, as in deep waters and running Rivers, and that the River
is deep that you cannot set your Rods in, then take a pole or a cord, and a
long hay rope that will wind round about the length of the pole, then take
your Limerods and stick them very thick and loose withal, and then lay your
pole or poles over the River, and thrust the end of your pole within the
bancke, and tie the other end of you pole next to you to the bancke side, and
see that your pole be a pretty way within the water, and that the heads of
your Rods do stand close to the water: and thus may you set as many poles or
cords as you think the place does desire, and stick your Rods very
loosely that they may go with the foul as soon as they touch them.

Good Spaniell a treasure to Fouler sure is,
To help him sometime else often should he mis:
For water and land it is a good thing,
A Spaniell to have his game for to bring.
Also there is another manner of way to catch in the water with small cords
being tied overthwart the water, and lime them as you do your Limerods with
good water lime (as we call it) though indeed it is but Birdlime, but it is
tempered to hold within the water, which if you let the cords be but a
little within the water that it may scarce cover it: and if the water be
broad, then take a Cork or two and tie them to your Line to hold it up. This
is a pretty way and not to be suspected.

How to make Birdlime very pure.
FIrst pill the Bark from the Holly tree about Midsommer, then boil the same
bark till the utter rind will pill from the green bark, which will be
within one day, then lay the same inner bark so pilled in some close place on
the ground, and cover the same with some green weeds or dockes till it be
well rotten, which will be within nine days or thereabout, then either beat
it in morters or grind it very small, and then in some quick stream wash it
very clean, then put it in a pot of earth and it will spurge within three
days, then take of the skumme twice or thrice, for if there be any filth left
in it, it will rot the Lime. After this keep the Lime very close till you have
need to occupy it, mingle a little Hogs grease with it, and so many you work
your Rods with it. Therefore as it is mentioned of the Poet, the Wosell or
Robin is a great cherisher of the Holly tree, as Terence says, Turdus cacat
sibi malum, he makes a Rod for his own tail, for the dung of the Wosell
cherishes much the Holly tree, which afterward turns to his own sorrow.

A rare secret to catch foul, as Geese, Duckes, or Birds.
NVxe vomica, otherways called in English the Spring Nut, being a pretty deal
of that sod in a pecke of Barley, or as little as you think good, or Fetchis,
or Wheat, and being strowed where wild Geese or wild Duckes come, and as soon
as they eat of this they will sound, and you may take them will your hand.
Also the powder of Nuxe vomica is good to kill Kites, Ravens, Pyes, Crows, or
any other carronus foul. Also take a piece of flesh and lay it in the field,
and make holes in it, then put in the powder of Nuxe vomica in every hole, and
as soon as any foul eats of this, they will be overcome, and then they will
fligh boult upright, and fall down to the ground straight again, and so you
may take them.

Another pretty way to make birds drunk that you may take them with your hand.
TAke Wheat or Fitchis, or any other seed, and lay the same insteepe in lees of
wine, or in the juice of Hemlock, and straw the same in the place where Birds
use to haunt, and if they eat thereof, straight ways they will be so giddy,
that you may take them with your hand.

An excellent good way to make a bait to catch vvild Geese, or wild Duckes,
and all other sort of foul.
TAke the seed of Belenge, and the roots also, and steep them in water the
space of a day and a night: then sees the said seeds and roots in the water
that they were steeped in, so that the seeds may well drink and soke up the
water, then lay the said seeds or grain in the places where wild Duckes and
wild Geese and wont to resort, and they will eat this grain or seed so
prepared, and thereupon will sleep as they were drunk, and in the mean time
you may take them with your hands: but there must be a pretty quantity of
this, especially for wild Geese. This may also serve to take all other manner of
foul that go together in sholes or companies. If you sees this grain in
Brimstone, and lay it in the places where birds and fowls are wont to feed,
all that eat of it will fall down and die: but to keep them that they die
not, you must give them to drink Oil Olive, and shortly after they will
revive again. This is approved.

Of fouling with Limebush.
TO speak of Limebush there can be but little said, for it is commonly known
and practiced of all both in Winter and Summer. In Winter it is used with
Limebush, which we call Bat fouling, along by hedges to catch those birds that
rest in hedges, one to carry a light and another to beat the hedge: as also
the Limebush is used at house ends, Houels or Rickes: the Limebush is of little
cost, and is good for all times of the year. In Summer you may call Sparrowes
with a whistle to your bush. There is another pretty way to catch birds with
your Limebush, if you can get but an Oule and set her upon an hedge, and set a
bush of two by her of one side of her, and when the birds epsy her they will
flutter about her, and you shall catch good store of Birds. In Winter you have
many other ways good.

How to foul with Nets.
ALso there is another manner of way to foul which is with Nets, but the use
of them is in the night, and the darkest night the better: and first of fouling
with Nets, which we call in England most commonly Birdbaiting, and some call
it lowbelling, and the use of it is to go with a great light of Cressets, or
rags of linen dipped in Tailow that will make a good light, and you must have
a pan of plate made like a Lantern to carry your light in, which must have
a great socket to hold a great light, and carry it before you on your breast
with a Bell in your other hand of a great bigness, made in manner like to a
Cowbel, but of greater bigness, and you must ring it always after one order,
with two to go with Nets one of each side of him that carries the Bell, and
what with the light that so does amase them, and the Bell that so does
astonish them, they will when you come near them turn up their white bellies,
which you shall quickly perceive, then lay your Nets on them and take them:
but the Bell must not stint going: for if it cease, then the Birds will fly up
if they hear any more nigh. This is a good way to catch Larkes, Woodcockes,
and Partriches, and all other land birds,

To go with a Trammill.
TO go a trameling with a Net it is a good way, for two may go abroad with a
Tramell and catch store. You must have your Net seven yardes of length, and
five in breadth, then take a couple of Poules or long rods, so long as your
Net is, and tie your poles to your Nets all along the length of your Nets,
one of one side, and the other of the other side, then may you take your poule
in your hand, and pluck out your poule out of breadth, and one go in one
through of the land and another in the other through, and go along in lands and
carry your Net as far forwards as you can, and when they hear you tread,
then will they flutter up into your Net, which you shall quickly hear, then
let down your Net to the ground, and gripe them, and take them from under
your Net, but if it be in a very dark night, that you cannot see them, you
should have a little cloase Lantern, that one may perceive no light, but when
it is opened to see to take them, but we commonly make shift without.

To set Springes.
ALso some use to set Springes, which is made with a running knot, and a stick
in the ground to yerke up with an other stick which the foul must tread one,
which is in manner like to a trop or running knot which is made of hears,
which is good to be set in frost time in springs for Woodcocks and Snipes, or
any other foul if they come where that springes be set, or you may set them
in Lands in the very through for Woodcockes, where you know that they haunt,
and in Summer you may set them in bushes either for Woodcocks or any other
birds, and you must look that the stick that they tread on be somewhat
round and brown, for if it be white, they will fear to tread of it: and your
nouse must be made of horse hear, and the blacker the better.

The end of Fouling.
A breife Treatis of Fishing, with the art of Angling. Wherein is contained the
perfect making of all manner of Implements appertaining to that exercise: the
diverse and several baytes for every kind of Fish, with the best times of the
year for the taking of them.

A brief Treatise of Fishing, with the Art of Angling: wherein is contained
the perfect making of all manner of Implements appertaining to that exercise:
The diverse and several baits for every kind of fish, with the best times of
the year for the taking of them.
AS the wise man says, a good spirit makes a merry and flourishing age, and
causes a man to live long: and truly in my opinion, these three things are a
medesine, and a preservation for the same. The first of them is, a merry
thought. The second is, labor not outrageous. The third is, diet measurable.
The first, if a man will evermore be in a merry thought, and have a glad
spirit, he must eschew all contrarious company, and all places of debate,
where he may have any occasion of melancholy, and he must eschew all
places of Riot, which is occasion of surfit and sickness, and he must draw
him to places of sweet air, and eat nourishing meats and delectable.

As now I mean to descriue these disportes and games, to find the best of
them as truly as I could, and although the right Noble and worthy Duke of
York, late master of the game, has described this art of Fishing, and the
rest of these pleasures and disportes. For hunting in mine opinion is
laboursome, for the Huntsman must follow his hounds, sweating full sore, he
blows till his lips blister, and when he thinks he has a Hare, full often
it is a Hedgehog. Thus he chaseth up and down, and knows not sometimes at
what. He comes home at night rain beaten and pricked, and his clothes torn
all to pieces, wetshod and all myrie, and some of his hounds lost, and some
surbated. Such griefs and many other happen unto the Huntsmen, which for
displeasing of them that love it I dare not report: thus truly me thinks it
is not the best game and disport of the four.

Hawking is labourous and troubelous: for as often the Faulkner loses his
Hawks, as the Hunter his Hounds, then is his game and disport gone, yea, and
full often he cries and whistleth, till he almost loses his wind, his Hawke
sometime takes above, and gives no mind nor sight to him: for when he would
have her fly, then she will bathe: with misfeeding she will have the
frounce, and many other diseases that brings to souce. Thus by proof, this
is not the best disport and game of the said four. In my opinion the game of
Fouling is the simplest: for in Winter in cold weather, the Fouler can do no
good, but in the hardest and coldest weather, which is grievous: for when he
would go to his ginnes, he cannot for cold: many a devise he makes, and
yet in the morning his fortune is hard, when he is wet up to the waste. Many
discommodities I could show, but for offending I let them pass. Then since it
is so, that Hawking, Hunting, and Fouling be so laborous, that none of them
may be a mean to a merry spirit, which is the cause of long life, unto the
sayings of the wise in his Parables: doubtless then it must follow, that
fishing with the Angle is most delectable, for all other are troublesome and
laberous: For in some kind of fishing it makes the Fisher through wet and so
cold, that many and sundry times there insueth diverse infirmities through the
same: But the Angler he has no cold, no disease, no impediment, except it
be through himself: for he can lose but a Line or a Hook at the most, which
he may make again at his own leisure, as he shall be taught hereafter: So
then is not his loss grievous if the fish break away with his Hook, that is
the most: for and he fail of one, he hitteth of another: and if he quite
fail, yet he has his wholesome walks, his pleasant shades, the sweet air,
the excellent smelles of the sweet Medowe flowers, which makes him hungry:
he hears the melodious Harmony of Birds and other Fowls, which he
thinks is better then the noise of Hounds, the blast of Horns, or all the cry
that Hunters, Faulkners, or Foulers can make: and if the Angler do take fish,
then has he a mercy spirit, and a glad heart. But who so will use this
exercise, he must rise carely, which is profitable to man for the health of
his body: For as the old English Proverb is, who so does rise carely shall
be holy, healthie, and happy. Thus I have showed in this Treatise, that this
disport and game of Angling, is the very mean to induce a man to a merry
spirit. And to the content of all those that have delight in these exercises, I
have collected this Treatise following, which you may use at your pleasure.

IF you will be perfect in this art of Angling, you must first learn to make
your Implements: that is to say, your Rod, and your Lines of diverse colors:
This done, you must know how you must angle, and in what place of the water,
how deep, and at what time of the day, and for what manner of Fish, and what
weather, how many impediments there be in fishing, and specially in Angling,
and what bait belongs to every fish every time of the year: And how you
shall make your baits breed, where you shall find them, and how you shall
keep them for the most part: How you shall make your Hooks of Steel, and of
Osmonde, some for the Dub, some for the Flote, and for the ground. And here I
will teach you how you shall make your Rod: you shall cut it between Michalmas
and Candlemas, of an ell and a half long, being the arm of a great Hasell,
Willow, or Aspe, and beth him in a whote Oven, and set it even and straight,
and let it cole a month, then take a cord and bind it fast about, and bind
it to a form or to a piece of square timber: then take a Plummers wire that
is even and straight, and sharp the one end and heat it in the fire and
Charcole, and burn the hole quite through in the pith, beginning at both ends
and go on too the middle: you may burn the hole with a Bird broch, but let
the last broch be bigger then any of them before, then let it lie and cool
two days, unbind it and let it lie in the smoke, or the roufe of a house,
till it be through dry. In the same season cut a yard of green Hasell, and
beth it even and straigh, and let it dry with the staff: and when it is dry
make it fit for the hole in the staff, unto the half length of the staff:
and to fill the other half of the crop, take a fair shute of Black thorn,
Crab tree Medler, or else of Juniper, cut in the same season, and well bethed
and straight, and set them fit together, so that the crop may enter all into
the said hole, then shave your staff and make it Tapar wise, then hoope the
staff at both ends with long hoopes of iron, or latten after the cleanliest
manner, and a pike in the nether end fastened with a running wire to take in and
out of your staff, and set your crop a handful within your upper end of your
staff, in such wise that it be as biggethere as in any other place above,
then arm your staff down to the fret with a Line of six hears, and dubble
the Line and fret it fast on with a piece of a bow: And thus you shall make
you a staff to walk with, and no man may know whether you have such
Implements about you: It will be very light and nimble to fish with at your
pleasure, and is always very ready and necessary.

AFter you have thus made your Rod, you must learn to color your Lines of
hear after this manner. You must take of a white Horse tail the longest
hears you can get, and the bigger and rounder it is, the better it is, depart
them in six parts, and color every part by himself in diverse colors: as
yeallowe, green, tawnie, brown, russet, or duskie color: And for to make
your hear take a good creene color, you must take a quart of Ale, and put
into it half a pound of Allom, and put your hear and all together in a little
pan, and let them boil sofly half an hour, then take out your hear and let
them dry, then take a pottle of fair water, and put it into a pan, and two
handfulles of Wexen, and press it with a Tyle stone, and let it boil softly
the space of an hour: and when it is yeallowe on the skumme, put therein your
hears, with half a pound of Copperous beaten into powder, and let it boil
the space of going of half a mile, and then set it down and let it cool the
space of five or six hours, then take out the hear and dry it, and it will
be the best green for the water that can be, and the more that you put of
Copperous to it the better it will be.

For to make your hear yeallowe.
Dress it as before with Allom, and after with Oldes, or Waxen, with Copperous
or Verdigreace.

To make another yeallow.
TAke a pottle of small Ale, and stamp thereinto three handfulles of Walnut
leaves, and put it together, and then put in your hear that it be as deep as
you will have it.

For to make Russet hear.
TAke a pint of strong Lee, and half a pound of Sote, and a little Juice of
Walnut leaves, and a quart of Allom, put them altogether in a Pan, and boil
them well, and when it is cold put in your hear till it be as dark as you
will have it.

To make your hear brown.
TAke strong Ale and Sault, and mingle them together, and put your hears two
days and two nights and they will be a perfect color.

For to make a tawny color.
TAke Lime and water, and put them together, and then put your hears therein
four or five hours, then take them out, and put them into a Tanners Ose one
day, and it will be as fine a tawny color as can be for your purpose.

The sixth part of your hear, you shall keep still white for lines, for the
double hook to fish for the Trout, and for small lines to lie for the Roche
and the Dace.

When your hear is thus collected, you must know for which waters and which
seasons they shall serve, the green color for all clear waters from April
until September. The yellowe color in every clear water from September to
November. For it is like the Weeds and other kind of grass that is broken in
the River. The russet color serves all the Winter until the end of April,
as well in Rivers as in Pooles or lakes.

The brown color serves for the water that is blackish, in Rivers or other
waters: the tawny colors, for those rivers or waters that be heathy or morish.

Now you must make your lines after this order. First you must have an
inscrument for the twisting of your line. Take your hear and cut off a
handful at the end, because it is not strong enough, then turn the top to
the tail over each alike, and make it into three parts, and knit every part
by himself, and knit the other end altogether: then put that end fast into
your instrument into the clift, and make it fast with a wedge, four fingers
shorter then your hear, then twine your warpe one way alike, and fasten them
in three cliftes alike straight, then take that out at the other end, and let
it twine that way that it desires, then streine it a little, and knit it for
undoing, and that is good.

So when you have so many links as will suffice for a line to make it long
enough, then must you knit them together with a water knot, or a Dutch knot,
and when your knot is knit, cut of the void shore ends a straw breadth from
the knot, thus shall your lines be fair and even: and also sure for any manner
of Fish.

The finest practice is in making your hockes, and for the making of them you
may have your several kind of tools that you may do them artificially. A
semy clam of iron, a bendor, a pair of long and small tongues, and a knife
somewhat hard and thick, an Anuild, and a little hammer.

And for a small Fish you shall take the smallest quarrel Needles that you can
find of Steel: and you shall put the Quarrel in a fire of Charcole till it
be of the same color that the fire is, then take it out and lay it to cool,
and you shall find it well alayd to file, then raise the beard with your knife,
and make the point sharp, then alay him again or else he will break in the
bending, then bend him as he will serve for your purpose, you shall make them
of great Needles, as shoomakers Needles, Taylers needles, or imbroderers
Needles: but look that they will bow at the point or else they be not good,
and when you have beaten flat the end of the hook, fyle him smooth that it
fret not the line, the put it into the fire, and give it an easy red heat,
then suddenly quench it in water, and it will be hard and strong. And for to
have knowledge of your Instruments that be necessary, without the which you
are not able to accomplish your desire, that is, your Hammer, Knife, Pynson,
Claem, Wedge, File, Wrest, and a Needle.

When you have made your hooks, then you must set them on according to their
strength and greatness. First take small red silk, and if it be for a great
hook then double it and twist it, and for a small hook let it be single, and
therewith fret the line where as you will have the hook stand, a straw
breadth, then set to your hook and fret it with the same thread the two parts,
of the length that it shall be fret in all, and when you come to the third
part, then turn the end of your line up again double, to the other third part,
then put your thread in at the hole twice or thrice, and let it go each time
about the yeard of your hook: then wette the hook and draw, and look that
your line lie evermore within your hooks, and not without, and then cut of the
lines end, and the thread as nigh as you can, saving the fret.

So, ye know with how great Hooks you shall angle to every fish, now I will
tell with how many hears you shall angle for every fish. First for the Menowe
with a line of one hear: For the waring Roche, the Bleake, the Gogion, and the
Ruff, with a line of three hears: For the Dace and the Roch, with a line of
three hears: For the Perch, the Flounder, and Bremet, with a line of four
hears: For the Cheuin, the Breame, the Tench, and the Eele, with six hears:
For the Troute, and the grasing Barble, and the great Cheuin, with nine hears:
For the great Troute with twelve hears: For the Salmon, with fifteen hears:
and for a Pyke with a chalk line made in the color aforesaid, armed with a
line, as you shall hear hereafter. When I speak of the Pyke, your Lines must
be plumed with lead, and the nearest plumbe to the Hook, be a foot of at
the least, and every plumbe of the quantity of the bigness of the line: There
be three manner of plumbes, for a ground line, renning, and for the slote: set
upon the ground line lying, ten plumbs all joining together on the ground line,
renning, nine or ten small: the flote plumbe shall be heavy, that the first
pluck of any fish may pull it into the water, and make your plumbes round and
smooth, that they stick not on stones and weeds.

THen you shall make your slotes in this manner. Take a piece of a Cork that
is clean without holes, and bore it through with a small hot iron, and put
thereinto a quill or pen even and straight: always note that the greater the
hole, the bigger the pen, and shape it great in the midst, and small at both
ends, and especially sharp in the nether end, and make them smooth on a
Grindstone, and look that the flote for one hear be no bigger then a Peace,
for two hears as a Beam, for twelve hears as a Walnut, and so every line must
have according to his portion. Al manner of lines that be not for the ground,
must have flotes: and the renning ground line must have a flote, and the lying
ground line must have a flote.

NOw I have taught you to make your hears, hereafter I mean to show you the
art of Angling. You shall understand that there is six manner of Anglings: the
one is at the ground for the Troute, and other fish: another is at the ground
at the Arch or stang where it ebbeth and flows, for Bleake, Roch, and Dace:
the third is with a flote for all manner of fish: the fourth, with a Menowe for
the Troute without plumbe or flote: the fifth is renning in the same for the
Roche and Dace with two hears or one hear, and a fly: the fixed is a dubbed
hocke for the Troute or Grayling. And for the first and principal point in
Angling, look that you keep you from the sight of the fish, either stand
close on the land, or behind some bush: for if he see you, then your sport is
marde for he will not bite, and look that you shadow not the water as little
as you can, for it is that which will make him be gone: for if the fish be
fraide he will not bite a good while after. For all manner of fish that feed
by ground, you must angle for them to the bottom, so that your hook shall
run and lie on the ground: and for all other fish that feeds above, you
shall angle for them at the midst of the water, or above the midst, or below
the midst whether ye will, for the greater the fish, the nearer he lies to
the bottom of the water, and evermore the smaller the fish, the more he
swimmeth above. The third good point, is when the fish biteth, that you be not
too hasty to smite nor to take: for you must abide till the bayte be far in
the mouth of the fish, and then tarry no longer, and this is for the ground:
and for the flote when you see it pulled into the water, or else carried softly
upon the water, then smite, and look that you never ouer-smite the strength of
your line for breaking: And if it be your fortune to smite a great fish with a
small line, then you must lead him in the water, and labor him there till he
be drowned and overcome, then take him as well as you can, and ever take heed
that you streyne him not over the strength of your line, and as much as you can
let him not go past your lines end from you, but keep him ever under your
Rod, and hold him as straight as your line will sustain, and bear his leapes
and his plunges as well as you can with your Crope in your hand.

Here I will declare unto you, in what place of the water you shall angle,
either in Poole or standing water, and according to the deepenes of the said
water.
THere is no great diversity in any place of a Poole, so it be deep, for it
is a prison to all fishes, and therefore the sooner taken: but in the River the
best angling is where it is deep, and clear by the ground, as gravel or clay
without mud or weeds, and especially if there be any whirling in the water,
or a covert, as a hollow bancke or great roots of Trees, or long weeds
fleeting above the waters, where the fish may hide themselves at certain times
when they list. Also it is good to angle in stiff streams, and also in
valleys of waters, and in flood gates, and Mill pits, and at the bancke where
the stream runs, and is deep and clear by the ground, and in any place
where the fish haunt and have any feeding.

Now you shall understand the best time of the year, and the best times of the
day, from the beginning of May to September: the best time of their baiting is
from four a clock in the morning until eight a clock, and from four in the
after noone till eight at night: but it is not so good in the afternoon as in
the morning: and if it be a cold wind and a lowering day it is much better
then a clear day, and the Poole fishes will bite best in the morning.

And if you see at any time of the day the Trout or the Grayling leap, angle
for him with a dub according to the season of the year, and where the water
ebbeth and flows: the fish will bite in some place at the ebb, and in some
place at the flood, after they have had resting behind Stanges and Arches of
Bridges, and other such places.

The principal time to angle is in a lowering day, when the wind blows
softly: for in Summer when it is very whote then it is naught: from September
until April in a fair Sunnie day, it is very good angling, and if the wind
at that time have any part of the Orient weather, then it is naught: and when
it is a great wind and that it snoweth, raineth, or haileth, or is a great
tempest, as Thunder or Lightning, or a swollie hot weather, then it is naught
for to angle.

You shall further understand that there be twelve empediments, which cause a
man to take no fish, as it does most commonly hap. The first is if that your
harness be not fit and well made. The second is if your baits be not good and
fine. The third is, if you angle not in biting time. The fourth is, if the fish
be fraid with the sight of man. The fifth, if the water be red, thick, and
white, of any flood lately fallen: the sixth, if the Fish stir not for cold:
the seventh, if the weather be hot: the eight, if it rain: the ninth, if it
hail or snow: the tenth, if it ibe a tempest: the eleuent, if it be a great
wind: the twelfth is, if the wind be in the East, and that is worst, for
commonly neither in winter nor summer the fish will not bite if it be in the
East, the West or the North is good, but the South is best of all.

And now I have taught you to make your harness, and how you shall fish
therewith in all points. Now there rests to show you what baits be best for
every kind of fish, for all times and seasons of the year, which is the
principal part of this art: without the knowledge of which baits, all the rest
before were to no purpose: for there is no man can take the fish to swallow the
hook without the bait, and therefore I have set you down every Fish with his
proper bait belonging to the time, and the best time to caught them as
follows.

And because the Sammon of all fish is the most stateliest, therefore I mean
to begin with him the first.
THe Sammon is a very gentle fish, but he is troublesome to take, for commonly
he is in deep places of great Rivers, and for the most part he will keep him
in the midst of it, that you may not come at him, and he is in season from
March, until Michaelmas: in which season you may angle for him, with these
baytes if you can get them. First with a red worm in the beginning and ending
of the season, and also with a grub that breeds in a dounghill, and
especially there is a sovereign bait that breeds in a water Docke, and he
biteth not at the ground, but at the flote, you may take him when he leapeth
in like manner as does a Trout or a Grailing, and these are proved baits for
the Samon.

The Trout because he is a dainty Fish, and also a very fervent byter: he
is the next that I mean to show you the time to catch him. From March until
Michalmas he lies on the gravel, and in a stream you may angle for him with
a line, lying or running, saving in leaping time, and then with a dub, and
early with a running ground line, and in the day time with a flote line. You
shall angle for him in March, with a Menowe hanging on your hook, by the
nethernes without Flote or Plumbe, drawing up and down the stream till you
feel him fast. Also it is good to angle for him with ground lines, and with a
red worm, for the most part, and in April take the same baytes, as also the
Canker that breeds in a great tree, and the red snaile, you may take the bob
worm under the Cowtord and the silk worm, and the bayte that breeds on a
Fearne leaf. In June take a red worm and nippe of his head, and a cod worm,
and put it on the hook. In July take the Codworme, and the red worm together.
In August take a flesh fly, and the fat of Bacon, and bind them together about
the hook. In September take the red worm and the Menowe. In October take the
same. There be specially for the Troute all times of the year. From April
until September the Troute leapeth: then angle for him with a dubbed hook
according to the mouth: which dubbed hooks you shall find in the end of this
Treatise, and the mouths with them.

The Grayling of some so called, of others Vmbre, It is a right delicate fish
to man's mouth, and you may take him as you do the Troute, and these are his
baytes. In March and in April the red worm, in May the green worm, a little
braised worm, the docke canker, and the Hawthorne worm. In June the bayte
that breeds between the Bark of an Oak. In July a bait that breeds on the
Fearne leaf, and the great red worm, and nip off the head and put it on the
hook, and a Codworme before. In August the red worm and a dock worm, and all
the year after a worm.

The Barbell is a sweet fish, but he is a very queysie meat, and very
dangerous to eat: for commonly he brings an inconvenience to the Febres,
and if he be eaten raw, he may be the cause of a man's death, which has
oftentimes been seen, and these are his baits in March and in April. Take
fresh Cheese, and lay it on a Trencher, and cut it into small pieces, the
length of your hook, then take a Candle and burn it on your hook till it be
yellowe, and then bind it on you hook with Fletchers Silk, and make it rough
like a Welbede, this bait is good all the Summer season. In may and in June
take the Hawihorne Worm, and the great red Worm, and nip the head off, and
put a codworme on your hook before, and this is a very good bait. In July
take the red worm for the chief, and the Hawthorne, together with the
waterdocke leaf worm. In August, and for all the year, take the tallowe of a
sheep, and of soft cheese, each of them alike, and a little Honey, and temper
them together till they be tough, and then put a little Flower into it, and
make it in small pellets, and that is a good bayte to Angle with at the ground,
and look that it sink in the water, or else it is not good for that purpose.

The Carpe is a deyntie fish, but there is no great plenty of them, and
therefore I write least of him, but he is a very subtle fish to take, for
heee is so strong in the mouth that there is no weak harnes will hold him: and
as touching his baits I have little knowledge thereof, and therefore I would
be loath to write more then I know and have proved: but I am sure the red worm,
and the Menow are good baits for him at all times, as I have heard diverse good
Fishers report.

The Cheuin is a stately fish, and his head is a deinty morsel, there is no
fish so strongly enarmed on the body with scales, and because he is a strong
biter he has the more baits, which are these: In March, the red worm at the
ground: for commonly then he will bite there at all times of the year, if he
be any thing hungry: In April, the Canker that breeds in the tree, the
worm that breeds between the bark of the tree of Oak, the red worm, and
the young Froshes when the feet be cut off: also the Stone fly, the Bob under
the Cowturd, the red Snaile: In May, the bait that breeds in the Ozier
leaf, and the Docke canker put on the hook, and a bait that breeds on the
Fearne leaf, the Redworme, and the bait that grows upon the Hawthorne, and
a bait that breeds on the Oak leaf, and a Silk worm and a Codworme
together: In June, take the Creker and the Dorre, also a red worm the head
being cut off, and a Codworme before, and put them on the hook: also a Grub
that breeds in the dunghill, a great Greshopper, and the Humble be in the
Medowe: Also young Bees and Hornets, and the fly that is among the Pismiers
hills. In August, take Wort worms, and Maggots, till Michalmas. In September,
the red worm, and a young Mouse not heared, and the House comb.

The Breame is a noble fish and a deyntie, and you shall angle for him from
March until August with a red Worm, and then with a Butterfly, and with a
bait that grows amongst green Reed, and a bait that breeds in the bark
of a dead tree: and for Bremets take Maggots, and from that time forward all
the yerre take the red worm: and in the River, brown bread.

The Tench is a good fish, and heals in a manner all other fish that be hurt,
if they may come to him, he is most parts of the year in the mud, and
stirs most in June and July, and in other season but little, he is an evil
biter, and his baits be these: For all the year, brown bread tosted with
Honney, the likeness of a bantred loaf, and the great red wore, and take the
black blood in the heart of a Sheep, and flower and honey, and temper them all
together, so make them softer then past, and anoint the red worm therewith,
both for this fish and for others, and they will bite much the better thereat
all times of the year.

The Perch is a deyntie fish, and passing wholesome, and a great and earnest
biter: In march, the red worm, the Bob under the Cowturde. In April and May,
the Slowthorne, worm, and the Codworme. In June, the bait that breeds in an
old fallen Oak, and the great Canker. In July the bait that breeds on the
Ozier leaf, and the Bob that breeds on the dunghill, and the Hawthorne
worm, and the Codworme. In August, the red worm and Maggots, and all the
year after take the red worm for the best.

The Roch is an easy fish to take, and if he be fat and penned then is he
good meat, and his baits are these. In March take the red worm. In April,
the Bob under the Cowturde. In May, the bait that breeds in the Oken leaf,
and the Bob on the dunghill. In June, the bait that breeds on the Ozier, and
the Codworme. In July, the House spies, and the bait that breeds on an Oak,
and the Notworme, and Mathewes maggots, until Michalmas, and after that the
fat of Bakon.

The Dace is a gentle Fish, and is very good meat, in March his haite is a
red worm, and in April the Bob under the Cowtord. In May the docke cancker,
and the bayte on the Slowthorne and that on the Oken leaf. In June the
Codworme and the bait on the Ozier, and the white Grub on the dunghill. In
July take house spies, and the flies that breed in Pismyre hills, the Codworm
and Magots till Michaelmas, and if the water be clear, you shall take fish
when other shall take none, and from that time forth do as you would do for the
Roch: for commonly their biting and baits be alike.

The bleake is but a feeble fish, yet is he wholesome. His bait from March till
Michaelmas be the same that I have written for the Roche and the Dace, saving
all the summer you may angle for him with a house fly, and in Winter season
with Bacon, and with other baits as hereafter you shall learn.

The Ruff is a very good and a wholesome fish, and a free biter: but subtle
withal, and you must angle for him with the same baits and the same seasons
of the year as I have told you of the Perch: for they be like in fish and
feeding, saving the Ruff is less, and therefore you must have the smaller
baytes.

The Flounder is a wholesome fish and free, but a subtle byter, in this manner:
for commonly when he sucketh his meat, he feeds at the ground, and
therefore you must angle for him with a ground line lying, and he has but one
manner of bayt, and that is a red worm, and that is most chief for all manner
of Fish.

The Gogin is a good fish of his bigness, and he biteth well at the ground,
and his baits for all the year is the red worm, Codworme and Magots, and you
must angle for him with a flote, and let your bait be near the bottom, or
else upon the ground.

The Menowe when he shines in the water is bitter, and though his body be
but little, yet he is a ravenous biter and eger, and you shall angle for him
with the same baits that you do for the Gogion, saving they must be small.

The Eele is a quesie fish, and a rauenor and a deuourer of the brood of fish,
and the Pike is also a deuourer of fish, I put them both behind all other fish
for to angle. For the Eele, you shall find the hole in the ground of water, and
it is blewe and blackish, there put in your hook till it be a foot within the
hole, and your bait shall be a great angle with a Menowe.

The Pyke is a good fish, but that he is a deuourer of all fish as well of his
own brood as of other, and therefore I love him the worse: and for to take
him ye shall do thus. Take a Rock or a fresh Herring, and a wire with a hook
in the end, and put it in at the mouth and down by the ridge to the tail of
the Herring, and then put the line of your hook in after, and draw the hook
into the cheek of the fresh Herring, then put a plumbe of lead on your line a
yard from your book, and a flote in the midway between, and cast it in a pit
where the Pykes use, and this is the best and surest way to take: and three
manner of taking of him there is. Take a Frosh, and put it on your hook
between the skin and the body in at the neck, on the back half, and put
on the flote a yard thereto, and cast it where the Pyke haunteth, and you shall
have him. Another way: Take the same bait and put it in safe tied, and cast it
into the water with a Cork, and you shall not fail of him: And if you mind
to have good sport, then tie your cord to a Goose foot, and you shall see good
haling between the Goose and the Pyke, who shall have the hetter.

Now you know with what baits and in what seasons of the year you shall
angle for every kind of fish, now I mean to tell you how you shall keep and
feed your quick baits. You shall keep them all in general and every one
several by himself, with such things as they are bred in, and as long as they
be quick and new they be fine: but when they be in a slough or dead, then
they are naught: Out of these be excepted three broodes: that is, Hornets,
Humble bees and Waspes, which you shall bake in bread, and dip their heads in
blood, and let them dry. Also except Maggots, which when they be bred great
with their natural feeding, you shall feed them furthermore with Sheep
tallowe, and take heed that in going about your disports you open no man's
gates, but that you shut them again. Also you shall not use this sport
craftelie for covetousness, to the increasing and sparing of your money only,
but principally for your solace, and for the maintenance of your bodily health.
For when you purpose to go on your disports in fishing, you will not desire
greatly many persons with you, which might let you of your game, and then your
mind may be well given to the serving of God, as in prayer or otherwise, and
in so doing you shall eschew and avoid many vices, as Idleness, which is
the principal leader to vice, and it is commonly seen that it brings diverse
to their utter destruction. Also you must not be too desirous of your game but
with discretion, that you mar not other men's game and your own too, as too
much at one time, which you may lightly do, if in every point you fulfill this
present treatise: but when you have a sufficient mess, to content your self
for that time. Also you shall apply your self to the nourishing of the gain,
and in destroying of such things as shall be the deuourers of it.

FINIS.

