MISCELANEA.

Meditations.

Memoratiues.

By Elizabeth Grymeston.

Non est rectum, quod a Deo non est directum.

LONDON, Printed by Melch. Bradwood for Felix Norton. 1604.

The Contents.
1 A short line, how to level your life. 2 A mortified man's melancholy. 3 A
patheticall speech in the person of Dives in the torments of hell. 4 Who lives
most honestly, will die most willingly. 5 A sinners Glass. 6 The union of
Mercy and Justice. 7 No greater cross than to live without a cross. 8 That
fear to die, is the effect of an evil life. 9 That affliction is the cost of
a true Christian. 10 A theme to think on. 11 Morning meditation, with sixteen
sobs of a sorrowful spirit. 12 A Madregall. 13 Evening meditation. 14
Memoratiues.
To her loving son Bernye Grymeston.
MY dearest son, there is nothing so strong as the force of love; there is no
love so forcible as the love of an affectionate mother to her natural child:
there is no mother can either more affectionately show her nature, or more
naturally manifest her affection, than in aduising her children out of her own
experience, to eschew evil, and incline them to do that which is good. Out of
these resolutions, finding the liberty of this age to be such, as that
quicquid libet licet, so men keep themselves from criminal offenses; and my
mothers undeserved wrath so virulent, as that I have neither power to resist
it, nor patience to endure it, but must yield to this languishing consumption
to which it has brougt me: I resolved to break the barren soil of my
fruitless brain, to dictate something for thy direction; the rather for that
as I am now a dead woman among the living, so stand I doubtful of thy fathers
life; which albeit God has preserved from eight several sinister assaults, by
which it has been sought; yet for that I see that Quem saepe transit casus,
aliquando inuenit, I leave thee this portable veni mecum for thy Counselor, in
which thou may ^ee the true portrature of thy mothers mind, and find
something either to resolve thee in thy doubts, or comfort thee in thy
distress; hoping, that being my last speeches, they will be better kept in the
conseruance of thy memory; which I desire thou will make a Register of
heavenly meditations.

For albeit, if thou prouest learned (as my trust is thou will; for that
without learning man is but as an immortal beast) thou may happily think
that if every Philosopher fetched his sentence, these leaves would be left
without lines; yet remember withal, that as it is the best coin that is of
greatest value in fewest pieces, so is it not the worst book that has most
matter in least words. The grauest wits, that most grave works expect,
The quality, not quantity, respect.
And the spiders web is neither the better because wouen out of his own
breast, nor the bees honey the worse, for that gathered out of many flowers;
neither could I ever brook to set down that haltingly in my broken style,
which I found better expressed by a grauer author.

God send thee too, to be a wits Camelion,
That any authors color can put on.
I have prayed for thee, that thou might be fortunate in two hours of thy
life time: In the hour of thy marriage, and at the hour of thy death. Marry
in thine own rank, and seek especially in it thy contentment and preferment:
let her neither be so beautiful, as that every liking eye shall level at her;
nor yet so brown, as to bring thee to a loathed bed. Defer not thy marriage
till thou come to be saluted with a God speed you Sir, as a man going out of
the world after sortie; neither yet to the time of God keep you Sir, whilst
thou art in thy best strength after thirty; but marry in the time of You are
welcome Sir, when thou art coming into the world. For seldom shall thou see a
woman out of her own love to pull a rose that is full blown, deeming them
always sweetest at the first opening of the budde. It was Phoedra her
confession to Hippolitus, and it holds for truth with the most: Thesei vultus
amo illos priores quos tulit quondam iuuenis. Let thy life be formal, that thy
death may be fortunate: for he seldom d^es well that lives ill. To this
purpose, as thou have within thee Reason as thy Counselor to persuade or
dissuade thee, and thy Will as an absolute Prince with a Fiat vel Euitetur,
with a Let it be done or neglected; yet make thy conscience thy Censormorum,
and chief commander in thy little world: let it call Reason to account whether
she have subjected her self against reason to sensual appetites. Let thy Will
be censured, whether her desires have been chaste, or as a harlot she have
lusted after her own delights. Let thy thoughts be examined. If they be good,
they are of the spirit (quench not the spirit) if bad, forbid them entrance;
for once admitted, they straight ways fortify; and are expelled with more
difficulty, than not admitted. Crush the serpent in the head,
Break ill eggs yer they be hatched.
Kill bad chickens in the tread,
Fledge they hardly can be catched.
In the rising stifle ill,
Lest it grow against thy will.
For evil thoughts are the Devils harbingers; he never rests, but where they
provide his entertainment. These ^re those little ones whose brains thou must
dash out against the rock of true judgment: for As a false Lover that thick
snares has laid,
T'intrap the honor of a fair young maid,
When she (though little) listening ear affoords
To his sweet, courting, deep affected words,
Feels some asswaging of his freezing flame,
And sooths himself with hope to gain his game,
And rapt with joy, upon this point persists,
That parleing city never long resists:
Even so the serpent that does counterfeit
A guilefull call t'allure us to his net,
Perceiving us his flattering gloze digest,
He prosecutes, and iocund does not rest,
Till he have tried foot, hand, and head, and all,
Upon the breach of this new battered wall.


I could be content to dwell with thee in this agrument: but I must confine my
self to the limits of an epistle, Quae non debet implere sinistram manum. To
which rule I do the more willingly submit my self, for that the discourses
following are motives to the same effect: which I pray thee use to peruse, even
in that my affectionate love, which diffused amongst nine children which God
did lend me, is now united in thee, whom God has only left for my comfort.
And because God has endued thee with so violent a spirit, as that quicquid vis
valde vis; therefore by so much the more it behooves thee to deliberate what
thou undertake: to which purpose my desire is, that thou might be seasoned
with these precepts in thy youth, that the practice of thy age may have a taste
of them. And because that it is incident to quick spirits to commit rash
attempts: as ever the love of a mother may challenge the performance of her
demand of a dutiful child; be a bridle to thy self, to restrain thee from
doing that which indeed thou may do: that thou may the better forbear
that which in truth thou ought not to do, for haud cito progreditur ad
maiora peccata, qui parua reformidat; he seldomest commits deadly sin, that
makes a conscience of a venial scandal.

Thou see my love has carried me beyond the list I resolved on, and my aching
head and trembling hand have rather a will to offer, than ability to afford
further discourse. Wherefore with as many good wishes to thee, as good will can
measure, I abruptly end, desiring God to bless thee with sorrow for thy
sins, thankfulness for his benefits, fear of his judgments, love of his
mercies, mindfulnesse of his presence; that living in his fear, thou may
die in his favor, rest in his peace, rise in his power, remain in his glory
for ever and ever.

Thine assured loving mother Elizabeth Grymeston.

SIMON GRAHAME to the Author.
Go famous thou, with ever flying fame,
That make thy flight on Virtues wings to sore,
In worlds of hearts go labyrinth thy name,
That wonders self may wondrous thee adore.
Though th'authours self triumph in heavenly glore,
Thou sacred work give mortal life again;
And so thy worth has made her evermore
In heaven and earth for ever to remain.
Her pondrous speech, her passion and her pain,
Her pleasing style shall be admired ilke where.
The fruitful flowing of her lofty brain
Does now bewray a mothers matchless care,
While she lives crowned amongst the high divines,
Thou on her son celestial sun down shines.
Tota vita dies vnus.
CHAP. I. A short line how to level your life.
WHen thou risest, let thy thoughts ascend, that grace may descend: and if thou
can not weep for thy sins, then weep, because thou can not weep.

Remember that Prayer is the wing wherewith thy soul flies to heaven; and
Meditation the eye wherewith we see God; and Repentance the Supersedea^ that
discharges all bond of sin.

Let thy sacrifice be an innocent heart: offer it daily a^ set hours, with
that devotion that well it may show, thou both know and acknowledgest his
greatness before whom thou art. So carry thy self as worthy of his
presence.

Where thou owe, pay duty: where thou find, return courtesy: where thou
art known, deserve love. Desire the best: disdain none, but evil company.
Grieve but be not angry at discourtesies. Redress, but revenge no wrongs. Yet
so remember pity, as you forget not decency.

Let your attire be such, as may satisfy a curious eye; and yet bear witness
of a sober mind.

Arm your self with that modesty, that may silenc^ that intemperate tongue,
and control that unchaste eye, that shall aim at passion.

Be mindful of things past; Careful of things present; Provident of things to
come.

Go as you would be met.
Sir as you would be found.
Speak as you would be heard: And when you go to bed, read over the carriage
of your self that day. Reform that is amiss; and give God thanks for that
which is orderly: and so commit thy self to him that keeps thee.

Teach me O Lord to number my days, and to order my life after this thy
direction.

CHAP. II. Amortified man's melancholy expressed in the person of Heraclitus,
who always wept.
LEt him that laughes come weep with me: for that which mirth neglects, tears
do learn: It is the afflicted mind that is the touchstone of faults
committed: and the guilt which security ouerseeth, a troubled mind does soon
discover.

A doleful case desires a doleful song
Without vain Art or curious complement;
And squallid fortune into baseness flung
Does scorn the pride of woonted ornament.
Be sorry that thou can not sorrow; thou that art begot in filthiness,
nourished in darkness, brought forth in pangs of death; thou whose infancy
is a dream; whose youth a frenzy; whose manhood a combat; whose age a
sickness; whose life misery; whose death horror.

Think, o think, and bethink thy self, from whence thou came, where thou
art, and whither thou go, for thou art here in an obscure land, governed by
the prince of darkness, where vice is advanced, virtue scorned, where
pleasures are few, pains infinite: where want is miserable, plenty full of
peril: in a vale of tears, environed or all sides with unplacable
adversaries: where if thou subdue lust, covetousness assaults thee; if
covetousness be vanquished, ambition will second her; if ambition be
surprised, anger succeeds: in a world of mischief, where envy breaks peace,
jealousy sundreth friendship.

A wretched world, the den of wretchedness.
Deformed with silth and foul iniquity,
A wretched world, the house of heaviness,
Filled with the wreaks of mortal misery.
O wretched world, and all that is therein,
The vassals of Gods wrath, and slaves to sin.
Thou have a silly, poor, yet powerful soul, a soul of noble substance, of
exceeding beauty, inspired by God the Father; redeemed by God the Son;
sanctified by God the holy Ghost: this is the careful charge committed to thy
charge to keep her. Where will thou find security for her, Which did in
former time Gods image bear?
And was at first, fair, good, and spotless pure.
But since with sins her beauties blotted wear,
Does of all sights her own sight least endure.


But now exiled from hir-selfe, and as a widow deprived of her espoused
fellowship, committed to thy safe conduct where will thou secure her? in heaven
the angels fell in God^ presence: in paradise Adam fell from a place of
pleasure in the world Judas fell in the school of Christ: and if tho^
suffer her to fall, the false to eternal perdition, for the sword of Gods
justice hangs always over our souls rea^die for our sins to divide us
from eternal bliss.

Since harvest never fails, but ever must,
Be torturd with the rack of his own frame:
For he that holds no faith, shall find no trust,
But sowing wrong, is sure to reap Gods blame.
Let the foore of him that sits upon the rainbow be thy arc of security in
this deluge of miseries; be not like the unclean Crow, that can find footing
on every carrion, with little care to return again: but rather imitate the
innocent Dove, that lothing abode without this arc, can find no rest; and
with the wings of a longing desire and penitent heart, flicker at the window of
this arc, till thy heavenly Noah put out his merciful hand to take thee in.

For when the soul sindes here no true content,
And like Noah's Dove can no sure footing take:
She does return from whence she first was sent,
And flies to him that first her wings did make.
Let her not drink of the fluds of the vanities of this life, but as the dogs
do of the river Nilus, that drink running, least while they stay to take a
full draught, they be stung with scorpions: for she lives in thy body no
otherwise than as a lazar on his death bed, uncertain of life, but in apparent
danger of endless death; within she makes her solace full of sadness: her
hope full of hazard, and all her ways strowed with Coccatrice eggs, fair
without, and foul within, make her careful of her steps. Thou have the
example of Christ: which way will thou go? he is the Way: whither will thou
go? he is the Truth: where will thou stay? he is the Life. If this Way lead
thee through austere passages; if this Truth teach thee true contrition: if
this Life be not achieved but with a doleful pilgrimage; for where do thou
read that Christ laughed? then Woe be to you that laugh, for you shall mourn:
and happy are you that lament, for you shall be comforted.

CHAP. III. A patheticall speech of the person of Dives in the torments of hell.
O Death, how sudden was thy arrest unto me? how unexpected? while my body was
strong, while my intrals were full of fat, and my bones were watered with
marrow; while I had rest in my substance, and peace in my riches; in one night
my soul was taken from me, and all my joy was turned into mourning.

Like as the sacred one that careless stands,
With gilded horns, and slowrie garlands crowned,
Proud of his dying honor and dear bands,
Whilst theaters fume with frankensence around:
All suddenly with mortal blow astond,
Does groueling fall, and with his steeming gore,
Distaine the pillars and the holy ground,
And the fair flowers that decked him before,
So down I fell on wordlesse precious shore.
I saw my friends forsake me in a moment: I felt how hard a thing it was to
sever two such old acquaintances as my soul and body: I wanted no view of the
vanities wherein I had delighted. On the one side hung a register of my sins
committed; on the other side lay a catalogue of good deeds omitted: within me
boiled my conscience confessing and accusing me: Before me stood the judgments
of God denounced against sin so mustered in rank, as I might well perceive
my dangers were certain, and destruction imminent. In this ecstasy while I
desired but one hours delay, I was carried with a motion Torrenti simili, as
swift as the torrent before the tribunal seat of God.

Under whose feet, subjected to his grace,
Sat Nature, Fortune, Motion, Time and Place.
To this tribunal seat attended me my evil works, where Christ showing
himself, laid open unto me the benefits he had bestowed upon me, the rewards
he promised me, the torments he suffered for me; all which the devil
confessing, concluded me to be his; for that though he never loved me', yet I
served him, though he never gratified me, yet I obeyed him, without wooing he
wan me, performing what he suggested, embracing what he preferred, affecting
every thing he cast in my way, all which my conscience acknowledging, censured
me to this bottomless depth, to this profound lake, to this sink of the
world, whither all the afflictions and unpleasant things in the world draine
and unite themselves to take revenge of sin.

A deadly gulf where naught but rubbish grows,
Which up on the air such stinking vapor throws,
That over there may fly no bird but dies,
Chok't with the pestilent savors that arise.
To this Chaos of confusion, to this Well of perdition wherein I am coarcted,
to this burning lake of fire and brimstone wherein I lie burning, but not
consuming; lamenting, but not pitied; where vomit out the riches which I
devoured; in pain, without ease; in torture without intermission; where my
lascivious eyes are afflicted with most ugly and fearful sights of griesely
devils; my ears that once were delicate, are laden now with the hideous noise
of damned spirits; my nose that once was dainty, is cloied with the stink of
unsupportable filth; my taste that sometimes was curious, and surfeited with
plenty, is now tormented with want; my imagination is vexed with apprehension
of pains present; my memory grieved with the loss of pleasures past; my
understanding affected with the consideration of felicity lost, and misery
found. Thus comparing senses pleasure with incumbent joy, I find my ioies
abortiue, perished ere they bud, my pains everlasting, during beyond eternity.

Your fond preferments are but childrens toys.
And as a shadow all your pleasures pass.
As years increase, so wauing are your joys.
Your bless is brittle, like a broken glass,
Or as a tale of that which never was.
Wherefore as one past cure, dejected beyond hope of redemption into endless
perdition, rather condoling my misfortune, than expostulating my mishap whereof
my self was author, I call to you, the glory of your age, the meat of time,
who proud in your errors, tread the path of worldly pleasures, wherein I was
impathed: Frustra, o frustra haec alio properanti.

What in this life we have or can desire,
Has time of growth, and moment of retire.
So feeble is man's state as sure it will not stand,
Till it disordered be from earthly band.
It was a condition annexed to our Creation: Intrasti v^exires, thou were borne
to die. Nothing more sure than thy dissolution: no time more uncertain than
thy time of separation. Be always ready to prevent that enemy, that is
always in readiness to take advantage. Qui non vult in vit^ prouidere mortem,
non potest in morte videre vitam. Who while he lives will not prevent eternal
death, shall neue^ after death inherit eternal life

Let every one do all the good he can:
For never comes ill of doing well.
Though just reward it wants here now and than,
Yet shame and evil death it does expel.
Miser chi maloprando, si confida,
Ch'ogn' hor star debba in maleficio occulto:
Che quand'ogn' altro taccia intorne grida,
L'aria la terra e'l luggo in ch'e sepolto.
Edio sa spesso ch'il peccato grida
Il peccator, poi ch'alcun di gli ha indulto,
Che se medesimo, seuza altruj rechiesta,
Inauedutamente manifesta.
Wretched is he that thinks by doing ill,
His evil deeds long to conceal and hide:
For though the voice and tongues of men be still,
By fowls and beasts his sin shall be descride.
And God often works by his secret will,
That sin it self the sinner so does guide,
That of his own accord, without request,
He makes his wicked doings manifest.
Shame follows sin never so closely done:
Shame always ends, what wickenesse begun.
Hoc est momentum temporis vnde pendet aeternitas. The carriage of thy self in
this life, is the beam whereof thy welfare for ever depends. Defer not thy
amendment: God is best when soonest wrought,
Lingering thoughts do come to naught.
O suffer not delay to steal the treasure of that day,
Whose smallest minute lost, no riches render may.


Turpe est eo statu viuere, in quo non statuas mori. In vain thou live in
that estate of life, in which thoue meanest not to die. Make, o make your
salvation sure unto you by good works. Incline your heart to do good: for the
reward thereof is infinite: for he is coming and comes quickly, and brings
his reward with him, to distribute to every one as he has deserved, even
according to his works. Omission and commission brought my confusion.

Cautior exemplo tu. Let my example provoke you to detest that wherein I took
delight, lest you also come hither to be tormented not only with oppression of
eternal punishment, but with omission of everlasting joys, which I admire
now, carendo non fruendo: which if I might redeem by suffering all the
torments that either tyrants have invented, or martyrs suffered; if with my
tongue I might lick out the print of my feet out of the way of sinners; if
with tears of blood and water I might purge my uncleanness to work my
redemption: Ecce Domine paratum aegrum haberes in omnem medicinam. Behold, o
Lord, thou should have a patient fit for any cure. I would wring my drained
eyes, vt facile sentires paratum ad omne supplicium ipsum habitum orantis
Christiani. But since my glass is run, and my sun set; since death has
ouershadowed me, and that there is no pleading after sentence; since that sero
ducit suspiria, qui ron expectat remedum: since my affecting what I should have
desired, is turned into a feeling of that I lost; quia ex infer no nulla
redemptio, quia poenarum nullus sinis, suppliciorun nulla defectio; because
there is no end for my hell, nor satisfaction for my punishment: Therefore to
you I call, to you that careless live, that feel not with what sense speak.
Consider, Whence you came, Where you are, and Whither you go. You are parts of
that God that created all things for you, and you for himself. You live on the
stage of the earth, Vbi spectaculum factiestis Deo, Angelis, and hominibus,
Where you are in the view of God, angels an^ men. And you are going, o look to
your going, Non est vit^ momentum sine motu ad mortem. There is no moving of
(...) without a motion to death. You go and are always goin^ to make your
appearance before the tribunal seat of Go^ where every man shall receive
according to his works. Qu^ lis vita, finis ita: vt cecideris, ita eris. As you
fall, so he find^ you: as he finds you, so he censures you: and as he
ce^^sures you, so he leaves you for ever and ever. Wherefor^ quia arbor ad eam
partem moriens cadit, ad quam partem ^^uens ramos extenderat, because as a tree
falls, that way swayes while it is in growing: if you desire to fall righ^
learn while you are in your growth, to sway the right wa^ Judge your selves,
that you be not judged, Vt sementum ^^ce^is, ita metes: What you sow that you
reap, either crown of glory, quam nemo scit nisi qui accepit, or a chaos
confusion, in qua sempeternus horror habitat, whose worth can not be expressed,
but of him that enioyes it, or a mass of confusion in which eternal horror
does inhabit.

CHAP. IIII. Who lives most honestly, will die most willingly.
SWeet (says Chrysostom) is the end to the laborers: willingly does the
traveler question about his Inn: often casts the hireling when his years
will come out: the woman great with child will often muse of her delivery:
and he that knows his life is but a way to death, will sit upon the thresholde
with the poor prisoner, expecting to have the door open to be let out of so
loathsome a prison, looking for death without fear, desiring it with delight,
and accepting it with devotion. For what is the life of man, but even a tragedy,
Full of sad sighs, and sore catastrophes?
First coming to the world with weeping eye,
Where all his days like dolorous trophes,
Are heapt with spoils of fortune and of fear.
For it is only death that vnlooseth the chains, and sers us free from our
domestical enemy. It is only he, that wafts us forward in this sea of
calamities, the danger whereof is shown by the multitude of those that perish
by the gunshot of the devils assaults, and by the rareness of those that
escape shipwreck. Our frailties dome, is written in the flowers,
Which flourish now, but fade yer many hours.
By deaths permission th'aged linger here,
Straight after death, is due the fatal beer.
It is only death that brings us into harbor, where our repose is without
trouble, our comfort without crosses, where our tears shall be turned into
triumph, our sadness into joy, and all our miseries into perfect felicity.

Death is the salve that cease all annoy.
Death is the port by which we pass to joy.
It is for brutes to fear death, whose end of life is conclusion of their
being. It is for Epicures to fear death, whose death is the beginning of their
damnation. It is for such as traffic vanities, to look to gain grief; for
such as have sown sin, to look to reap misery; for those of a desperate
life, to look for a damnable decease: but the good man that did sow in
tears, by death shall reap in joy; for his judge is he who knows our
weakness, and will acknowledge our infirmities: his accusers are made dumb by
former repentance; his conscience is cleared by former confession; hope is his
staff, to keep him from sliding; grace is his guide, to keep him from
erring; faith his assurance, to strengthen his resolution: and what does he
ose, but frail and tickle life, a vapor that soon vanishes, a dry leaf
carried with every wind, a sleep fed with imaginary dreams, a tragedy of
transitory things and disguised persons, that pass away like a post in the
night, like a ship in the sea, like a bird in the air, whose tract the air
closes?

Life is a bubble blown up with a broth,
Whose wit is weakness, and whose wage is death,
Whose way is wildness, and whose inn is penance,
Stooping to crooked age the host of grieuance.
Who can he in his study and look on his houre-glasse, and say not to
himself, Vt hora, sic fugit vita? that thy life is spent with the hour? Who
can walk in the Sun, and look on his shadow, and not say with Pindarus,
(...), Vmbrae somnium homo, Man is but the dream of a shadow? Or who can see
the smoke dispersed in the air, and not say with the Poet, Sic in non hominem
vertitur omni^ homo Can thou feel the wind beat on thy face, and cans^ thou
forget that thou hold thy tenement by a puff o^ wind? can thou sit by
the river side, and not remembe^ that as the river runs, and does not
return, so is the lif^ of man? Can thou shoot in the fields, and not call to
min^ that as the arrow flies in the air, so swiftly do thy daye^ pass? Or
can thou walk in the fields, and see how some grass is coming, some newly
withered, and some already come, and do not remember that all flesh is
grass? Miser homo, cur te ad mortem non disponis, cum sis pro certo moriturus?
Miserable man, why do thou not dispose thy self to death, since thou art
sure thou can not live? Nostrum viuere, e vita transire: our best life is to
die well: for living here we enjoy nothing: things past are dead and gone:
things present are always ending: things future always beginning: while we
live we die; and we leave dying, when we leave living. Our life was a smoke,
and is vanished; was a shadow, and is passed; was a bubble, and is dissolved.
The poor man's life is led in want, and therefore miserable. The rich man's joy
is but vanity: for he is poor in his riches, abject in his honors,
discontented in his delights. This made Hilarion say, Egredere: quid times,
anima? octoginta annos seruisti domino: Thou have served thy God fourscore
years, and therefore fear not now to go take thy wages. And Ambrose, Non
mori timeo, quia bonum habeo dominum, Who feared not to die, knowing that he
that came hither to buy us an inheritance, is gone before us to prepare it for
us.

O who would live, so many deaths to try,
Where will does wish that wisdom does reprove,
Where nature craves that grace must needs deny,
Where sense does like, that reason can not love,
Where best in show in final proof is worst,
Where pleasures vpshot is to die accursed?
Quid es; vides. Quid futurus sis; Cogita.
CHAP. V. Speculum vitae. A sinners glass.
WHat is the life of man but a continual battle, and defiance with God? what
have our eyes and ears been, but open gates to send in loades of sin into
our mind? What have our powers and senses been, but tynder to take, and
fuel to feed the flame of concupiscence? What has thy body been but a
stews of an adulteress, but a forge of Satan, where the fire of our
affections kindled with wicked suggestions, have enflaired the passions of our
heart, and made it the anuile to turn us to most ugly shapes of deformed
sensuality? What has our soul, which is the receipt of the blessed Trinity
betrothed to Christ in Baptism, beautified with grace, ordained with the
fellowship of angels to eternal bless, what has it been, but a most vile
broker, presenting to thy will allurements of sin? what has our will been,
but ^ common harlot lusting after every delight, wherein she took liking? what
is our memory, but a register of mos^ detestable and abominable facts
committed by us? wha^ has our reason been, but a captiued vagabond, subdue^
by every passion?

The sin that conquers grace by wicked ure,
So soyles our souls as they can have no cure.
So that by this metamorphosis we are become more od^^ous to God then the
devil himself: for the devil by cre^^tion was more beautiful then we: it
was sin that defo^^med him, and that sin that made him odious, makes us
detestable: for our sins are worse then his, and we not so good as he: for
his sin was one, and ours are infinite: he sinned before the stipend of sin
was known, ours after notice and experience of it: he sinned created in
innocence, we sin restored unto it: he persisted in malice being of God
rejected, we continue in hatred against him that recalled us: his heart was
hardened against him that punished him, ours obdurate against him that allureth
us. So that our case is now such as infinite goodness detesteth, and infinite
love cannot condole. The earth was created for a place of pleasure, the air
was created temperate, creatures were made to be obedient to man, all things
framed to his best content: but see how sin has transformed pleasure into
plagues, famine and murders many in number, grievous in quality, and ordinary
in experience, which indeed are but Initia dolori^ for the damned suffer death
without death, decaie without decay, envy without envy; for their death ever
lives: their end ever begins, and their decay never cease, but are
always healed to be new wounded, dying but never dead, repaired only to be
new decayed.

CHAP. VI. The union of Mercy and Justice.
THere be two feet whereon God walks on the hearts of men; Mercy and Truth,
which a sinner must fall down with Marie and kiss, that in respect of Gods
Justice we may retain fear, and in regard of his Mercy conceive hope: for
all the ways of God are Mercy and Truth; Mercy, that we may not despair,
and Truth, that we may not presume.

O who shall show the countenance and gestures,
Of Mercy and Justice, which fair sacred sisters
With equal poize do ever balance even,
Th'vnchaunging proiects of the king of heaven?
The One stern of look, the other mild aspecting,
The One pleased with tears, the other blood affecting.
The One bears the sword of vengeance unrelenting,
The Other brings pardon for the true repenting.
Because God is merciful, will thou build a nest of sin, as the Psalmist
says, upon his back? thou can not sever his Mercy from his Justice, and
then Justice will sentence, Tarditatem poenae, grauitate supplicij. Is God a
just God, a terrible God, into whose hands it is a horrible thing to fall? Thou
can not separate his Justice from his Mercy: she will proclaim Misericordiam
Dei super omnia opera sua, his mercy exalts hirselfe above his judgments,
Vult enim omnes homines saluos sieri. He that can that he will, will not the
death of one sinner, but that he may turn from his wickedness and live for
ever: he offreth his mercy to all, but never uses his justice but upon
necessity. I will sing unto thee, o Lord, mercy and truth together, not mercy
alone, as not fearing thy judgments, nor truth alone, as despairing in thy
mercies: but thy mercies shall breed a love, and thy judgments shall make me
fear to impath my self in the way of sinners.

For hope of help still comfort gives,
While Mercy still with Justice lives.
CHAP. VII. Iugum meum suaue.
IT is well observed by one, That the rod of the root of Iesse flowred, that
the sweetness of the flower might mittigate the severity of the the rod.
The devil is never suffered to punish us farther then is for our benefit: for
either he corrects us ^or our former offenses, or else to prevent our future
infirmities. Neither is every one that spares, a friend, nor every one that
strikes an enemy: but the words of a friend are better then the flatterings
of a foe, and he that loves with austeritie, is better then he that killes with
delicacie. It is the devils common course to kill our soul, while he flatters
our fancy. For as the thief that can not by open violence catch his booty,
seeks by shrowding himself in valleies and bushes to take the travelers
unprovided: so the devil, when by open pursuit he can not prevail, he
coutcheth himself in briers and shadows of worldly vanities, entrapping us
before we prevent his trains. For albeit with a smooth flight and even wing he
lessen himself into the clouds, as an eagle delighted to view the sun: yet
is he but a ravening kite, soaring in the air, the better to see how to seize
upon his pray. God borrows not the Sirens voice, when he would sting with a
Scorpions tail, and when he bites with the tooth of a lion, he uses not the
tears of a crocodill, but as the husbandman lops his vine least the juice
should be spent in leaves: so least our minds should be employed in vain and
superfluous pleasures; our wits which without profit would be diffused, are by
him kept in compass by tribulation. For where he purposes to heal, he
spares not to lance: and if he see thou be fostered by the world thy natural
nurse, he can anoint her teate with the bitterness of discontent, to weane
thee from her: for he that binds the frantic, and awakes the lethargee, is
troublesome, but friendly to both.

If ought can touch us ought, afflictions looks
Makes us to look into our selves so near,
Teach us to know our selves beyond all books,
Or all the learned schools that ever were.
This makes our senses quick, and reason clear,
Resolves our will, and rectifies our thoughts,
So do the winds and thunder cleanse the air,
So lopt and pruned tries do flourish fair.
Be not discouraged; thou art a Christian, whose captain is a Crucifixe, whose
standard the Cross, whose armor Patience, whose battle Persecution, whose
victory Death. Whether God fostreth thee as a weakling, or exercise thee as
one stronger, or check thee as one unruly; yet he tendreth all as his own
children. Behold thy Savior with his head full of thorns, his eyes full of
tears, his ears full or blasphemies, his mouth full of gal, his body full of
wounds, his heart full of sorrow; and blame him not, if ere thou find him, he
give thee a sippe of the chalice whereof be drunk so full a cup. Thy love
must be great, when his sorrow is more at thy ingratitude, then at his own
affliction, when he lost himself to win thee: a work without example, a
grace beyond merit, a charity surpassing measure. Wherefore whether he set
thee to seek him in the poverty of the crib and manger, or in the agony of his
bloody sweat in the garden, or in the midst of reproaches and false
accusations before the tribunal, or in the torments of a shameful death; yet
think thy self as deep in his favor for being tried by the torments of his
passion, as those that ar^ called by the testimony of his glorious
transfiguration.

CHAP. VIII. That fear to die is the effect of an evil life.
Johannes Patriarch of Alexandria, whose fre^quent deeds of charity gave him
this Ep^^thete, to be called Johannes Eleemosynarit^ having his tomb in
building, gave his pe^^ple in charge, that it should be left vnfin^^shed, and
that every day one should (...) him in mind to perfect it. His meaning was,
that by the means having his thoughts fixed of the door of death, (...) might
the better prepare himself for the passage throu^^ it. The Pope that day he is
chosen, has one comes to (...) with four marble stones, as patterns to choose
of which his tomble shall be built. He that raketh up virtue in the ^shes of
the memory of death, shall find her force so vni^ed, that when they come to
be vnraked, they shall find that her heat will so encourage us, that when our
soul fin^eth a vent to mount up to her natural Sphere, she will ^lame in the
firmament, and shine most oriently to our ex^essiue comfort, and her Creators
inestimable glory: for he whose life was a study to die, well knows that
death has ^ost his tartenesse by passing through the veins of life: he ^eares
not his cold sweats, nor forgoing gripes, but takes them as throws in
childe-bed, by which our soul is ^rought out of a loathsome body into eternal
felicity. He ^eares not the devils, whose temptations he has valiantly
^esisted: the grave is no horror to him, for he knows he ^wes the body in
corruption to reap it again in immor^litie. He that lives well, shall make a
good end, and in ^he day of death his decease shall be blessed, for he rest^om
his labors, and his works do follow him. But to him ^^at lives ill, death is
an ever dying death: he lies tormen^^d with the pangues of the dying flesh,
amazed with the ^orrosiue fittes of the mind, frighted with terror of that is
^ come, grieved with remorse of that which is past, stung ^^th the gnawing of a
guilty conscience, terrified with the rigor of a severe judge, vexed with
approach of a loathsome sepulcher. They made their prison their paradise, their
belly their God, their appetite their guide: so sowing sin, they reap
misery, traffiking vanities, they gain grief: detestable was their life, and
damnable is their decease.

Absit mihi gloriari nisi in Christo.
CHAP. IX. That affliction is the coat of a Christian.
IF we be Christians, asfliction is our coat, and the Cross our cognizance, In
hoc signo vinces: Christ's clouts comfort not those that walk in side robes.
The stable and manger are no refreshings to such as love the highest rooms in
the Synagogue. Our arc lies not in papilionibus, but in praesepio. If we be
members of that head which was pricked with thorns, let the rest of the parts
sympathize with it: let the Mount Caluarie be our school, the cross our
pulpit, the crucifixe our meditation, his wounds our letters, his lashes our
commaes, his nails our full-points, his open side our book, and Scire
Christum crucifixum, our whole lesson. By his nakedness, learn to clothe
thee; by his crown of thorns, how to adorn thee; by his vinegre and gall,
how to diet thee; by his praying for him murderers, how to revenge thee; by his
hanging on the cross, how to ^epose thee. Here learn, that death reuiueth,
sorrow solaceth, an eclipse enlighteneth; that out of the deuourer there came
meat, and out of the stronger issues sweetness. And since our sins (like
fierce Samsons) have murdered the lion of the tribe of Judah, let our repentant
thoughts (like bees) suck at the flowers of his passion, and make honey to
delight our selves and provoke others. Let us seek Christ, not inter cognatos
and natos, nor with the spouse in the Canticles, in lectulo meo quaesiui quem
amaui, nor with them in Osee, that look him in gregibus and armentis; but
seek him with Moses in the desert, with Daniel in a fiery throne. His delight
is to see Nineue in sackcloth, Job on the dunghill; he expects a perfect
demonstration of a serviceable mind, for an Eamus and nos, vt moriamur cum
illo: for loss of felicity searches the force of affection. It is neither
prosperity that tries a friend, nor adversity that concealeth an enemy. This
is that true God that chief life, in whom, by whom, and from whom all things
do flow, from whom to revolt is to fall, to whom to return is to rise, in
whom to stay is to stand sure, from whom to depart is to die, to whom to
repair is to revive, in whom to dwell is to live: that God whom none loses
but deceived, none seeks but admonished, none finds but are cleansed, what
ever is not of God is not good: give me thy self, and take all things else from
me.

CHAP. X. A theme to think on.
COnsidera, o homo, Quid es in natura, Quis in persona, Qualis in vita.
Consider, o man, what thou art in nature, who thou art in person, what an one
thou art in life: for thou art not in nature as a stone having only being, nor
as a plant having only being and growing, nor as a brute having only being,
growing, and sense; but as a man who to these imperfections has the perfection
of a living soul added.

This soul's a substance and a real thing,
Which has it self an actual work in night,
But neither from the senses power does spring,
Nor from the bodies humors tempered right:
It God himself does in the body make,
And man from this the name of man does take.
And the same God that created thee of nothing, preserues thee from all things
that might annoy thee; gives thee health and plenty, and subiecteth all things
to thy service, that thou might serve him in holiness and righteousness all
the days of thy life: for if God had not created thee, thou had not been at
all: if Christ had not redeemed thee, the devil had dejected thee in the fall
of Adam: if the Holy Ghost should not comfort thee, thou could not be
preserved as thou art. Since therefore thou art Gods by creation, redemption,
and preservation, look what time thou bestowest out of his service, thou
stealest from him who made it for thee to serve him in it, and art a thief. If
thou b^est more enamoured of any of these blessings which he bestows on thee
to win thy love, than of himself, who shows his love in bestowing them on
thee, thou committest idolatry, and art an idolater. If thou bestowest good
hours in ill actions, or great blessings to bad purposes, thou committest
treason, and art a traitor.

He that preferres not God fore all his race,
Amongst the sons of God deserves no place.
Tui pe est been natis male viuere, and plantatis been peius fructificare. Thou
art created after his own image; make no impression unworthy that character.
Pulchra siut oportet quae ex eius animo procedunt, qui in Dei habitaculum est
praeparandus. Thy soul is the temple of the Holy Ghost, thou must not pollute
it with brutish appetites, but prepare it with gracious meditations, most
fitting food wherewithal to entertain so heavenly a ghest. He has made thee
in person erect, that he might put thee in mind to rectify thy thoughts and
actions. O level thy life to the straightness of the line of thine own
portrature. Stain not the beauty of thy parts, lest thou sustain misery in
this life with the loss of eternal life: for the stipend of sin is death,
and the merit of transgression is eternal perdition.

CHAP. XI. Morning Meditation, with sixteen sobs of a sorrowful spirit, which
she used for mental prayer, as also an addition of sixteen staves of verse
taken out of Peter's complaint; which she usually sung and played on the wind
instrument.
Happy is the man whose life is a continual prayer.

O God to whom nothing is so great as can resist, nothing so little as is
contemptible: O Christ the guide of those that seek thee, the light of those
that find thee: O Holy Ghost that both fillest and includest all things; I am
ashamed to be seen of thee, because I am not assured to be received by thee,
having neither deserved pardon for my faults, nor participation of thy glory:
yet sweet Jesus supply my defects, that by thy mercy I may obtain remission,
and by thy merits deserve salvation. Let thy passion work compassion for me, A
sorry wight the object of disgrace,
The monument of fear, the map of shame,
The mirror of mishap, the stain of place,
The scorn of time, the infamy of fame,
An excrement of earth to heaven hateful,
Injurious to man, to God ungrateful.


LOrd, I am depressed with the burden of my sins, and oppressed with the
fear of the punishment belonging to them; having neither power to resist thy
wrath, nor patience to endure thy indignation: wherefore I am becomes as it
does become me, thy humbie suppliant. Lord be merciful to me a sinner. My
abject countenance witnesses my distressed mind, my words are seasoned with
sighs, and bathed with tears. O let the deaw of my devotion be drawn up with
the beams of thy remorse: for behold, as a hunger* starued beggar do I knock
at thy gate, o honorable householder. Open, o open the gates of thy mercies, to
the greatness of my miseries.

Sad subject of my sin has stored my mind,
With everlasting matter of complaint:
My throws an endless alphabet do find,
Beyond the pangues that Jeremy does paint.
That eyes with errors may just measure keep:
Most tears I wish that have most cause to weep.
Preserve my body from eternal death, reserve my soul from everlasting
damnation: let me neither ungratefully remember thy benefits, nor vngratiously
forget thy severe judgments: for albeit, there be no folly which has not had
his seat in my mind, and left his footstep in my actions; yet for that thou
look for my amendment, that I may have thy favor, grant me thy favor that
I may have amendment.

Give vent unto the vapors of my breast,
That thicken in the brims of cloudy eyes,
Where sin was hatched let tears now wash the nest.
Where life was lost, recover life wit (...)
My trespass foul, let not my tear (...) off
Baptize my spotted soul in weeping dew humors ^.
Conform my life, confirm my faith, endue my soul with thy love, subdue my
flesh with thy fear: Let me not dieere I begin to live: give me time to
repent, and occasion to amend: direct my reason: regenerate my will: lead my
desires, that I may seek thee: illuminate my understanding, that I may find
thee: let my joy be in enjoying thee, in whom desire wants no satiety, nor
satiety breeds discontent.

For gripes in all my parts do never fail:
Whose only league, is now in bartring pains:
What I engrosse, they traffic by retaile:
Making each others misery their gains:
All bound for ever prentices to care,
Whilst I in shop of shame trade sorrows ware.
LEt thy majesty appear in thy mercy, cover my sins, and I am recovered of
my infirmities: for my conscience accuses me, my memory gives evidence
against me, and my reason condemns me. Convert o Lord, convert my life, and
divert my punishment.

My guilty eye still seems to see my sin:
All things characters are to spell my fall.
What eye does read without heart rues within:
What heart does rue to pensive thought is gall,
Which when my thought would by my tongue digest,
My ears convey it back into my breast.
OVt of a maze of amazements do I cry out unto thee, o God my Savior and
Redeemer: Grant, o Lord, that I may firmly resolve, speedily begin, constantly
continue in performing thy will: let me honor thee as a Creator, love thee as
a Redeemer, expect thee as a Savior: for by thy goodness I was created, by
thy mercy redeemed, by thy power preserved, and by thy grace I shall be
glorified. Grant, o (...) God, that wast mademan, that men might (...) the
sons of God, that I may live in thy fear, (...) our, rest in thy peace, rise
in thy power, remain in thy glory for ever and ever.

For lif's a maze of countlesse straying ways:
Open to erring steps, and strowed with baits:
To wind weak senses into endless straies,
A loofe from virtues rough unbeaten straits,
A flower, a play, a blast, a shade, a dream,
A living death, a never turning stream.
Gracious God, whose honor is more in saving through pity, then in condemning
through judgment, thou that can mitigate griefs present, and can turn
away dangers to come: pardon, I beseech thee, my sins past, aid me against
all temptations to come, and I shall praise thy name for ever and ever.

Else weeping eyes resign your tears to me,
A sea will scantly rinse my ordur'd soul.
Huge horrors in high tides must drowned be.
Of every tear my crime exacteth toule.
My stains are deep: few drops take out none such,
Even salve with sore, and most is not too much.
GOod Lord, make me covet those things that be pleasing to thee, let me find
them easily, and search them wisely, know them truly, and exercise them
effectually, to thy glory and my salvation. Dispose the course of my life, that
it may accomplish that which thou requirest: Lay forth thy passions that I may
feel them; satisfy me in thy mercies, that I may rejoice in them: remove
from me all lets to serve thee, and give me those things that may draw me to
thee: instruct my judgment, rule my affections according to thy will, in the
depth of thy mercies confound the devises of my enemies against me.

Lest shame the livery of offending mind,
The ugly shroud that over shadoweth blame,
The mulct at which foul faults are justly fined,
The dampe of sin, the common sluice of fame,
By which impostum'd tongues their humors purge,
Do light on me: for I deserve thy scurge.
LOrd thou have delivered me out of the jaws of death and redeemed my ^oule
out of the gates of perdition sanctify my life, that it may be a witness of
my thankeful^nesse; let my memory be a record to show thy goodness so shall
my lips show forth thy praise, and my heart shall be possessed with the glory of
thy greatness.

For fawning vipers, dumble till they had wounded,
With many mouths do now vpbraid my harms:
My sight was veiled, till I my self confounded,
But now I see the disinchanted charms,
Now can I cut the anatomy of sin,
And search with Linxes eyes what lies within.
Give me, o Lord, sorrow for my sins, thankfulness for thy benefits, fear
of thy judgments, and love of thy mercies: give me an understanding heart,
that I may conceive a right love of thy law, that I may desire to perform it,
strength of thy spirit that I may have power to execute it: and because by thy
grace I am that I am, let thy demands be no greater then thou have given me
grace to perform. Lord give what thou command, and then command what thou will: let the greatness of thy mercies supply the wants of my miseries: that
my heart may rejoice in the Lord, and thy saving health may be known among all
nations.

O beams of mercy beat on sorrows cold,
Power suppling shewers on my parched ground,
Bring forth the fruit of your due service vowed,
Let good desires with like deserts be crowned,
Water yongue blooming virtues tender flower,
Sin did all grace of viper growth devour.
Have mercy upon me, o Lord, have mercy upon me, according to the multitude of
thy mercies, do away ^hy offenses: wash me from my wickedness, and cleanse me
from my secret sins: for I acknowledge my faults, and my sins have made me
odious to my self. Be merciful, ^ Lord, be merciful unto thy servant, and
let not the gates ^f hell prevail against him: for though the stipend of his
^^nne is death, and the merit of his transgression eternal perdition; yet is
thy mercy above all thy works, and thou can forgive more, than he could
offend: thou that wilt not the death of a sinner, deny not the request of a
repentant sinner: thou which have given me repentance, which is the seal of
forgiveness, grant me forgiveness, which is the assurance of repentance.

If David night by night did bathe his bed,
Esteeming longest days too short to moan:
Inconsolable tears if Anna shed,
Who in her son her solace had forgone:
Then I to days, to months, to weeks, to years,
Do owe the hourly rent of stintlesse tears.
OVt of the depth of my soul do I cry unto thee, Lord put me not to rebuke in
thine anger; let not thine hand ^resse me, neither chasten me in thy
displeasure; for I consesse my wickedness, and am sorry for my sin; suffer
not my name to be touched with dishonor, neither give me over to be clothed in
rebuke: cleanse my heart from corrupt thoughts, and purge my mouth from all
uncleanness, and impath me in that course that is best pleasing to thee.

Christ health of feuer'd soul, heaven of the mind,
Force of the feeble, nurse of infant loves,
Guide to the wandering foot, light to the blind,
Whom weeping winnes, repentant sorrow moves,
Father in care, mother in tender heart,
Revive and save me slain with sinful dart.
PRaise the Lord, o my soul, o let all that is within me praise his holy name.
Praise the Lord, o my soul, and let not the least of his benefits be
forgotten: for he has delivered thy body from death, and thy soul has he
redeemed out of the estate of damnation: for he has created thee after his
own image, and breathed a living soul into thee, to praise his name for ever
and ever: for his providence has preserved thee, his strength defended thee,
his mercy comforted thee, and his grace shall glorify thee. O therefore
praise his holy name; O let all that is within me sing praises to my God, my
Savior and Redeemer.

Lazar at pities gate I vlcered lie,
Craving the refuse crummes of childrens plate.
My sores I lay in view to mercies eye:
My rags bear witness of my poor estate.
The worms of conscience that within me swarm,
Prove that my plaints are less than is my harm,
Give me, o Lord, an understanding heart, that I may have a true feeling of the
greatness of thy benefits, instruct thou my lips, and my mouth shall show
forth thy praise: for my heart desires to have her love known, and my spirit
reioiceth in God my Savior: I will magnify thy holy name, for thou have heard
my voice, and not suffered my foes to triumph over me: thou have relieved my
wants, and given me plenty when I was in necessity. I will lift up my hands
unto the king of glory, even unto his mercies sea^ from whence is my
redemption; for I know the weakness of our flesh, and acknowledge there is no
help that comes not from above.

Prone looks, crossed arms, bent knee, and contrite heart,
Deep sighs, thick sobs, dew'd eyes, and prostrate prayers,
Most humbly beg release of earned smart,
And saving shroud in mercies sweet repaires:
If Justice should my wrongs with rigor wage,
Fears would dispaires, ruth breed a hopeless rage.
I Give thee thanks, o most merciful father, for all thy benefits bestowed
upon me, desiring thee long to continue them, and to make me thankful for
them: direct the words of my mouth, the meditations of my heart, the actions of
my body, that they may be pleasing to thee, and profitable for me: Lord hear
my voice, accept this my sacrifice of thanksgiving, which thy bountiful
goodness has exto^ted. Let not the world, the flesh, nor the devil prevail
against me, but let thy gracious spirit conquer them in all my conflicts. Lord
I have reposed my whole trust in thee, let no: thy servant be put to confusion.

With mildness Jesus measure my offense,
Let true remorse thy due revenge abate,
Let tears appease when trespass does incense,
Let pity temper thy deserved hate,
Let grace forgive, let love forget my fall:
With fear I crave, in hope I humbly call.
LOrd, though I can neither praise thee as becomes me, nor pray to thee as I
ought to do; yet accept I beseech thee, these my halting speeches brokenly
uttered, as an oblation for my most grievous offenses: look upon me in thy
mercies, and let the blood of that immaculate lamb Christ Jesus, stand betwixt
me and thy judgments. Lord, into thy hands do I commend my soul, and my body
into thy custody, Lord Jesus receive them: Lord bless me and all that belongs
unto me from this time forth for evermore. Sweet Jesus sanctify my life, and
bless me with sorrow for my sins, thankfulness for thy benefits, fear of
thy judgments, love of thy mercies, mindefulnesse of thy presence, that living
in thy fear, I may die in thy favor, rest in thy peace, rise in thy power,
remain in thy glory for ever and ever.

Redeem my lapse with ransom of thy love,
Trauers th'inditement, rigors doom suspend,
Let frailty favor, sorrow succor move.
Be thou thy self, though changeling I offend,
Tender my suite, cleanse this defiled den,
Cancel my debts sweet Jesus say Amen.
CHAP. XII. A Madrigall made by Berny Grymeston upon the conceit of his mothers
play to the former ditties.
HOw many pipes, as many sounds
Do still impart to your sons heart
As many deadly wounds.
How many strokes, as many stounds,
Each stroke a dart, each stound a smart,
Poor Captive me confounds.
And yet how often the strokes of sounding keys has slain,
As often the looks of your kind eyes restores my life again.
CHAP. XIII. Evening Meditation. Odes in imitation of the seven poenitentiall
Psalms, in seven several kind of verse.
Domine exaudi orationem meam.
VOuchsafe admit thy gracious ears,
With mild regard for to attend
The prayers, that a plaining heart
With sorowing sighs to thee does send:
And let thereto, o loving Lord,
Thy Justice and thy Truth accord.
In rigor of thy righteous doom,
O do not scan thy servants cause:
For there is none on earth alive,
Through faultlesse life freed from thy laws.
Then how may I in sinful plight,
Seem just in thy all-seeing sight!
The friend of sin, the foe of souls,
Down to the earth my soul has brought,
Which to the heaven should aspire,
Since from the heaven it was wrought:
O raise it up again to bliss,
From earth and all that earthly is.
Amids the dark misse-led am I,
Where lack of light sins view denies:
I live a life more like to death,
While dead from grace my body lies,
And where as care through secret smart
Sends anguish to afflict my heart.
But I (o Lord) recall to mind
What thou have done in time before,
And how thy Justice has been great,
But how thy Mercy has been more.
Thus hope of help still comfort gives,
While Mercy still with Justice lives.
My stretched hands to thee display
The ensigns of my yielding heart:
My soul, as earth that water wants,
Of virtues fruit can bear no part.
I faint, send some relief of rain,
Lest else unfruitful I remain.
Thy face of pity, not of wrath,
Turn not, o loving Lord, from me:
And let not, Lord, my own misdeeds
Have lasting force to anger thee:
For so might I compare my case
To theirs that furthest fall from grace.
But since my hope is firm in thee,
Let me betimes thy mercy have,
The way of health make known to me,
My feet from erring paths to save.
Only to thee my soul retires:
Only thy mercy it desires.
O free me from my sinful foes,
To thee I fly to be secure,
Teach me the lesson of thy will,
And let me put it well in ure.
Thou art my God, and God of all
That for thy aid and comfort call.
Thou will vouchsafe to me, o Lord,
Thy Holy Spirit to be my guide,
My faith and hope in thee is such,
And such it ever shall ab^de.
Revive thou will me for thy name:
Goodness in thee requires the same.
So that at last by thee, o God,
My soul from bale to blis be brought;
And that in mercy thou subvert
All those my souls destruction sought:
And force of foes destroyed may be,
And made safe for serving thee.
All glory be to thee, o God
The Father of eternal might,
And to the Son and Holy ghost,
Three man undivided plight,
As now it is, and was of yore,
And shall endure for evermore.
De profundis clamaui ad te Domine.
EVen from the depth of woes,
Wherein my soul remains,
To thee in supreme bliss,
O Lord, that highest reigns,
I do both call and cry.
It Is deep heart sorrows force,
That moves me thus to wail:
It Is pity Lord in thee,
Must make it to avail.
Thine ears therefore apply.
If strictly thou, o Lord,
Observed have my sin,
Alas, what shall I do?
What case then am I in,
If rigor thou extend?
But well, o Lord, I know
Sweet Mercy dwells with thee:
And with thy Justice then
It must expected be:
And I therefore attend.
My soul does wait on thee,
Thy grace confirms my trust,
My warrant is thy word,
Thou keep promise just:
Keep me, o Lord, secure.
Let thy afflicted flock
Comfort in thee retain,
From dawning day to night,
From night to day again
Let still their hope endure.
There is with our good God
Much mercy still in store
Redemption does remain
With him for evermore.
Abundant is his grace.
His people he afflicts
He will not leave distressed,
The thralled he will free
With ease of their unrest,
(...) deface*
All glory be therefore,
O Father, unto thee,
And so unto the Son
The like great glory be,
And to the Holy Ghost,
Such as it woonted was
Before the world began,
Such as now yet it is,
And ever shall remain,
Above all glory most.
Domine exaudi orationem meam.
O Let, o Lord, thine ears inclined be
To hear the prayers that I make to thee:
And my hearts grief that breaks forth in cries,
O let it have the power to pierce the skies.
Turn not from me thy favorable face,
What day or hour I am in heavy case:
But when I call to thee in my distress,
O hear me, Lord, and send me soon redress.
My days and years, alas with little gain,
Like unto smoke, how are they past in vain!
My forces, Lord, how are they parch't and dry!
Devotions lack yields moisture no supply.
The blasted grass my image now can show,
My withered heart confirms that it is so,
And I forgotten have, unto my grief,
To eat the bread of my souls best relief.
And my too much regard of earthly care,
Before my self for grace I could prepare,
Made reason to abandon reason quite,
And to affliction fast it self unite.
But now, o Lord, since that I now begin
To see my self, and know the shame of sin;
From earthly train I will retire my mind,
Thee will I seek my saving health to find.
In desert like as lives the Pelicane,
Or as the Crow that does day light refrain,
Or chirping Sparrow sitting all alone,
I shroud, I watch, retired I make my moan.
But while, O Lord, I do endure this life,
Expecting peace, by fleeing worldly strife,
Old friends I find become new noisome foes,
O love me Lord, for loss of love of those.
My penance not restraind through scorn of these,
My food I take with ashes and with tears,
The more I fear lest thou on me should frown,
That can me raise, and raising cast me down.
My days decline as does a shadow pass,
And I as haie that whilome was as grass:
But thou from age to age shall ever be,
Then evermore, o Lord, forget not me.
Vouchsafe, o Lord, in puissance to arise,
To raise thy Sion that depressed lies:
Now is the time, the time does now expire,
It mercy wants, and mercy does desire.
This glorious work was first begun by thee:
Thy servants erst were glad the stones to see:
And they will grieve with hearts afflicted care,
If so the ruins thou do not repair.
But when, o Lord, thy works shall show thy fame,
The faithless people then shall fear thy name,
And earthly kings shall bend their glory down
At thy celestial glory and renown.
Because thy Church, thy Sion, thou did build,
Where thou would ever have thy honor hild,
And have not unregarded heard the plaint
Of faithful folk, thrald in untruths restraint.
And that no time, remembrance may impair
Of thy maintained work and mercy rare:
Let people now, for people to ensue,
Thy praise record, thy praises to renew.
For from high heaven to this low earthly place,
From bliss to bale our Lord enclines his face,
The groans to hear, the grieved to release,
To free from thrall, to make affliction cease.
The more may Sion now sound forth his fame,
Jerusalem his praises may proclaim,
Wherein his Church, his people do accord,
And where as kings are subjects to their Lord.
Who may, O Lord, the datelesse days relate,
That of all ages ouerpasse the date?
It Is thou to us have put appointed space,
O stop not me ere half I run my race.
These elements by alteration strange
Shall changed be, and so remain in change:
But thou, o Lord, that workst all at thy will,
Wast erst the same, the same remaining still.
Vouchsafe, o Lord, their offspring to preserve,
That thee in fear, and faith, and love do serve,
And in thy ways directed to remain,
A lasting life in lasting blis to gain.
Unto the Father, Son and holy Ghost,
All praise and glory be ascribed most,
As here before the world begun,
And as it now, and ever shall be done.
Miserere mei Deus.
Have mercy o good God on me
in greatness of thy grace,
O let thy mercies manifold
my many faults deface.
Foul, filthy, loathsome, ugly sin
has so defiled me,
With streams of pity wash me clean,
else clean I cannot be.
Too well my foul vnclensed crimes
Remembrance do renew,
Too plain in anguish of my heart
they stand before my view.
To thee alone, o Lord, to thee
these evils I have done,
And in thy presence, woe is me,
that ere they were begun.
But since thou pardon promisest
where hearts true ruth is shown;
Show now thy mercies unto me,
to make thy justness known.
That such as do infringe thy grace,
be made ashamed, and shent,
As rife thy mercies to behold,
as sinners to repent.
With favor view my foul defects:
in crimes I did begin:
My nature bad, my mother frail,
conceau'd I was in sin.
But since thy self effectest truth,
and truth at self is Thee;
I truly hope to have thy grace
from sin to set me free.
Since to the faithful thou before
the secret science gave,
Whereby to know what thou would spend,
the sinful world to save.
Whose heavenly Hyssope sacred drops.
shall me besprinckle so,
That it my sinne-defiled soul
shall wash more white then snow.
O when my ears receive the sound
of such my souls release,
How do sin laden limbs rejoice,
at hearts true ioies increase!
From my misdeeds retire thy sight,
view not so foul a slain,
First wipe away my spots impure,
then turn thy face again.
A clean and undefiled heart,
o God, create in me:
Let in me, Lord, of righteousness
a spirit infused be.
From that most glorious face of thine
o cast me not away,
Thy holy Ghost vouchsafe, o God,
With me that it may stay.
The joy of thy salvation, Lord,
restore to me again,
And with the sprite of graces chief,
confirm it to remain.
That when at thy most gracious hand
my suits received be,
The impious I may instruct
how they may turn to thee.
For when, o Lord, I am releast
from vengeance and from blood,
How joyful shall I speak of thee,
so gracious and so good!
Thou, Lord, wilt give me leave to speak,
and I thy praise will show:
For so thy graces do require
thou do on me bestow.
If thou sin offerings had desired,
as wonted were to be,
How gladly those for all my illes,
I would have yielded thee!
But thou accepts in sacrifice
a sorrowing soul for sin,
Despising not the heart contrite,
and humbled mind within*
Deal graciously, o loving Lord,
in thy free bounty will
With Sion thy dear spouse on earth,
and fortify it still.
That so thou may thence receive
that sovereign sacrifice,
From altar of all faithful hearts,
devoutly where it lies.
To thee, o Father, glory be,
and glory to the Son,
And glory to the holy Ghost
eternally be done.
Domine ne in furore.
A Mids the fury, my dear Lord,
rebuke not me,
Nor let thy chasticement befall,
when wrathful thou shall be.
Thy arrows in my self I feel
already stand.
I see, o Lord, thou fixed have
at me thy aiming hand.
Within my self (o woe is me)
no health I find,
Through fear and terror of thy face,
that seems to wrath enclinde.
My very bones disturbed be,
gone is their peace,
My own beholding of my sins,
does work my woes increase.
And as my sins surmounting are,
I must confess,
So are they mounted on my head,
and heavy me oppress.
My crimes forepast and pardoned,
like stars remain,
That putrifi'd break out anewe,
because I sin again.
A woeful wretch am I become,
crooked I grow,
Each day I wail, and while I live,
I will continue so.
My members by illusions led
me so restrain,
My healthlesse body is unapt
true virtue to retain.
By great affliction I am brought
exceeding low;
Be moved, Lord, through my loud groans,
thy mercies to bestow.
My suites, o Lord, tend all to thee,
thou know my case;
My plaints and penance, Lord, accept,
that so I may have grace.
Within my self my silly heart
is vexed still,
My force is lost, my sight I lack
to see and shun my ill.
In my displeasing thee, o Lord,
right well I see,
My friends are foes, my life is sought,
and force is wrought on me.
They wish my ill, and speak my scorn;
and when they smile,
Their hate admits no time of stay
to study fraud and guile.
But I, alas, with patience pressed
must all forbear,
Like to the dumb, and seeming deaf,
I neither speak nor bear.
And for because, o gracious God,
I trust in thee,
Thou will, I know, my loving Lord,
give care and aid to me.
Let not, O Lord, my foes prevail,
lest they rejoice,
Since scarce my feet I may remove,
but they advance their voice.
Of my misdeeds I am prepared
to bear the smart:
Still is my sin before my sight,
and sorrow in my heart.
I will reuolue my faults forepast
amids my mind,
And those I truly will confess,
that I may mercy find.
Hate has confirmed on me my foes,
in wrongful wise,
And still they live, and do increase,
whose envy never dies.
They yield me ill that gave them good,
and me defy,
Because I goodness would ensue,
from which they seek to fly.
Forsake me not, O Lord my God,
in state distressed;
Be ready, Lord, to my relief,
my life in thee does rest.
To Father, Son, and Holy Ghost
all glory be,
From former endless date to dure
to all eternity.
Beati quorum remissae sunt.
O How much blessed may they remain,
That pardon for their guilt obtain,
And whose great ill, and each offense,
Lies hid in contrite penitence!
What happy state may he be in,
To whom our Lord imputes no sin,
Whose conscience does no guile retain,
That can himself beguile again*
I did my sins in silence hold,
In grief whereof my bones grew old:
Mean while my days in plaints of pain,
Without redress, I spent in vain.
But when, O Lord, thy heavy hand
No day or night I could withstand,
But that in anguish ouerworne,
My conscience pricked as with a thorn:
Lo then, O Lord, I did begin
To utter all my secret sin,
No longer list I ought conceal,
But each in justice to reveal.
Against my self, I said, will I
My wrongs confess, and faults defy:
To thee, O Lord, O Lord to thee,
That have from all absolved me.
And since I thus thy mercies find,
Let each of good and godly mind
Approach to thee in happy time,
To pray for pardon of his crime.
For such as so do sincke in sin,
That still they plunged lie therein,
Unable are of thee to gain
What contrite sinners can obtain.
O Lord, my refuge rests in thee,
When troubles do enuiron me:
O free me then, my freedoms joy,
From such as seek me to annoy.
Great comforts, Lord, I do conceive,
Thou me thy servant wilt not leave:
But wilt instruct and guide me right,
And keep me ever in thy sight.
O ye that careless are of grace,
Behold, and see your brutish case,
And be not as the horse and mule,
That live deuoid of reasons rule.
And thou, O Lord, in mercies rife,
Vouchsafe restrain their straying life,
With bit and bridle make them stay,
That unto thee will not obey.
Since that for those of sinful trade
Full many scourges there be made,
Well's him that does in God repose,
Whose mercies may his soul enclose.
Be therefore joyful in our Lord,
All that to righteousness accord;
Let each with gladness bear his part,
That has a pure and perfect heart.
All glory be, O Lord, to thee,
And to thy Son in like degree,
As also to the Holy Ghost
Perpetual and enduring most.
Domine ne in furore.
WHen my misdeeds, o God,
may thee to anger move,
Amids the rigor of thy rage,
vouchsafe me not reprove.
Nor when for my offenses
thy chastisement must be,
In thy displeasure, o dear Lord,
let it not light on me.
Thy mercies Lord I crave,
of strength I am bereft;
O salve the soreness, that my sin
upon my bones has left.
My much aggrieued soul,
my sorrows does abound:
How long, O Lord, shall they endure,
or comfort be unfound?
O turn thy self to me,
and rid my soul of pain,
Even for thy mercies which exceed,
and ever do remain.
O hasten thee, O Lord,
to save and set me free:
Amongst the dead (to their avail)
there is none can think on thee.
And in the depth of hell,
where there is no redress,
Who is it that will give thee praise,
or unto thee confess?
My sighings for my sins
have past in painful wise,
And I each night will wash my bed
with tears of wailing eyes.
My sight is vexed with fear
of fury in thy rage,
O that my sins must be my foes
to wear me out in age.
Away, away from me,
all ye that are unjust:
Let him my woeful sound receive.
in whom I put my trust.
That I with joy may say,
how to my suites accord,
Vouchsafed has to condescend
my dear and loving Lord.
Let shame my foes befall,
and vexed let them be,
Their own conversion, or their shame,
Lord, let them quickly see.
Glory, o God to thee,
and unto Christ thy son,
As also to the holy Ghost,
let endlesly by done.
CHAP. XIIII. Memoratiues.
THe darts of lust are the eyes; and therefore fix not thy eye on that which
thou may not desire.

Opportunity kindles the fire of concupiscence.

In all temptations it is safer to fly, than to fight with Satan.

Shun occasion of doing evil, and thou have half over (...) him.

Affections are the feet of the mind; and therefore set ^atch over them, left
they make her miscary.

Examine thy thoughts. If thou find them to be good; ^re is the spirit:
Quench not the spirit. If bad; forbid (...) entrance: for once admitted, they
straightwayes for^e and are expelled with more difficulty, than not ad^^tted.

Epicurisme is the fuel of lust; the more thou addest, (...) more she is
inflamed.

There is no moment of time spent, which thou art not ^untable for, and
therefore, when thou hear the clock ^ike, think there is now another hour
come whereof ^ou art to yield a reckoning; and by endeavoring to end one hour
better than another, thou shall come to me better perfection in Christianity.

He that considers the joys of heaven that good men ^^pect, or the dread of
torments which the bad shall suffer, ^ll hardly sin.

The end of a dissolute life is a desperate death. There as never president to
the contrary, but in the thief in the ^ospell: In one, le^t any should
despair: in one alone, lest (...) should presume.

Think from whence thou came, and blush: where ^ou art, and sigh: and
tremble to remember whither thou ^^alt go.

Desperate thoughts are fit for such as fear shame, and ^ot for such as hope
for credit.

Evil thoughts are the devils harbingers: for he lodges ^ot, but where they
provide his entertainment.

The whole world is as an house of exchange, in which Fortune is the nurse that
breeds alteration.

Mishap is the touchstone of friendship, and adversity ^he trial of friends.

Indifferent equality is safest superiority.

Where proportion keeps not the door, there confusion will quickly enter.

Where passions increase, complaints multiply.

It is neither freedom to live licentiously, nor liberty to live without
labor.

Labor in youth, gives strong hope of rest in old age.

Carfulness and diligence are the keys of certeinty.

A malefactor has fear for his bedfellow, care for hi^ companion, and the
sting of conscience for his torment.

In contention, advised patience, and opportunity well ta^ken, are the best
weapons of advantage.

Thanks wax old when gifts are had in possession.

So give, as that thou may always be giving, and ne^uer be said to have
done giving.

Give to the poor, but not beyond thy power.

If thou give a benefit, keep it close; but if thou rece^^uest one, publish
it: for that inuites another.

Let thy wit be thy friend, thy mind thy companion, the tongue thy servant.

Let virtue be thy life, valor thy love, honor thy fame and heaven thy
felicity.

In differences rather choose to purchase by persuasion than to enjoy by
violence.

He that leaves his wife a goldefinch, may hap at his re^turne find her a
wagtaile.

On the anuill of vpbraiding is forged the office of vn^thankfulnesse.

True nobility descending from ancestry proves base (...) present life continue
not thy dignity.

The longer we delay to show our virtue, the strong (...) the presumption that
we are guilty of base beginning.

Who may do all that he will, will do that which h^ should not.

Let thy speech be the shadow of thy deed.

He is not worthy to find the truth, that deceitful^ seeks her.

^^ocencie grows in despite of oppression.

^ominion is always attended by envy.

^ortune is always a friend to a froward mind.

He never gives in vain that gives in zeal.

Courtesy is the true character of a good mind.

Anger is the cradle of courage.

Looking eyes have liking hearts.

Truth is the center of religion.

Dominion is safest, where obedience is best nouri^d.

Let the eyes be sentinels of the body.

By being silent, thou shall both know other men's impertions, and conceal
thine own.

Charity and humility purchase immortality.

Age may gaze at beauties blossoms, but youth climbes tree and enioyes the
fruit.

Death is the tribute all flesh must pay.

He dies most willingly that lived most honestly.

Who lives to die, dies to live.

Time is the herald of Truth: and Truth the daughter Time.

Who climbes by privy sin, shall fall with open ^^me.

Who swimmes in vice, will sink in vanity.

The young man may die quickly, but the old man can live long.

The chief properties of wisdom are to be mindful of ^gs past, careful of
things present, provident of things ^ome.

The longer God stays, not finding amendment, the (...) he scourges when he
come to judgment.

Whosoever passes many years, and purchases little profit, (...) had a long
being, and a short life.

Let thy apparel be cleanly without singularity: thy ^^ch such as may
maintain love and win affection.

Use such affability and convenient complements, as common civility and
usual courtesy most requires, without making thy self too cheap to thy
friend, or him too dear to thee.

Be not at any time idle. Alexanders soldiers should scale molehilles rather
than rest unoccupied: it is the woman that sits still, that imagines
mischief: it is the rolling stone that rises clean, and the running water
that remains clear.

Standing water is soonest frozen, and he that sits still is quickliest
overcome with sleep.

Thoughts are the buddes of the mind; and words the blossoms of their
desires; and deeds the fruits of their event: and therefore he that will not
suffer ill thoughts to fructify, must crop them in the bud.

There be four good mothers have four bad daughters: Truth has Hatred;
Prosperity has Pride; Security has Peril; and Familiarity has Contempt.

He that refuses to take counsel good cheap, buys repentance too dear.

Let thy love hang on thy hearts bottom, not on thy tongues brimme.

Mistrust no man without cause, neither be credulous without proof.

Suspicion may enter a false action, but it is proof brings in the good plea.

When we are most miserable, then Gods grace is most favorable.

Who thinks before he do, thriues before he think.

A perverse man is like a sea crab that always swimmes against the stream.

Wisdom is that Olive that springs from the heart, bloometh on the tongue,
and bears fruit in the actions.

The end of treachery is to have no trust.

He that makes a question where there is no doubt, must take an answer where
there is no reason.

Where marriage rides on the saddle, repentance will be on the crupper.

Before thou sleep, apparel thy remembrance with that thou did waking.

It is less pain to learn in youth, then to be ignorant in old age.

Better not to be, then to be slave to passion.

Innocence is the best good, and a guilty conscience the woorst evil.

Humility raises when fortune depresseth.

He receives a benefit that bestows it woorthily:

Courtesy in majesty binds affection in duty.

Delay in punishment is no privilege of pardon.

The law of fear is melted by Christ in the mould of love.

Every man is the workman of his fortune, and fashioneth her according to his
manners.

(...) is that mishap whereby we pass to better perfection*

(...) that contenteth is best riches.

Death and misfortune come soon enough if slow ^^nough.

So love as thou may hate.

So hate as thou may love, and both without challenge.

Opinion judges that the best, that it least enioieth.

Judges opinions make suites immortal.

(...) g^od belief brings forth a good life.

(...) greater comfort then to know much: no less labor (...).

No (...) misery then to fall into unknown misery.

(...) breeds ignorance, and adversity brings forth knowledge.

He cannot judge of pleasure, that never tasted pain.

He finds best help in adversity, that seeks it in prosperity.

The man is happiest that lives least his own, and most his neighbors.

A little stream drives a light mill.

A small sum paies a short reckoning.

Give a lazy clarke a lean fee.

In little meddling lies much rest.

Where opportunity opens the shop door, the ware is best sold.

A wanton eye lights where it leueleth.

Jealousy is the herbinger of disdain.

He that will stir affection in others, must show passion in himself.

Lingering is loathsome where necessity requires haste.

Careless men are ever nearest their own harm.

After the unlawful getting of a covetous father, soon follows the riotous
spending of a prodigal son.

The virtue of a prince is the chiefest authority of his magistrate.

A mild answer reconciles displeasure.

A wanton eye is the messenger of an unchaste heart.

There is nothing swifter decreasing, then youth while it is increasing.

The soul is the greatest thing in the least continent.

Let the limits of thy power, be the bounds of thy will.

A fair woman is a paradise to the eye, a purgatory to the purse and a hell
to the soul.

The death of an evil man is the safety of a good man.

What harm the heart does think, and hand effect, that will the worm of
conscience betray.

FINIS.
THE BALLAD, OR; Some Scurrilous Reflections In Verse, On the PROCEEDINGS of
the Honorable HOUSE of COMMONS: ANSWERED STANZA by STANZA.

WITH THE Memorial, Alias Legion, REPLIED TO Paragraph by Paragraph.

London, Printed by D. EDWARDS, and Sold (...) Booksellers of London and
Westminster.

THE PREFACE.
THOUGH the Design of this Publication is of so commendable a Nature in its self,
as to need nothing to be said in favor of it; yet it may not be amiss, to make
some Reflections in Prose, when the Ballad has escaped the Censure of Verse,
and take notice of the Clemency of those Gentlemen its Presumptious Author
taxes with Cruelty.

We have seen, these two or three days last past, Papers publicly cried about,
that dared the Face of Authority, and the Members abused that compose that
Venerable Assembly that sat for the Redress of our Grievances, and has been
employed in asserting our Right and Liberties; yet has their Patience been
such, as to show us regard to those Abuses which bore none to Truth, and pass
by Calumnies they were sensible the Good Laws they had obliged us with, could
not deserve.

Whosoever the two Authors are, the scurrilous pieces of Scandal that comes
from 'em, (...) Impudence enough in 'em to be called (...) liament thought 'em
beneath their notice, I could not but think my self obliged to send some
Remarks of mine to keep 'em Company, since all the People of England are
scandalized in the Persons of those that represent us.

And though I may not probably make such a Figure in Meter, as this Champion of
Quality, or the Prose defender of Rebellion; I am certain I have spoken more
Truth, and am ready to own my self to be of the same order of Men, which their
way of writing points them out to be of. For if they are of that House they
write in defense of, I dare affirm them to be the most unmannerly P -- rs
living; but his Stanza's are of such a Complexion, and his mercinary Paragraphs
have such an unsavory Tincture that I could not but think 'em two of our
suburbian Hirelings; And as such, I have endeavored to treat 'em.

THE Ballad, etc.
I.
YE True-born Englishmen proceed
Our trifling Crimes Detect,
Let the Poor Starve, Religion Bleed,
The Dutch be damned, the French succeed,
And all by your Neglect.
ANSWER.
Ye Slaves who make it your Pretense
To seek the Nations Good,
And cant, and snarl, and give Offense
To Men of Honesty and Sense,
At all Dissemblers should.
II.
Your Actions all the World disgust,
The French are only glad,
Your Friends your Honesty distrust,
And while you think you're Wise and Just,
The Nation thinks you mad.
ANSWER.
Speak Truth for once, and feeely own
The Justice of their Cause
That never Parliament was known
To be more faithful to the Throne,
Or made more wholesome Laws.
III.
Are these the ways your Wisdom takes.
To raise our Reputation?
To Quarrel at a few Mistakes
While France their own Advantage makes,
And laughs at all the Nation.
ANSWER.
(...) Councillors preside,
And public harms propose,
The way to humble France's Pride
Is certainly to have 'em tried
That we may know our Foes.
IV.
You are the People who of Old
The Nations Troops disbanded,
And now you should your Friends uphold,
Your Friends and you are bought and sold,
As always was intended.
ANSWER.
When all the Fears of War were passed
And Peace was dearly gained
Our Money ran away so fast,
We must have sold our selves at last,
Had we those Troops maintained.
V.
There Is none but Fools in Time to come
Will Trust the English Nation;
For if they do they know their Doom,
That we'll be falling out at Home
And baulk their Expectation.
ANSWER.
However when a Neighbr'ing Shore
Demanded promised Aid,
They sent ten thousand Warriors over,
Keeping the Faith they gave before,
And whom they sent they paid.
VI.
You are the Nations Grand Defense
Against Illegal Power;
And yet against both Law and Sense,
And sometimes too without pretense
You send Folk to the Tower.
ANSWER.
And a^ the Dutys of their Place
Were to detect Abuses,
Corruption durst not show its Face,
Or Moneys spent in any Case
In Bribes or evil Uses,
VII.
Some Lords your Anger have incurred
For Treaty of Partition,
But if you will take the Nations word,
Most People think it was Absurd
And empty of Discretion.
ANSWER.
The Treaty of Partition must
Without all Doubt have faults,
If we can Lord or Commons trust
Who voted Both it was unjust,
And spoke the Nations thoughts.
VIII.
For if that (...) it is famed,
Gave part of Spain to Gaul,
Why should those Gentlemen be blamed
When you your selves are not ashamed
To let 'em take it All?
ANSWER.
Then how ran they be faultless who,
Gave Counsel to divide,
Or it in any sense he true,
That (...) steps pursue,
That take the Austrian side,
IX.
Bribes and ill Practices you found
And some few felt your Power,
But soon you (...) your selves aground
For had you pushed the (...) round,
You all (...) gone to the Tower.
ANSWER.
Shepherd, and the Tooth-drawing Squire
Who'd be a Legislator,
When Burgesses let out to Hire
Would gratify a Knaves desire
Know quite another Matter.
X.
Some Reformation has from you,
In vain been long expected,
For when you should your Business do,
Your private Quarrels you pursue,
And the Nation lies neglected.
ANSWER.
The Rights of those they represent
Should never be yielded by 'em.
And as they Articles have sent,
The P^ers might hold themselves content,
And by known Rules to try 'em.
XI:
Long has the Kingdom bore the weight
Of your deficient Fu^d^,
That Parliamentary public cheat.
Pray where is the difference of that
And Plundering with Dragoons?
ANSWER.
Long has the Kingdom shown its Zeal.
And been at vest Expen^es.
To forward good of Commonweal
And given Money, Hand and Seal,
To prove 'twas in its Senses.
XII.
Are you the People that complain
Of Arbitrary Power?
Then show the Nation if you can,
Where Kings have been, since Kings began,
Such Tyrants (...) you are.
ANSWER.
Yet have some Miscreants taken the parts.
Of Patriots misguided,
And cursed the Men that had the Hearts
To take to those, who studied Arts,
That with their Country sided.
XIII.
When Kings with right and Law dispense,
And set up Power despotick,
It has been counted Law and Sense
To take up Arms against our Prince,
And call in aids Exotic.
ANSWER.
It Is thought a Business now of great,
And wondrous Reputation,
To ruin us and help the State,
While Nobles Sin at any Rate,
And Beggar half the Nation.
XIV.
But you, although your Powers depend
On every Plowman's Vote,
Beyond the Law that Power extend,
To ruin those you should defend,
And sell the Power you bought.
ANSWER.
And as their Privilege takes Rise
From Men of Low Condition,
To study every thwarting Vice,
That may bring twelve Pence to a Sice,
And hinder Coalition.
Is it for this we must be thought,
Strange insolent Pretenders,
Whilst poor unthinking Lords are caught
And vindicate that sorry thought
That clears impeached Offenders.
XV.
The King Religion did Commend
To you his Law-Explainers,
We know not what you may intend,
Nor how you should Religion mend,
Unless you will your Manners.
ANSWER.
A Pious King may recommend
Good Statutes to Lawgivers;
But how can Nobles who pretend
Religious Matters to befriend,
Do good while such Bad Livers?
XVI.
You are the Nations darling Sons,
The Abstract of our Mobb,
For City Knights and Wealthy Clowns,
Stock Jobbers, Statesmen and Buffoons,
You may defy the Globe.
ANSWER.
It Is true the Common's all are Chose,
By Common-People's Charters.
But every living Creature knows,
No Souls are thought such Common Foes,
As Coronets and Garters.
XVII.
Toland insults the Holy Ghost,
Bribed S -- r bribes accuses,
Good Manners and Religion's lost,
The King who was your Lord of Host,
The Raskal H -- w abuses.
ANSWER.
S -- rs to his Immortal Fame
Has heard his Crimes repeated,
And naval O -- d to his Shame,
Has got a Conscientious Name
By being false acquitted.
XVIII.
Your Statesmen G -- lle with intent
To cultivate with Care,
The dignity of Parliament,
Plyes closely at the Dancing tent,
And manages May-Fair.
ANSWER.
Bola H -- m has uttered words,
Audacious in Committee,
And given Affronts to those whose Swords,
Were full as sharp as any Lords,
And Sentences as witty.
XIX.
The True Born Heroes diligence
For public good appears,
There he refines his Wit and Sense
That the next day in our defense
May fill Committee Chairs.
ANSWER.
Though G -- lle has been lately bought
And Country left for Court,
And C -- tts to show he valued naught,
That was Vnparliamentary thought
Attended Lords Report.
XX.
The limitation of the Crown
Is your Immediate care,
If your Wise Articles go down,
Your Power will be so Lawless grown,
It Is no matter who is the Heir.
ANSWER.
If the Succession Bill restrain's
All Arbitrary Notions,
Had Men, or Gratitude, or Brains,
They Would fairly thank 'em for their Pains,
And praise such useful Motions.
XXI.
Did we for this depose our Prince,
And Liberty assume,
That you should with our Laws dispense,
Commit Mankind without Offense,
And Govern in his Room?
ANSWER.
Our Prince has been deposed for things
Of fatal Consequences;
But he that this poor inference brings
That they who chose one since, are Kings,
Must needs be out of's Senses.
XXII.
You should find out some other word
To give the Crowns Accepter,
To call him King would be Absurd,
For though he will seem to wear the Sword,
It Is you have got the Scepter.
ANSWER.
Senates think fit for public good
To bridle Regal Power,
And make Kings act as Monarchs should,
That spare their Subjects Wealth and Blood,
Not those they Rule devour.
XXIII.
And now your wrath is smoking hot
Against the Kent Petition,
No Man alive can tell for what,
But telling Truths which pleased you not,
And taxing your Discretion.
ANSWER.
If Men of Kent Petitions draw,
And idly vote Supplies,
Instead of those who make the Law,
The Gate House, or some Bedlam Straw,
Must serve to make 'em Wise.
XXIV.
If you those Gentlemen detain
By your unbounded Power,
It Is hoped you will never more complain
Of Bishops in King James's Reign,
Sent blindly to the Tower.
ANSWER.
The Bishops were close Prisoners made,
By reason of their Conscience,
But these Impertinents, afraid
A War would spoil their Owling Trade,
Are shut up for their Nonsense.
XXV.
A strange Memorial too there came,
Your Members to affront,
Which told you Truths you dare not Name,
And so the Paper escaped the Flame,
Or else it had been burnt.
ANSWER.
The House had other Fish to fry,
When Legions Libel came,
Then to sit talking over a Lie,
Which had been punished, by the By,
Had the Author sent his Name.
XXVI.
Some said the Language was severe,
And into Passion flew,
Some too began to curse and swear,
And called the Author Mutineer,
But all Men said 'twas true.
ANSWER.
The Language certainly was such
As showed the Writers breeding,
And for Civility kept touch
With those, it would defend, the Dutch,
That use such rough Proceeding.
XXVII.
But oh! the Consternation now
In which you all appear!
It Is plain from whence your terrors ^le^*
For had your guilt been less you knew,
So would have been your fear.
ANSWER.
And since such falsehoods were given out,
By those who wished 'em Evil,
It Was time for them to look about,
And to prevent the Rabble Rout,
Since Mob's a very Devil.
XXVIII.
In Fifteen Articles you're told
You have our Rights betrayed,
Banter'd the Nation, bought and sold
The Liberties you should uphold;
No wonder you're afraid.
ANSWER.
Five Hundred Articles might show
What Malice could devise,
But had those Articles been true,
And worthy of a Public view,
Their Votes had made 'em Lies.
XXIX.
And now to make your selves appear
The more Impertinent,
A wise Address you do prepare,
To have His Majesty take care
Rebellion to prevent.
ANSWER.
Addresses at a time when those
They wisely represent,
Are threatened by the Kingdoms Foes,
Who would have Brethren come to Blows,
Are needful by Consent.
XXX.
No doubt His Majesty will please
To take your Cause in hand,
Besides the work is done with ease,
Full Seven thousand Men he has
The Nation to defend.
ANSWER.
His Majesty has taken care
To Guard us at their Motion,
And where we have Fleets without compare,
Seven thousand Men are very fair,
When they command the Ocean.
XXXI.
Our Hundred Thousand Heroes more
Do our Trained Bands compose,
If foreign Forces should come over,
Plant them and you upon the Shore,
How bravely you will oppose.
ANSWER.
There Is no great likelihood appears
Of Foreigners Invasion,
Since Rook around the Channel steers,
And Troops enough to quell those Fears,
Are ready on Occasion.
XXXII.
Then blush ye Senators to see
How all Men stand dismayed,
The Nation should so patient be,
To bear withal your Villainy,
And see themselves betrayed.
ANSWER.
Then blush, vile, murmuring Scribe at ^ight
Of what you cannot prove,
And see whilst you Invectives write,
How Senators contemn your spite,
And gain the Nations Love.
XXXIII.
It was our Freedom to defend,
That We the People chose you,
And We the People do pretend
Our power of Choosing may extend
To punish and depose you.
ANSWER.
We Apples cried the Horse-Turds, who
Were naught, but common Dung.
So We the People's used by you,
Who never had perhaps to do
With Choosing Right or Wrong.
XXXIV.
For since in vain our Hopes and Fears,
Petitions too are vain,
No Remedy but this appears,
To pull the House about your Ears,
And send you home again.
ANSWER.
But softly, Friend, 'twixt you and me,
This would for Truth be known
Should any be so bold, he would see
Their Ear would stand, and such as he,
Would probably have none.
XXXV.
These are the Nations Discontents,
The Causes are too true,
The Ploughman now his Choice repents,
For though he values Parliaments,
He Is out of Love with You.
ANSWER.
That Ploughman neither must have Wit
Or sense of growing Favors,
Who does not wish and think it fit,
Such Patriots should for ever sit,
And perfect their Endeavors.
XXXVI.
When to be chose with Caps in hand
You courted every Voice,
You were our Servants at Command.
By which it seems you understand,
Until we made our Choice.
ANSWER.
If things were rightly understood,
You Would be in other Story,
And freely own, as Sinners should,
They Are forced to beg to do us Good,
And forward Englands Glory.
XXXVII.
If that be true, we let you know
Upon that very Score,
You Would best your present Hours bestow
In all the Mischiefs you can do,
For we'll never choose you more.
ANSWER.
Scriblers may Write what Scriblers please,
And threatening Periods use,
But such poor Animals as these
Are of such Pennyless Degrees,
They have no Right to Choose.
LEGIONS.
Mr. S -- R.
THE Memorial you are Charged with, in the behalf of many Thousands of the good
People of England.

There is neither Popish, Jacobite, Seditious, Court, or Party Interest
concerned in it; but Honesty and Truth.

You are commanded by Two Hundred Thousand Englishmen, to deliver to the H -- c
of C -- s, and to inform them that it is no Banter, but Serious Truth; and a
Serious Regard to it is expected; nothing but Justice, and their Duty is
required, and it is required by them who have brth a Right to Require, and
Power to Compel, viz. the People of England.

We could have come to the House Strong enough to Oblige them to hear us, but
we have avoided any Tumults, not desiring to Embroil, but to Save our Native
Country.

If you refuse to communicate it to them, you will find cause in a short time
to Repent it.

To R -- t H -- y Esquire S -- r to the H -- e of C -- s, These.
M -- S.
Answer.

THE Enclosed Libel, to which its Author gives the Name of a Memorial, bears so
little proportion to the Sentiments of the People, and has so small an Argument
with either Honesty or Truth, that not one of the Good People of England, though
he boasts of many Thousands, can be concerned in it.

As it is written in favor of the Proceedings of a certain Body of Men, who
would stretch the Power of Greatness beyond its due length, and would take off
from those Authorities of Parliament, which have been so generously Asserted in
the Days of our Forefathers, so it is hoped the next Sessions (...) those
Worthy Persons who Generously Stand up for the Privileges of the Commons of
England, an Opportunity of going through with so laudable a design as the
Punishment of evil Councillors, the Promotion of the King's Honor, and
Advancement of the Public Good.

And you may be assured you shall not want those to stand by you, who have
entrusted you with the Defense of their Rights, and Liberties, notwithstanding
the Numbers which a Prerogative Party may threaten You with; since the People
of England's Honor is concerned in the Violation of that of their
Representatives, and we ought to vindicate the Proceedings of those Gentlemen
that would bring the Betrayers of their Country to public Justice.

To the H -- ble R -- ^ H -- y Esquire S -- r of the H -- of C --

The Memorial.
To the K -- r, C -- s, and B -- s in P -- t Assembled. A Memorial. Legion.
From the Gentlemen, Freeholders and Inhabitants of the Counties of -- in the
behalf of themselves, and many Thousands of good People of England. Gentlemen,
It were to be wished you were Men of that Temper, and possessed of so much
Honor, as to bear with the Truth, though it be against you: Especially from us
who have so much Right to tell it you: but since even Petitions to you from
Your Masters, (for such are the People who Chose you) are so Haughtily
received, as with the Committing the Authors to Illegal Custody; you must give
us leave to give you this fall Notice of your Misbehaviour, without Exposing
our Names.

An. To show us what sort of Truths the House of Commons are desired to bear
with, the Libeller (...) being their Representatives Masters, because they
Chose 'em, which is altogether as false, as if he should say they are His
Majesty's Superiors, on account of their Investing him with the Royal
Authority. A sort of an Assertion he might well be ashamed of, and for that
Reason forbear to expose his Name on account of it.

Le. If you think fit to rectify your Error, you will do we^l, and possibly
may hear no more of us; but if not, assure your selves the Nation will not long
hide their Resentment. And though there are no stated Proceedings to bring you to
your Duty, yet the great Law of Reason says, and all Nations allow, that
whatever Power is above Law, is Buthensome and Tyrannical; and may be Reduced
by Extrajudicial Methods: You are not above the Peoples Resentment,, they that
made you Members, may reduce you to the same Rank from whence they chose you,
and may give you a Taste of their abused Kindness, in Terms you may not be
pleased with.

Ans. Power above Law is allowed to be Burthensom, etc. but a Power that goes
hand in hand with it (as theirs does) is of a different Nature; and if the
People have a Right of Unmaking, alias dissolving Parliaments, they are upon
the same Level with the Prince, which seems wholly contradictory to the Design
of this pretended Memorial.

Le. When the People of England Assembled in Convention, Presented the Crown to
His present Majesty, they annexed a Declaration of the Rights of the People, in
which was Expressed what was Illegal and Arbitrary in the former Reign, and was
claimed as of Right to be done by Succeding Kings of England.

In like manner, here follows, Gentlemen, a short Abridgement of the Nations
Grievances, and of your Illegal and Unwarrantable Practices; and a Claim of
Right which we make in the Name of our Selves, and such of the good People of
England, as are justly Alarmed at your Proceedings.

Ans. The Convention made their Claim of Right for the sake of the People* but
our Male content enters his, on purpose to set 'em together by the Ears; and
though he has no Grievances to be Redressed in relation to the Gentlemen he makes
his Address to, yet it may be observable, he tacitly owns the Superiority of
them he called the People's Servants, by this Impudent Remonstrance.

Le. To raise Funds, for Money, and Declare by borrowing Clauses, that
whosoever Advances Money on those Funds, shall be Re-imburs'd out of the next
Aid, if the Funds fall short; and then give Subsequent Funds, without
Transferring the Deficiency of the former, is a horrible Cheat on the Subject
who lent the Money; a Breach of Public Faith, and destructive to the Honor
and Credit of Parliaments.

Ans. The raising Funds by such Unanimous Resolutions and quick Dispatches,
without burthening the Subject should have more grateful Returns: and we must
acknowledge the Deficiency of Funds to be the Effect of their Compassion, as
their Endeavors to make 'em good, are to be attributed to their great Love of
Justice.

Le. To Imprison Men who are not your own Members, by no Proceedings but a Vote
of the House, and to continue them in Custody, Sine die, is Illegal; a
Notorious Breach of the Liberty of the People; Setting up a Dispensing Power in
the House of Commons, which your Fathers never pretended to; bidding Defiance
to the H^beas Corpus Act, which is the Balwark of Personal Liberty, destructive
of the Laws, and Betraying the Trust reposed in you. The King at the same time
being obliged to continue in Custody the Horrid Assassinators of his Person.

Ans. The Right of Parliaments to commit Offenders and punish their
Delinquencies, has been deduc^d to 'em from their Ancestors, and has so many
Presidents for their Justifications; that no Person who had any Remembrance of
former Proceedings would question it: and how the King was forced to Petition
them to continue the Conspirators on Custody, when they moved His (...) I cannot
possibly prevail with my (...).

Le. Committing to Custody those Gentlemen, who at the Command of the People
(whose Servants you are) did in Peaceable way put you in mind of Petitioning
for Redress of Grievances, which has by all Parliaments before you, been
acknowledged to be their undoubted Right.

Ans. If Gentlemen turn intermeddla^s with what concerns them not, and set up
for their Councillor's Advisers, they ought to be made sensible of their
Faults, and brought to a sense of their Duty.

Le. Voting a Petition from the Gentlemen of Kent Insolent, is Ridiculous and
Impertinent, because the Freeholders of England are your Superiors; and is a
Contradiction in it self, and a Contempt of the English Freedom, and contrary
to the Nature of Parliamentary Power.

Ans. To call an Audacious Petition Insolent, is to give it his true Name; and
to say the Parliament are the Nations Servants, otherwise than the Members of
it are Volunteers to do it Service, has nothing but downright Falsehood in it.

Le. Voting People guilty of Bribery and Ill Practices, and Committing them, as
aforesaid, without Bail, and then upon Submission, and kneeling to your House,
discharging them; Exacting Exorbitant Fees by your Officers, is Illegal,
Betraying the Justice of the Nation, Selling the Liberty of the Subject,
encouraging the Extortion and Villainy of G^olers and Officers; and
discontinuing the Legal Prosecution of Offenders in the ordinary Course of Law.

Ans. There Votes were founded upon Substantial Proofs, and their release of
the Persons bribed, upon the utmost Compassion. And paying the accustomed Fees,
as regulated by Authority of Parlaments, is so far from being an Exaction, that
it would be an Injury to the Subject, should they give 'em away from them who
had purchased 'em.

Le. Prosecuting the Crime of Bribery in some to serve a Party, and then
proceed no farther, though Proof lay before you, is Partial and Unjust; and a
Scandal upon the Honor of Parliaments.

Ans. Their Delay in bringing Matters to Severity against the Persons accused,
proceeded from their earnest Desire to preserve that People, some of which
raised these Clamours against them.

Le. Voting the Treaty of Partition Fatal to Europe, because it gave so much of
the Spanish Dominions to the French, and not concerning your selves to prevent
their Possession of it all. Deserting the Dutch when the French are at their
Doors, till it be almost too late to help them; is Unjust to our Treaties, and
unkind to our Confederates, Dishonorable to the English Nation, and shows you
very negligent of the Safety of England, and of our Protestant Neighbors.

Ans. If they Voted the Treaty of Partition Fatal to Europe, the Effect of it
Justified their proceedings; and the timely Assistance they sent the Dutch, has
been acknowledged by His Majesty, as the only Means to preserve the Balance of
Europe, which is directly contrary to this Assertion.

Le. Ordering immediate Hearings to trifling Petitions, to please Parties in
Elections; and Postponing the Petition of a Widow for the Blood of her.
Murdered Daughter, without giving it a reading: is an illegal Delay of
Justice, and dishonorable to Public Justice of the Nation.

Ans. To gratify the Desires of whole Bodies of Men, ought to be preferable to
the Encouragement of an idle Woman's Petition, that had nothing in it against a
Gentleman of established Repuation, who had been Honorably Acquitted by due
course of Law.

Le. Addressing the King to displace his Friends upon bare Surmises, before a
Legal Trial or Article proved, is Illegal, and Inverting the Law, and making
Execution go before Judgment; contrary to the true Sense of the Law, which
esteems every Man a good Man till something appears to the contrary.

Ans. When the King for want of Advice, and a due knowledge of our English
Constitutions, entertain^ those for Favorites, that are approved Enemies to
the English Reputation, it is but just to petition for their removal: and His
Majesty's displacing of 'em, would be nothing like Execution before Judgment;
since Judgments upon Impeachments, are Imprisonments and pecuniary.

Le. Delaying the Proceedings upon Capital Impeachments, to blast the
Reputation of the Persons, without proving the Fact; is Illegal and Oppressive,
Destructive of the Liberty of Englishmen, a Delay of Justice, and a Reproach of
Parliaments.

Ans. The delay of the Trials of the Impeached Lords might probably lie at
another door; and if they'l^ believe their own Representatives, other Gentlemen
occasioned the Obstruction.

Le. Suffering Saucy and indecent Reproaches upon His Majesty's Person to be
publicly m^de in your House; particularly by that Impudent Scandal of
Parliaments I -- n H -- w, without showing such Resentments as you ought to do.
The said I -- H --, saying only, That His Majesty had made a Felonious Treaty
to rob his Neighbors; insinuating, that the Partition Treaty (which was every
way as just as blowing up one Man's House to save another) was a Combination
to rob the King of Spain of its due. This is making a Billingsgate of the
House, and setting to B^lly your Sovereign, contrary to the Intent and Meaning
of that Freedom of Speech, which you claim as a Right: is scandalous to
Parliaments; Undutiful and Unmannetly, and a Reproach to the whole Nation.

Ans. Mr. How might probably out of his great Abhorrence of Injustice; add an
Epithet to that Treaty, which the Nature of it deserved. But the Reflection was
very far from falling on His Majesty, since, the whole House in their Address
had wholly laid the Odium of it upon those that advised t.

Le. Your S -- r Exacting the Exorbitant Rate of 10 l. per Diem for the V -- s,
and giving the Princes encouragement to raise it on the People, by felling them
at 4 d. per Sheet; is Illegal and Arbitrary Ex^^tion, dishonorable to the
House, and burthen^^*

Ans. If the Speaker is expected to maintain the Dignity of the High Post he
has been called to by Choice of Parliament, he ought to have the same Allowance
as most of his Predecessors, and its none of his Fault that the Votes run at so
high a Rate; but the Niggardly Temper of the Printers, whom they ought to
discourage by not buying 'em, since he has no such price for them.

Le. Neglecting still to pay the Nations Debts, Compounding for Interest, and
Postponing Petitions; is Illegal, Dishonorable, and Destructive of the Public
Faith.

Ans. The Payment of the Nations Debts has taken up a Considerable part of
their Care, and the destruction of the public Faith can be no other way
brought about, than by those that encourage public Dissentions.

Le. Publicly neglecting the Great work of Reformation of Manners, though often
pressed to it by the King, to the great Dishonor of God, and encouragement of
Vice, is a Neglect of your Duty, and an Abuse of the Trust reposed in you, by
God, His Majesty, and the People.

Ans. When such Fellows as our Impudent Author, are beyond any possibility of
being Reformed, it is but flinging away their precious time to make Laws in
order to reclaim 'em.

Le. Being Scandalously Vicious your selves, both in your Morals and Religion;
Lewd in Life, and Erroneous in Doctrine, having public Blasphemers, and
Impudent Deniers of the Divinity of our Savior amongst you, and suffering them
unreproved and unpunished, to the infinite Regret of all good Christians, and
the Just Abhorrence of the whole Nation.

Ans. Then he that pretends to be one of the Electors of 'em has made a fine
Choice, if Persons of such ill Fame and Morals represent him. But I am of
another Opinion; and though they have no Lawn Sleeves among 'em, their Choice of
Preachers, (...) and Edifying (...)

Le Wherefore, in the (...) Ruin of our Native Country, while Parliaments
(which ought to be the Security and Defense of our Laws and Constitution)
betray their Trust and abuse the People whom they should protect: And no other
way being left us but That Force which we are very loath to make use of, that
Posterity may know we did not insensibly fall under the Tyranny of a Prevailing
Party,

Ans. They have made such provision for the public Security, that nothing can
obstruct it, unless the Jealousies and Fears he disperses among us, has that
(...) Effect as to disturb it. And for the making use of Force which he
rebelliously threaten's 'em with, their Party, without doubt will be so
Prevailing, as to be able to repel it with the same violent Methods. We do
hereby

Claim and Declare.

Le. That it is the Undoubted Right of the People of England, in Case their
Representatives in Parliament do not proceed according to their Duty, and the
Peoples Interest, to inform them of their Dislike, disown their Actions, and to
direct them to such thinks as they think fit, either by Petition, Address,
Proposal, Memorial, or any other peaceable way.

Ans. The People by the Choice of their Representatives resign up all their
Authority to 'em which they are actually invested with; and whatever Petition,
Address, Proposal, Memorial, etc. is represented by them, may be rejected by
the aforesaid Power they have given 'em.

Le. That the House of Commons, separately and otherwise than by Bill legally
passed into an Act, have no Legal Power to suspend or dispense with the Laws of
the Land, any more than the King has by his Pre^^gative.

Ans. There are Precedents from the first Institution of Parliaments to the
contrary, and the Repea^ of any Law whatsoever. ^f not judged useful, has been
always allowed to be their Prerogative, which has never been otherwise by those
that are now Members of the House of Commons, otherwise than in Concert with
the two other Estates of the Nation.

Le. That the House of Commons have no Legal Power to imprison any Person, or
commit them to Custody of Sergeants, or otherwise (their own Members except)
but ought to Address the King, to cause any Person, on good Grounds, to be
apprehended, which Person so apprehended, ought to have the Benefit of the
Habeas Corpus Act, and be fairly brought to Trial by due Course of Law.

Ans. Where would be the punishment of rich Offenders, should the Habeas Corpus
Act be allowed, in Cases of Kentish Petitioners, and other such Insolent
pretenders to prescribe turning their Addresses into Bills of Supplies to
Parliament?

Le. That if the House of Commons, in Breach of the Laws and Liberties of the
People, do betray the Trust reposed in them, and act Negligent or Arbitrarily
and Illegally, it is the undoubted Right of the People of England to call them
to an Account for the same, and by Convention, Assembly of Force may proceed
against them as Traitors and Betrayers of their Country.

Ans. Inferiors must not be Judges where Superiors are concerned, and things
are not come to such a^ pass as they were in 48, when even a King Himself was
sentenced to Death by the Instigation of the Devil and those he now calls the
People.

Le. These things we think proper to declare, as the unquestioned Right of the
People of England, whom you serve, and in pursuance of that Right (avoiding the
Ceremony of Petitioning our Inferiors, for such you are by your present
Circumstances, as the Person sent is less than the Sender) We do publicly
protest against all your foresaid Illegal Actions, and in the Name of our
Selves, and of all the good People of England,

Ans. The person sent may be less than the Senders, but when One is to be
Chosen into an High Station by his Superiors, the Elected has certainly got the
Start of the Electors, and is Superior to those whom he may call The People of
England.

Le. That all the Public Just Debts of the Nation be forthwith Paid and
Discharged.

Ans. They Will agree to the Proposal; Will the Person that makes the Demand
furnish 'em with Ways and Means.

Le. That all Persons illegally imprisoned, as aforesaid* be either immediately
discharged, or admitted to Fail, as by Law they ought; and the Liberty of the
Subject Recognized and Restored.

Ans. This will also be allowed, if Sir Positive, can bring any Proof of
Persons being Illegally Confined.

Le. That I -- n H -- w aforesaid be obliged to ask His Majesty Pardon for his
Vile Reflections, or be immediately Expelled the House.

Ans. Without doubt, Mr. How is so much a Gentleman, as to ask any Man's
pardon, if he has wronged him.

Le. That the growing power of France be taken into Consideration; the
Succession of the Emperor to the Crown of Spain supported, our Protestant
Ne^ghbours as the true Interest of England, as the protected, Protestant
Religion requires.

Ans. The Union of France and Spain has taken up no small part of their Time,
and they have been so Speedy as well as Hearty in their Desires to His Majesty
to make new Alliances, in order to disappoint their Joint Endeavors, That the
Emperor, and all our Protestant Neighbors, cannot but show their Satisfaction
in what they have done.

Le. That the French King be obliged to quit Flanders, or that His Majesty be
addressed to declare War against him.

Ans. To declare War will be of more Disadvantage to the Kingdoms than
Auxiliary Forces, which are enough to conserve our Reputation amongst our
Confederates.

Le. That Suitable Supplies be granted to His Majesty for the putting all these
necessary things in execution, and that care be taken that such Taxes as are
raised may be ^ore equally Assessed and Collected, and scandalous Deficiencies
prevented.

Ans. The Supplies have been granted, and His Majesty has thanked 'em for their
ready Concurrence in Complying with his Desires.

Le. That the Thanks of this House may be given to those Gentlemen who so
gallantly appeared in the the behalf of their Country, with the Kentish
Petition, and have been so scandalously used for it.

Ans. They may thank themselves for their Confinement, in endeavoring to be
Representatives of the People themselves, and coming to Affront those who were
theirs.

Le. Thus Gentlemen. You have your Duty laid before you, which it is hoped you
will think of; but if you continue to neglect it, you may expect to be treated
according to the Resentment of an injurd Nation; for Englishmen are no more to
be Slaves to Parliament, than to a King.

Our Name is Legion, and we are Many.

Ans. Thus, Gentleman, or Plebeian, or whatever thou art, thou have been a mere
Devil in endeavoring to sow the Seeds of Discord among thy Fellow Subjects,
and may well subscribe with the Name of Legion, which has been made use of
in Scripture for a Devil of particular Eminence.

Post Script.
Le. If you require to have this Memorial signed with our Names, it shall be
done on your first Order, and personally presented.

Ans. You could not Subscribe your Christian Names to such Heathenish
Proceeeings; if you had, you would in all likelihood have kept your Fellow
Mutineers Company in the Gate House.

FINIS.

