Fidessa, more chaste then kind.

By B. Griffin, gent.

AT LONDON Printed by the Widow Orwin, for Matthew Lownes. 1596.

TO THE MOST KIND AND VERTVous gentleman, M. William Essex of Lamebourne, in
the County of Bark Esquire.
SIr, it may seem strange that I should be thus far bold to make choice of
your self, a patron of so slender a work, (especially being so little known
unto you as I am:) but howsoever, I protest what is done, proceeds from the
unfeigned love I bear unto you, your own demerit, your friends hope, and the
good report of all men. All which, are liuely-witnesses of your love to the
Muses, your grace with fortune, and your fame with the world, quickened in
your birth, increased in your travails, and living after death. Daigne (sweet
sir) to pardon the matter, judge favorably of the manner, and accept both: so
shall I ever rest yours in all dewtifull affection.

Yours ever, B. Griffin.

TO THE GENTLEMEN OF THE INNES OF COURT.
CVrteous Gentlemen, it may please you intertaine with patience this poor
pamphlet, unworthy I confess so worthy patronage, if I presume, I crave
pardon: if offend, it is the first fruit of any my writings: if dislike, I can
be but sorry. Sweet Gentlemen, censure mildly, as protectors of a poor
stranger, judge the best, as incouragers of a young beginner: So shall I make
true report of your undeserved favors, and you shall be your selves ever
courteous. In this hope (if promise may go for current) I willingly make the
same unto you of a Pastoral yet unfinished, that my purpose was to have added
(for variety sake) to this little volume of Sonnets: the next term you may
expect it. In the mean time I wholly rely on your gentle acceptance.

Yours ever, B. Griffin.

Faults escaped, amend thus.
Sonnet 36. line 6. dele Be. Sonnet 50 l. 6. for Delights nothing, read
Delight the nothing.

TO FIDESSA.
SONNET.I. Fertur fortunam fortuna faueere ferenti.
FIdessa fair, long live a happy maiden,
Blessed from thy cradle by a worthy mother:
High-thoughted (like to her) with bounty laden,
Like pleasing grace affoording one and other.
Sweet model of thy same renowned Sire,
Hold back while thy euer-giuing hand:
And though these fine pend lines do naught require,
For that they scorn at base Reward to stand:
Yet crave they most, for that they beg the least,
Dumb is the message of my hidden grief,
And store of speech by silence is increast,
Oh let me die or purchase some relief.
Bounteous Fidessa cannot be so cruel,
As for to make my heart her fancies fuel.
SONNET.II.
HOw can that piercing christall-painted eye,
That gave the onset to my high-aspiring,
Yielding each look of mine a sweet replve,
Adding new courage to my hearts desiring?
How can it shut it self within her Arc,
And keep her self and me both from the light:
Making us walk in al-misguiding dark,
Aye to remain in confines of the night?
How is it that so little room contains it,
(That guides the Orient, as the world the Sun?)
Which once obscured, most bitterly complains it,
Because it knows and rules what ere is done.
The reason is, that they may dread her sight,
Who does both give and take away their light.
SONNET.III.
VEnus, and young Adonis sitting by her,
Under a Myrtle shade began to woe him:
She told the yong-ling how god Mars did try her,
And as he fell to her, so fell she to him.
Even thus (quoth she) the wanton god embraced me,
(And then she clasped Adonis in her arms)
Even thus (quoth she) the warlike god vnlac'd me,
As if the boy should use like loving charms.
But he a wayward boy refusde her offer,
And ran away, the beauteous Queen neglecting:
Showing both folly to abuse her proffer,
And all his sex of cowardice detecting.
Oh that I had my mistress at that bay,
To kiss and clippe me till I ran away!
SONNET.IIII.
DId you sometimes three German brethren so
Rancor twixt two of them so raging rife,
That the one could stick the other with his knife?
Now if the third assaulted chance to be
By a fourth strange, him set on the three:
Them two twixt whom before was deadly strife,
Made one to rob the stranger of his life.
Then do you know our state as well as we,
Beauty and Chastity with her were borne
Both at one birth, and up with her did grow:
Beauty still foe to Chastity was sworn,
And Chastity sworn to be Beauties foe:
And yet when I lay siege unto her heart,
Beauty and Chastity both take her part.
SONNET.V.
Arraigned poor captive at the bar I stand,
The bar of Beauty, bar to all my joys,
And up I hold my euer-trembling hand*
Wishing or life or death to end annoyes.
And when the Judge does question of the guilt,
And bids me speak, then sorrow shuts up words:
Yea though he say, speak boldly what thou will,
Yet my confusde affects no speech affoords.
For why (alas) my passions have no bound,
For fear of death that penetrates so near:
And still one grief another does confound,
Yet does at length a way to speech appear:
Then (for I speak too late) the Judge does give
His sentence that in prison I shall live.
SONNET.VI.
Unhappy sentence, worst of worst of pains,
To lie in darksome silence out of ken:
Banished from all that bliss the world contains,
And thrust from out the companies of men.
Unhappy sentence, worse then worst of deaths,
Never to see Fidessaes lovely face:
Oh better were I loose ten thousand breaths,
Then ever live in such unseen disgrace.
Unhappy sentence, worse then pains of hell,
To live in self-tormenting griefs alone:
Having my heart my prison and my cell,
And there consumed, without relief to moan.
If that the sentence so unhappy be,
Then what am I that gave the same to me?
SONNET.VII.
Often have mine eyes the Agents of mine heart,
(False traitor eyes conspiring my decay)
Pleaded for grace with dumb and silent art,
Streaming forth tears my sorrows to allay.
Moning the wrong they do unto their Lord,
Forcing the cruel fair by means to yield:
Making her (against her will) some grace t'affoord,
And striving sore at length to win the field.
Thus work they means to feed my fainting hope,
And stre^gthened hope ads matter to each thought:
Yet when they all come to their end and scope,
They do but wholly bring poor me to naught.
She Will never yield, although they ever cry,
And therefore we must altogether dye.
SONNET.VIII.
Grief urging guest, great cause have I to plain me,
Yet hope persuading hope expects grace:
And says none but my self shall ever pain me,
But grief my hopes exceeds in this case.
For still my fortune ever more does cross me,
By worse events then ever I expected,
And here and there ten thousand ways does toss me
With sad remembrance of my time neglected.
These breeds such thoughts as set my heart on fire,
And like fell hounds pursue me to the death,
Traitors unto their Sovereign Lord and Sire,
Unkind exacters of their father breath,
Whom in their rage they shall no sooner kill,
Then they themselves themselves unjustly spill.
SONNET.IX.
MY spotles love that never yet was tainted,
My loyal heart that never can be moved:
My growing hope that never yet has fainted,
My constancy that you full well have proved.
All these consented have to plead for grace,
These all lie crying at the door of Beauty:
This wailes, this sends out tears, this cries apace:
All do reward expect of faith and duty.
Now either thou must prove the vnkindest one,
And as thou fairest art, must cruelst be:
Or else with pity yield unto their moan,
Their moan that ever will importune thee.
Ah thou must be unkind and give denial,
And I poor I must stand unto my trial.
SONNET.X.
CLip not sweet love the wings of my desire,
Although it soar aloft and mount too hie:
But rather bear with me though I aspire:
For I have wings to bear me to the sky.
What though I mount, there is no Sun but thee?
And since no other Sun, why should I fear?
Thou will not burn me though thou terrify:
And though thy brightness do so great appear,
Dear, I seek not to batter down thy glory,
Nor do I envy that thy hope increases:
Oh never think thy fame does make me sorry,
For thou must live by fame when beauty cease.
Besides, since from one root we both did spring,
Why should not I thy fame and beauty sing?
SONNET.XI.
Winged with sad woes, why does fair Zephire blow
Upon my face, (the map of discontent)
Is it to have the weeds of sorrow grow
So long and thick, that they will nere be spent?
No fondling, no, it is to cool the fire,
Which hot desire within thy breast has made:
Check him but once, and he will soon retire:
Oh but he sorrows brought, which cannot fade.
The sorrows that he brought he took from thee,
Which fair Fidessa spun, and thou must wear:
Yet has she nothing done of cruelty,
But (for her sake) to try what thou will bear.
Come sorrows come, you are to me assignde,
I Will bear you all: it is Fidessaes mind.
SONNET.XII.
OH if my heavenly sighs must prove annoy,
Which are the sweetest music to my heart:
Let it suffice I count them as my joy,
Swwet bitter joy, and pleasant painful smart.
For when my breast is clogged with thousand cares,
That my poor loaded heart is like to break:
Then every sigh does question how it fares,
Seeming to add their strength: which makes me weak.
Yet (for they friendly are) I entertain them,
And they too well are pleased with their boast:
But I (had not Fidessa been) ere now, had slain them,
It Is for her cause they live, in her they boast.
They promise help, but when they see her face,
They fainting yield, and dare not sue for grace.
SONNET.XIII.
COmpare me to the child that plays with fire,
Or to the fly that dies in the flame:
Or to the foolish boy that did aspire,
To touch the glory of high heavens frame.
Compare me to Leander struggling in the waves,
Not able to attain his safeties shore:
Or to the sick that do expect their graves,
Or to the captive crying ever more:
Compare me to the weeping wounded Heart,
Moning with tears the period of his life:
Or to the Bore that will not feel his smart,
When he is stricken with the butchers knife.
No man to these can fitly me compare;
These live to dye: I dye to live in care.
SONNET.XIIII.
WHen silent sleep had closed up mine eyes,
My watchful mind did then begin to muse:
A thousand pleasing thoughts did then arise,
That sought by sleights their master to abuse.
I saw (oh heavenly sight) Fidessaes face,
(And fair dame Nature blushing to behold it)
Now did she laugh, now wink, now smile apace,
She took me by the hand, and fast did hold it.
Sweetly her sweet body did she lay down by me,
Alas poor wretch (quoth she) great is thy sorrow:
But thou shall comfort find if thou will try me,
I hope (sir boy) you will tell me news to morrow.
With that away she went, and I did wake withal,
When (ah) my honey thoughts were turned to gall.
SONNET.XV.
CAre-charmer sleep, sweet ease in restles misery,
The captives liberty, and his freedoms song:
Balm of the bruised heart, man's chief felicity,
Brother of quiet death, when life is too too long.
A Comedy it is, and now an History,
What is not sleep unto the feeble mind?
It eases him that toils, and him that is sorry:
It makes the deaffe to hear, to see the blind.
Ungentle sleep, thou helpest all but me,
For when I sleep my soul is vexed most:
It is Fidessa that does master thee,
If she approach (alas) thy power is lost.
But here she is: see how he runs amain,
I fear at night he will not come again.
SONNET.XVI.
FOr I have loved long, I crave reward,
Reward me not unkindly: think on kindness;
Kindness becomes those of high regard:
Regard with clemency a poor man's blindness,
Blindness prouokes to pity when it cries,
It cries (give) dear Lady show some pity;
Pity, or let him die that day lie dies:
Dies he not often, who often sings this dittie?
This dittie pleases me although it choke me,
Me thinks dame Echo weepeth at my moning,
Moning the woes, that to complain provoke me.
Provoke me now no more, but hear my groaning;
Groaning both night and day does tear my heart,
My heart does know the cause, and triumphs in his smart.
SONNET.XVII.
SWeet stroke (so might I thrive) as I must praise,
But sweeter hand that gives so sweet a stroke:
The Lute it self is sweetest, when she plays,
But what hear I? a string through fear is broke.
The Lute does shake, as if it were afraid,
Oh sure some Goddess holds it in her hand!
A heavenly power that often has me dismaide,
Yet such a power as does in beauty stand.
Cease Lute, my ceaseles suite will nere be heard:
(Ah too hard-hearted she that will not hear it)
If I but think on joy, my joy is mard,
My grief is great, yet ever must I bear it.
But love twixt us will prove a faithful page,
And she will love my sorrows to assuage.
SONNET.XXVIII.
OH she must love my sorrows to assuage,
Oh God what joy felt I when she did smile?
Whom killing grief before did cause to rage,
(Beauty is able sorrow to beguile.)
Out traitor absence, thou do hinder me,
And make my Mistress often to forget;
Causing me rail upon her cruelty,
Whilst thou my suite injuriously do let.
Again, her presence does astonish me,
And strikes me dumb, as if my sense were gone:
Oh is not this a strange perplexity?
In presence, dombe: she hears not absent moan.
Thus absent presence, present absence makes,
That (hearing my poor suite) she it mistaketh.
SONNET.XIX.
MY pain paints out my love in doleful verse,
The lively glass wherein she may behold it)
My verse her wrong to me does still rehearse:
But so, as it lamenteth to unfold it.
My self with ceaseles tears my harms bewail,
And her obdurate heart not to be moved:
Though long continued woes my senses fail,
And curse the day, the hour when first I loved.
She takes the glass, wherein her self she sees
In bloody colors cruelly depainted:
And her poor prisoner humbly on his knees,
Pleading for grace with heart that never fainted.
She breaks the glass, (alas I cannot choose)
But grieve that I should so my labor loose.
SONNET.XX.
GReat is the joy that no tongue can express,
Fair babe (newborn) how much do thou delight me?
But what is mine so great? yea no whit less
So great, that of all woes it does acquit me.
It Is fair Fidessa that this comfort brings,
Who sorry for the wrongs by her procured,
Delightful tunes of love of true love sings,
Wherewith her too-chast thoughts were nere inured.
She loves (she says) but with a love not blind,
Her love is counsel that I should not love,
But upon virtues fix a stayed mind:
But what? this new coynd love, love does reprove.
If this be love of which you make such store,
Sweet, love me less, that you may love me more.
SONNET.XXI.
HE that will Caesar be, or else not be,
(Who can aspire to Caesar's bleeding fame?)
Must be of high resolve: but what is he
That thinks to gain a second Caesar's name.
Who ere he be that climes above his strength,
And climeth high, the greater is his fall:
For though he sit a while, we see at length
His slipperie place no firmnes has at all.
Great is his bruise that falls from on high,
This warns me that I should not aspire:
Examples should prevail: I care not I,
I perish must, or have what I desire.
This humor does with mine full well agree,
I must Fidessaes be, or else not be.
SONNET.XXII.
IT was of love ungentle gentle boy,
That thou did come and harbor in my breast:
Not of intent my body to destroy,
And have my soul with restles cares oppressed.
But since thy love does turn unto my pain,
Return to Greece (sweet lad) where thou wast borne:
Leave me alone my griefs to entertain,
If thou forsake me, I am less forlorn.
Although alone, yet shall I find more ease:
Then see thou hie thee hence, or I will chase thee:
Men highly wronged care not to displease:
My fortune hangs on thee, thou do disgrace me.
Yet at thy farewell play a friendly part,
To make amends, fly to Fidessaes heart.
SONNET.XXIII.
Fly to her heart, houer about her heart,
With dainty kisses mollify her heart:
Pierce with thy arrows her obdurate heart,
With sweet allurements ever move her heart.
At midday and at midnight touch her heart,
Be lurking closely, nestle about her heart:
With power, (thou art a god) command her heart,
Kindle thy coals of love about her heart,
Yea even into thy self transform her heart.
And she must love, be sure thou have her heart,
And I must dye, if thou have not her heart.
Thy bed (if thou rest well) must be her heart:
He has the best part sure that has the heart:
What have I not if I have but her heart?
SONNET.XXIIII.
Striving is past, ah I must sink and drown,
And that in sight of long descried shore:
I cannot send for aid unto the town,
All help is vain, and I must dye therefore.
Then poor distressed caytiue, be resolved
To leave this earthly dwelling fraught with care:
Cease will thy woes, thy corpse in earth inuolued,
Thou dyest for her that will no help prepare.
Oh see: my case her self does now behold,
The casement open is, she seems to speak:
But she is gone: oh then I dare be bold,
And needs must say, she causde my heart to break.
I dye before I drown, oh heavy case,
It was because I saw my mistress face.
SONNET.XXV.
COmpare me to Pygmalion with his image sotted,
For (as was he) even so am I deceived:
The shadow only is to me allotted,
The substance has of substance me bereued.
Then poor and helples must I wander still,
In deep laments to pass succeeding days:
Weltring in woes that poor and mighty kill,
Oh who is mighty that so soon decaies!
The dread almighty has appointed so,
The final period of all worldly things:
That as in time they come, so must they go,
(Death common is to beggars and to kings)
But whither do I run beside my text?
I run to death, for death must be the next.
SONNET.XXVI.
THe silly bird that hasts unto the net,
And flutters to and fro till she be taken,
Does look some food or succor there to get,
But loses life, so much is she mistaken.
The foolish fly that flies to the flame,
With ceaseles houering, and with restles flight,
Is burned straight to ashes in the same,
And finds her death, where was her most delight.
The proud aspiring boy that needs would pry
Into the secrets of the highest seat,
Had some conceit to gain content thereby,
Or else his folly sure was wondrous great.
These did through folly perish all and die,
And (though I know it) even so do I.
SONNET.XXVII.
Poor worm, poor silly worm, (alas poor beast)
Fear makes thee hide thy head within the ground,
Because of creeping things thou art the least,
Yet every foot gives thee thy mortal wound.
But I thy fellow worm am in worse state,
For thou thy Sun enioyest, but I want mine:
I live in irksome night: oh cruel fate!
My Sun will never rise, nor ever shine.
Thus blind of light, mine eyes misguide my feet,
And balefull darkness makes me still afraid:
Men mock me when I stumble in the street,
And wonder how my young sight so decaide.
Yet do I joy in this (even when I fall)
That I shall see again, and then see all.
SONNET.XXVIII.
WEll may my soul immortal and divine,
That is imprisoned in a lump of clay,
Breath out laments, until this body pine:
That from her takes her pleasures all away.
Pine then thou lothed prison of my life;
Untoward subject of the least aggrieuance,
Oh let me dye: mortality is rife,
Death comes by wounds, by sickness, care, and chance
Oh earth, the time will come when i will resume thee,
And in my bosom make thy resting place:
Then do not unto hardest sentence doom me,
Yield, yield betimes, I must and will have grace.
Richly shall thou be entombed, since for thy grave,
Fidessa, fair Fidessa thou shall have.
SONNET.XXIX.
EArth, take this earth wherein my spirits la^guish,
Spirits, leave this earth that does in griefs retain you:
Griefs, chase this earth, that it may fade with anguish,
Spirits, avoid these furies which do pain you;
Oh leave your loathsome prison, freedom gain you,
Your essence is divine, great is your power:
And yet you moan your wrongs and sore complain you,
Hoping for joy which fades every hour.
Oh Spirits your prison loath, and freedom gain you!
The destinies in deep laments have shut you
Of mortal hate, because they do disdain you,
And yet of joy that they in prison put you.
Earth, take this earth with thee to be enclosed:
Life is to me, and I to it opposed.
SONNET.XXX.
Weep now no more mine eyes, but be you drowned
In your own tears, so many years distilled:
And let her know that at them long has frowned,
That you can weep no more, although she willed.
This hap her cruelty has her alotten,
Who whilom was commaundres of each part:
That now her proper griefs must be forgotten,
By those true outward signs of inward smart.
For how ca^ he that has not one tear left him,
Stream out those floodes that is due unto her moning?
When both of eyes and tears she has bereft him:
Oh vet i will signify my grief with groaning!
True sighs, true groans shall echo in the air,
And say Fidessa (though most cruel) is most fair.
SONNET.XXXI.
TOngue never cease to sing Fidessaes praise,
Heart (how ever she deserve) conceive the best:
Eyes stand amazed to see her beauties rays,
Lips steal one kiss and be for ever blessed.
Hands touch that hand wherein your life is closed,
Breast lock up fast in thee thy lives sole treasure,
Arms still embrace and never be disclosed,
Feet run to her without or pace or measure,
Tongue, heart, eyes, lips, hands, breast, arms, feet,
Consent to do true homage to your Queen:
Lovely, fair, gentle, wise, virtuous, sober, sweet,
Whose like shall never be; has never been,
Oh that I were all tongue her praise to show:
Then surely my poor heart were freed from woe.
SONNET.XXXII.
SOre sick of late, Nature her due would have,
Great was my pain where still my mind did rest:
No hope but heaven, no comfort but my grave,
Which is of comforts both the last and least.
But on a sudden the almighty sent
Sweet ease to the distress and comfortless,
And gave me longer time for to repent,
With health and strength the foes of feeblenes.
Yet I my health no sooner began recover,
But my old thoughts (thoughful of cares) retained,
Made me (as erst) become a wretched lover
Of her, that love and lovers aye disdained.
Then was my pain with ease of pain increased,
And I nere sick until my sickness ceased.
SONNET.XXXIII.
HE that would feign Fidessaes image see,
My face of force must be his looking glass:
There is she portraide and her cruelty,
Which as a wonder through the world must pass.
But were I dead, she would not be betraide:
It Is I that against my will shall make it known,
Her cruelty by me must be bewraide,
Or I must hide my head, and live alone.
I Will pluck my silver hairs from out my head,
And wash away the wrinkles of my face:
Closely immured I Will live as I were dead,
Before she suffer but the least disgrace.
How can I hide that is already known?
I have been seen, and have no face but one.
SONNET.XXXIIII.
FIe pleasure fie, thou cloy'st me with delight!
(Sweet thoughts you kill me if you lower stray)
Oh many be the joys of one short night!
Tush fancies never can desire allay.
Happy unhappy thoughts: I think and have not
Pleasure: oh pleasing pain! Shows naught avail me.
Mine own conceit does glad me, more I crave not:
Yet wanting substance, woe does still assail me.
"Babies do children please, and shadows fools:
"Shows have deceived the wisest many a time:
"Ever to want our wish our courage cooles:
"The ladder broken, it is in vain to clime.
But I must wish, and crave, and seek, and clime,
It Is hard if I obtain not grace in time.
SONNET.XXXV
I Have not spent the April of my time,
The sweet of youth in plotting in the air:
But do at first adventure seek to clime,
Whilst flowers of blooming years are green and fair.
I am no leaving of al-withering age,
I have not suffered many winter lowres:
I feel no storm, unless my Love do rage,
And then in grief I spend both days and hours.
This yet does comfort that my flower lasted,
Until it did approach my Sun too near:
And then (alas) untimely was it blasted,
So soon as once thy beauty did appear.
But after all, my comfort rests in this,
That for thy sake my youth decayed is.
SONNET.XXXVI.
OH let my heart, my body and my tongue,
Bleed forth the lively streams of faith unfeigned:
Worship my saint the Gods and Saints among,
Praise and extol her fair that me has pained.
Oh let the smoke of my suppressed desire
Be raked up in ashes of my burning breast,
Break out at length, and to the clouds aspire,
Urging the heavens t'affoord me rest.
But let my body naturally descend
Into the bowels of our common mother,
And to the very Center let it wend:
When it no lower can, her griefs to smother.
And yet when I so low do buried lie,
Then shall my love ascend unto the sky.
SONNET.XXXVII.
Fair is my love that feeds among the Lillies,
The Lillies growing in that pleasant garden,
Where Cupids mount that well-beloved hill is,
And where that little god himself is warden.
See where my Love sits in the beds of spices,
Beset all round with Camphere, Myrrh and Roses,
And interlac'd with curious devices,
Which her from all the world apart incloses.
There does she tune her Lute for her delight,
And with sweet music makes the ground to move,
Whilst I (poor I) do sit in heavy plight,
Wayling alone my unrespected love,
Not daring rush into so rare a place,
That gives to her and she to it a grace.
SONNET.XXXVIII.
WAs never eye did see my Mistress face,
Was never care did hear Fidessaes tongue,
Was never mind that once did mind her grace,
That ever thought the travail to be long.
When her I see, no creature I behold,
So plainly say these advocates of love,
That now do fear, and now to speak are bold,
Trembling apace, when they resolve to prove.
These strange effects do show a hidden power,
(A majesty all base attempts reproving)
That glads or daunts as she does laugh or lower,
Surely some goddess harbors in their moving:
Who thus my muse from base attempts has raised,
Whom thus my muse beyond compare has praised.
SONNET.XXXXIX.
MY Ladies hair is threeds of beaten gold,
Her front the purest Crystal eye has seen:
Her eyes the brightest stars the heavens hold,
Her cheeks red Roses, such as seld have been:
Her pretty lips of red vermilion dye,
Her hand of yuorie the purest white:
Her blush Aurora, or the morning sky,
Her breast displaies two silver fountains bright,
The Spheres her voice, her grace the Graces three,
Her body is the Saint that I adore,
Her smiles and favors sweet as honey be,
Her feet fair Thetis praises evermore.
But ah the worst and last is yet behind,
For of a Gryphon she does bear the mind.
SONNET.XL.
Injurious fates to rob me of my bliss,
And dispossess my heart of all his hope:
You ought with just revenge to punish miss,
For unto you the hearts of men are open.
Iniuriou^ fates that hardened have her heart,
Yet make her face to send out pleasing smiles:
And both are done but to increase my smart,
And intertaine my love with falsed wiles.
Yet, being (when she smiles) surprisde with joy,
I feign would languish in so sweet a pain:
Beseeching death my body to destroy,
lest on the sudden she should frown again.
When men do wish for death, fates have no force,
But they (when men would live) have no remorce.
SONNET.XLI.
THe prison I am in is thy fair face,
Wherein my liberty inchained lies:
My thoughts the bolts that hold me in the place,
My food the pleasing looks of thy fair eyes.
Deep is the prison where I lie enclosed,
Strong are the bolts that in this cell contains me:
Sharp is the food necessity imposed,
When hunger makes me feed on that which pains me.
Yet do I love, embrace, and follow fast,
That holds, that keeps, that discontents me most:
And list not break, unlock, or seek to waste
The place, the bolts, the food (though I be lost.)
Better in prison ever to remain,
Then being out to suffer greater pain.
SONNET.XLII.
WHen never speaking silence proves a wonder,
When euer-flying fame at home remains,
When all-concealing night keeps darkness under,
When Men devouring wrong, true glory gains:
When Soule-tormenting grief agrees with joy,
When Lucifer forerunnes the balefull night,
When Venus does forsake her little boy,
When her untoward boy obtains sight,
When Sysiphus does cease to roll his stone,
When Oaths shakes off his heavy chains:
When Beauty Queen of pleasure is alone,
When Love and Virtue quiet peace disdaines.
When these shall be and I not be,
Then will Fidessa pity me.
SONNET.XLIII.
TEll me of love sweet Love who is thy fire,
Of if thou mortal or immortal be:
Some say thou art begotten by Desire,
Nourisht with hope, and fed with fantasy:
Engendered by a heavenly goddess eye,
Lurking most sweetly in an Angels face:
Others, that beauty thee does deifie,
Oh Sovereign beauty full of power and grace!
But I must be absurd all this denying,
Because the fairest fair alive nere knew thee:
Now Cupid comes thy godhead to the trying,
It Was she alone (such is her power) that slew me.
She shall be Love, and thou a foolish boy,
Whose virtue proves thy power but a toye.
SONNET.XLIIII.
NO choice of change can ever change my mind,
Choiceles my choice the choicest choice alive:
Wonder of women, were she not unkind,
The pitiles of pity to deprive.
Yet she, the kindest creature of her kind,
Accuses me of self ingratitude:
And well she may, since by good proof I find
My self had did, had she not helpful stood.
For when my sickness had the upper hand,
And death began to show his awful face;
She took great pains my pains for to withstand,
And easde my heart that was in heavy case.
But cruel now she skorneth what it craves:
Unkind in kindness, murdering while she saves.
SONNET.XLV.
MIne eye bewrayes the secrets of my heart,
My heart unfolds his grief before her face:
Her face bewitching pleasure of my smart,
Daignes not one look of mercy and of grace.
My guilty eye of murder and of treason
(Friendly conspirator of my decay,
Dumb eloquence the lovers strongest reason)
Does weep it self for anger quite away,
And chooses rather not to be, then be
Disloyal, by too-well discharging duty:
And being out, joys it no more can see
The sugared charms of all deceiving beauty.
But (for the other greedily does eye it)
I pray you tell me what do I get by it?
SONNET.XLVIII.
MVrder, oh murder! I can cry no longer,
Murder, oh murder! is there none to aid me?
Life feeble is in force, death is much stronger:
Then let me dye that shame may not upbraid me.
Nothing is left me now but shame or death:
I fear she fears not foul murders guilt,
Nor do I fear to loose a servile breath,
I know my blood was given to be spilt.
What is this life but maze of counties strayes,
The enemy of true felicity:
Fitly compared to dreams, to flowers, to plays?
Oh life, no life to me but misery!
Of shame or death if thou must one,
Make choice of death and both are gone.
SONNET.XLIX.
MY cruel fortunes clowded with a frown,
Lurk in the bosom of eternal night:
My climing thoughts are basely haled down,
My best devices prove but after-sight.
Poor outcast of the worlds exiled room,
I live in wilderness of deep lament:
No hope reserved me but a hopeles tomb,
When fruitles life, and fruitful woes are spent.
Shall Phoebus hinder little stars to shine,
Or lofty Cedar Mushrome leave to grow*
Sure mighty men at little ones repine,
The rich is to the poor a common foe.
Fidessa seeing how the world does go,
Joins with fortune in my overthrow.
SONNET.L.
WHen I the hooks of pleasure first deuowred,
Which undigested, threaten now to choke me,
Fortune on me her golden graces shewred,
Oh then delight did to delight provoke me.
Delight, false instrument of my decay,
Delights nothing that does all things move,
Made me first wander from the perfect way,
And fast entangled me in the snares of love.
Then my unhappy happiness (at first) began,
Happy, in that I loved the fairest fair:
Unhappily despisde, a haples man
Thus joy did triumph, triumph did despair.
My conquest is which shall the conquest gain:
Fidessa author both of joy and pain.
SONNET.LI.
Work work apace you blessed Sisters three,
In restles twining of my fatal thread:
Oh let your nimble hands at once agree,
To weaue it out, and cut it off with speed.
Then shall my vexed and tormented ghost
Have quiet passage to the Elisian rest:
And sweetly over death and fortune boast,
In everlasting triumphs with the blessed.
But ah (too well I know) you have conspired
A lingering death for him that lotheth life:
As if with woes he never could be tired:
For this you hide your all-diuiding knife.
One comfort yet the heavens have assigned me,
That I must dye and leave my griefs behind me.
SONNET.LII.
IT is some comfort to the wronged man,
The wronger of injustice to vpbraide:
Justly my self herein I comfort can,
And justly call her an ungrateful maid.
Thus am I pleased to rid my self of crime,
And stop the mouth of all-reporting fame:
Counting my greatest cross the loss of time,
And all my private grief her public shame.
Ah (but to speak a truth) hence are my cares,
And in this comfort all discomfort rests:
My harms I cause (her scandale) unawares,
Thus love procures the thing that love detesteth.
For he that viewes the glasses of my smart,
Must needs report she has a flintie heart.
SONNET.LIII.
I Was a king of sweet content at least,
But now from out my kingdom banished:
I was chief guest at fair Dame pleasures feast,
But now I am for want of succor famished.
I was a Saint and heaven was my rest,
But now cast down into the lowest hell:
Vile caytifes may not live amongst the blessed,
Nor blessed men among cursed caytifes dwell.
Thus am I made an exile of a king,
Thus choice of meats to want of food is changed:
Thus heavens loss does hellish torments bring:
Self crosses make me from my self estranged.
Yet am I still the same: but made another,
Then not the same: alas I am no other.
SONNET.LIIII.
IF great Apollo offered as a dower
His burning throne to Beauties excellence:
If Jove himself came in a golden shower
Down to the earth to fetch fair Io thence:
If Venus in the curled locks were tied
Of proud Adonis not of gentle kind:
If Tellus for a shepherds favor died,
(The favor cruel love to her assigned)
If heavens winged Herrald Hermes had
His heart enchanted with a country maid:
If poor Pygmalion were for beauty mad.
If gods and men have all for beauty straide,
I am not then ashamed to be included
Among those that love and be with love deluded.
SONNET.LV.
OH no I dare not, oh I may not speak!
Yes, yes, I dare, I can, I must, I will:
Then heart power forth thy plaints and do not break,
Let never fancy manly courage kill.
Entreat her mildly, words have pleasing charms,
Of force to move the most obdurate heart
To take relenting pity of my harms,
And with unfeigned tears to wail my smart.
Is she a stock, a block, a stone, a flint?
Has she nor ears to hear, nor eyes to see?
If so, my cries, my prayers, my tears shall stint.
Lord how can lovers so bewitched be!
I took her to be beauties Queen alone,
But now I see she is a senceles stone.
SONNET.LVI.
IS trust betraide, does kindness grow unkind?
Can beauty (both at once) give life and kill?
Shall fortune alter the most constant mind?
Will reason yield unto rebelling will?
Does fancy purchase praise, and virtue shame?
May show of goodness lurk in treachery?
Has truth unto her self procured blame?
Must sacred Muses suffer misery?
Are women woe to men, traps for their falls?
Differ their words, their deeds, their looks, their lives?
Have lovers ever been their tennis-balles?
Be husbands fearful of the chastest wives?
All men do these affirm, and so must I:
Unless Fidessa give to me the lie.
SONNET.LVII.
THree play-fellowes (such three were never seen
In Venus court) upon a summers day,
Met altogether on a pleasant green,
Intending at some pretty game to play.
They Dian, Cupid, and Fidessa were:
Their wager, beauty, bow, and cruelty:
The conqueresse the stakes away did bear,
Whose fortune then it was to win all three.
Fidessa, which does these as weapons use,
To make the greatest heart her will obey:
And yet the most obedient to refuse,
As having power poor lovers to betray.
With these she wounds, she heales, gives life and death:
More power has none that lives by mortal breath.
SONNET.LVIII.
OH beauty Siren, kept with Cyrces rod:
The fairest good in seem, but fowlest ill:
The sweetest plague ordained for man by God,
The pleasing subject of presumptuous will:
The alluring object of unstaid eyes,
Friended of all, but unto all a foe:
The dearest thing that any creature buys,
And vainest too: (it serves but for a shoe.)
In seem a heaven, and yet from bliss exiling,
Paying for truest service, naught but pain:
Young men's undoing: young and old beguiling,
Man's greatest loss, though thought his greatest gain.
True, that all this with pain enough I prove:
And yet most true, I will Fidessa love.
SONNET.LIX.
Do I unto a cruel Tiger pray,
That prays on me as wolf upon the Lambs?
(Who fear the danger both of night and day,
And run for succor to their tender dammes)
Yet will I pray (though she be ever cruel)
On bended knee, and with submissiue heart:
She is the fire, and I must be the fuel,
She must inflict, and I endure the smart.
She must, she shall, be mistress of her will,
And I (poor I) obedient to the same:
As fit to suffer death, as she to kill,
As ready to be blamed, as she to blame.
And for I am the subject of her ire,
All men shall know thereby my love entire.
SONNET.LX.
OH let me sigh, weep, wail, and cry no more,
Or let me sigh, weep, wail, cry more and more:
Yea let me sigh, weep, wail, cry euer-more:
For she does pity my complaints no more,
Then cruel Pagan, or the sauadge Moore:
But still does add unto my torments more,
Which grievous are to me by so much more,
As she inflicts them, and does wish them more.
Oh let thy mercy (merciles) be never more!
So shall sweet death to me be welcome more,
Then is to hungry beasts the grassie moore:
Ah she that to affliction ads yet more,
Becomes more cruel, by still adding more!
Weary am I to speak of this word (more)
Yet never weary she to plague me more.
SONNET.LXI.
FIdessaes worth in time begets praise,
Time praise, praise, fame, fame wonderment,
Wonder, fame, praise, time, her worth do raise
To hiest pitch of dread astonishment.
Yet time in time her hardened heart bewraieth,
And praise it self her cruelty dispraiseth:
So that through praise (alas) her praise decaieth,
And that (which makes it fall) her honor raises.
Most strange: yet true, so wonder wonder still,
And follow fast the wonder of these days:
For well I know (all wonder to fulfill)
Her will at length unto my will obaies.
Mean time let others praise her constancy,
And me attend upon her clemency.
SONNET.LXII.
MOst true that I must fair Fidessa love,
Most true that fair Fidessa cannot love.
Most true that I do feel the pains of love,
Most true that I am captive unto love.
Most true that I deluded am with love,
Most true that I do find the sleights of love.
Most true that nothing can procure her love,
Most true that I must perish in my love.
Most true that she contemnes the god of love,
Most true that he is snared with her love.
Most true that she would have me cease to love,
Most true that she her self alone is Love.
Most true that though she hated I would love,
Most true that dearest life shall end with love.
FINIS.
B. Griffin.

Talis apud tales, talis sub tempore tali:
Subque meo tals iudice, talis ero.


