A most pleasant Ballad of patient Grissell.
To the tune of the Brides good morrow.
A Noble Marquis as he did ride on hunting
hard by a Forest side:
A proper Maiden as she did fit a spinning
his gentle eye espide.
Most fair and lovely, and of courteous grace was she,
although in simple attire:
She sung full sweet with pleasant voice melodiously,
which set the Lords heart on fire.
The more he looked the more he might,
Beauty bred his hearts delight.
and to this dainty Damsel then he went:
God speed quoth he, thou famous flower,
Fair mistres of this homely bower,
where love and virtue lives with sweet content.
With comely iesture and courteous mild behavior
she bad him welcome then:
She entertaind him in faithful friendly manner
and all his Gentlemen.
the noble marquis in his heart felt such a flame
which set his senses at strife:
Quoth he, fair maiden show me soon what is thy name?
I mean to make thee my wife.
Grissell is my name quoth she,
Far unfit for your degree,
a silly Maiden and of parents poor.
Nay Grissell thou art rich he said,
A virtuous fair and comely Maid,
grant me thy love, and I will ask no more.
At length she consented, and being both contented
they married were with speed:
Her country russet was changd to silk and velvet
as to her state agreed.
And when she was trimly tired in the same,
her beauty shined most bright,
Far staining every other brave and comely dame,
that did appear in her sight.
Many envied her therefore,
Because she was of parents poor,
and twixe her Lord and the great strife did raise
Some said this, and some said that,
Some did call her beggars brat,
and to her lord they would her soon dispraise
O noble Marquis (quoth they) why do you wrong us
thus bacely for to wed?
That might have gotten an honorable Lady,
into your Princely bed.
Who will not now your noble issue still deride
which shall hereafter be borne:
That are of blood so base by their mothers side
the which will bring them in scorn:
Put her therefore quite away,
Take to you a Lady gay,
whereby your lineage may renowned be:
Thus every day they seemde to prate,
That malist Grisselles good estate,
who took all this most mild and patiently.
When that the marquis did see that they were bent thus
against his faithful wife,
Whom he most dearly, tenderly, and entirely,
beloved as his life.
Minding in secret for to prove her patient heart
thereby her foes to disgrace:
Thinking to play a hard discourteous part,
that men might pity her case.
Great with child this Lady was,
And at length it came to pass,
two goodly children at one birth she had:
A son and daughter God had sent,
Which did their father well content,
and which did make their mothers heart full glad.
Great royal feasting was at these Childrens christnings
and princely triumph made:
Six weeks together, al nobles that came thither
were entertaind and staid:
And when that al those pleasant sportings quite were done
the Marquis a messenger sent:
For his yo^ng daughter, and his pretty smiling son
declaring his full intent:
How that the babes must murdered be,
For so the Marquis did decree,
come let me have the children then he said:
With that fair Grissell wept full sore,
She wrung her hands and said no more,
my gracious Lord must have his will obaid.
She took the babies even from their nursing Ladies
between her tender arms:
She often wishes with many sorrowful kisses
that she might help their harms.
Farewell farewell a thousand times my children dear,
never shall I see you again,
It Is long of me your sad and woeful mother here.
for whose sake both must be slain.
Had I been borne of royal race,
You mighe have lived in happy case,
but you must die for my unworthiness:
Come messenger of death said she,
Take my despised babes to thee,
and to their father my complaints expres.
He took the children, and to his noble master
he brings them both with speed:
Who secret sent them unto a noble Lady,
to be nursed up in deed:
The^ to fair Grissel with a heavy heart he goes
where she sat mildly alone:
A pleasant iesture and a lovely look she shows,
as if this grief she never had known.
Quath he, my children now are slain,
What thinks fair Grissell of the same,
sweet Grissell now declare thy mind to me;
Since you my Lord are pleased in it,
Poor Grissell thinks the action sit,
both I and mine at your command will be,
My nobles murmur fair Grissell at thy honor
and I no joy can have:
Til thou be banished both from my court and presence
as they unjustly crave:
Thou must be stripped out of thy costly garments all.
and as thou came to me:
In homely gray in steed of bisse and purest pall
now all thy clothing must be.
My Lady thou shall be no more,
Nor I thy Lord, which grieves me sore,
the poorest life must now content thy mind.
A groat to thee I must not give,
To maintain thee while I do live,
against my Grissel such great foes I find.
When gentle Grissell did hear these woeful tidings,
the tears stood in her eyes:
She nothing answered, no words of discontent
did from her lips arise.
Her velvet gown most patienely she slipped off,
her kirtles of silk with the same:
her russet gown was brought again with many a scoff
to bear them all her self she did frame:
When she was dressed in this array,
And ready was to part away,
God send long life unto my Lord quoth she
Let no offense be found in this,
To give my Lord a parting kiss,
with watery eyes, farewell my dear quoth he.
From stately Palace unto her fathers Cottage
poor Grissell now is gone:
Full sixteen winters she lived there contented
no wrong she thought upon:
And at that time through all the land the speeches went:
the Marquis should married be:
Unto a Lady of high and great descent:
to the same all parties did agree.
The Marquis sent for Grissell fair,
The Brides bed chamber to prepare,
that nothing therein should be found awrye
The Bride was with her brother come,
Which was great joy to all and some:
and Grissell took all this most patiently.
And in the morning when they should to the wedding,
her patience now was tried:
Grissel was charged her self in princely manner
for to attire the Bride.
most willingly she gave consent to do the same
the Bride in her bravery was dressed:
and presently the noble Marquis thither came
with all his Lords as her request.
O Grissel I would ask quoth he,
If she would to this match agree.
me thinks her looks are waxen wondrous coy,
With that they all began to smile,
And Grissell she replide the while,
God send Lord Marquis many years of joy
The Marquis was moved to see his best beloved
thus patient in distress:
He stepped unto her, and by the hand he took her
these words he did express:
Thou art my Bride, and all the Brides I mean to have:
these two thine own children be:
The youthful Lady on her knees did blessing crave
her brother as willing as she,
And you that envied her estate,
Whom I have made my loving mate,
now blush for shame, and honor virtuous life:
The Chronicles of lasting fame,
Shall ever more extol the name,
of patient Grissell my most constant wife.
FINIS.

