A JOINT ATTESTATION, Avowing that the Discipline of the Church of ENGLAND was
not impeached by the Synod of Dort.

LONDON, Printed by M. Flesher for R. Mylbourne, and are to be sold at his shop
at the great South-doore of Paul's. 1626.

A JOINT ATTESTATION, avowing that the Discipline of the Church of England was
not impeached by the Synod of DORT.
IT behooveth him, that prete^deth to frame A just Appeal from unjust
Informers, therein to keep himself clear from the just imputation of unjust
informing. Yet has the Author of the Treatise, styled Appello Caesarem, rashly
and without ground cast a foul blot upon the Synod of Dort in general, and
consequently in common reputation upon all the members thereof; among whom
those Divines, that were by his late Majesty of blessed memory sent thither,
and concurred in the Conclusions of that National Synod, are in special
aimed at, as having betrayed, or impeached the government of their Reverend
Mother. The Discipline of the Church of England Appeal page 70.
(says he) in that Synod is held unlawful. And again, The Synod of Dort
in some Page 108.
points condemns upon the Bye even the Discipline of the Church of England.

Was that distressed Church, in the midst of her distractions about matter of
Doctrine, so wily in her intentions, as to make preposterous use of their
neighbors assistance, and to draw them in for concurrence, in matter of
Discipline, with a foreign sister against their own Mother? Were those, that
hence aided that Church, tam naris obesae, so dull of apprehension, as not to
perceive the interest of their own? Or did they demean themselves tam
sublesta fide, so perfidiously, as to suffer the government of this renowned
Church, so much as upon the Bye, to be condemned by others there, and to sit
down by it?

Had there been any color for such surmise, it might have pleased the
Appealer, or Appeacher, before he Recorded in print such his odious
Information, tendered to his Majesty's own hands, to have demanded in private
such a question of some of those, from whom in all likelihood he might have
received particular satisfaction. Civil correspondence required no less of
him toward those, whose persons he professes to respect Page 69.
for ancient acquaintance, and other causes.

The best is, though himself, for his own part, does often salute that Synod
with the complements called in Rhetorique (...), and (...), Non equidem Page
107.
invideo, and such like flowers strewed along his Treatise, yet in his
indulgence he gives others, as cause, so leave to speak in their own
behalf. Let them Page 71.
look to it, and answer for it, whom it concerns. And again, Let them, that
are interessed, Page 108.
plead for themselves. We therefore, who have hereto subscribed our names,
being interessed in that Synod, and withal deeply in this crimination of
Puritanisme, can do no less then answer, and clear in some public manner
this slander published against us.

And first in general to remove the often objected suspicion of complication
between foreine Doctrine and foreine Page 56. and 72.
Discipline, whereby is intended, that there is a kind of natural
consanguinitie between that Doctrine (which odiously he styleth foreine)
subscribed unto by that Synod, and the Presbyteriall Discipline established in
that and other foreign Churches: we answer, that in the Netherlands, the party
opposite unto that Synod, and most aggrieved with the Conclusions thereof
concerning the Points controverted, are notwithstanding as vehement and
resolute maintainers of the Ministerial Parity, as any that concluded, or
accepted the judgment of that Synod. Moreover, in our private conversing with
the most eminent of the Ministry there, we found diverse times, upon occasion
of our declaring unto them the order and manner of our Church Government, that
they were more ready to deplore, then defend, their own estate, and wished,
rather then hoped, to be made like the flourishing Church of England. Nor were
these therefore the less ready to concur for the Dort Conclusions, but were
rather of the principal and forward actors therein.

Secondly in special we plead against a supposed act of damning our own
Episcopal discipline. Which indictment, in fair accusation, should have been
laid more particularly, what action, what Session, what Conclusion. Now are
we put to seek, not so much our defense, as our fault. And for such surmise
we can find no other footing, then (possibly) in the approbation of the
Belgique Confession, propounded to the Consideration of the Synod about a
week before it brake up.

This Confession (composed an: 1550, and received in their Church, and in the
Wallon Churches, ever since the first reform of Religion) is unto them, for
consent in Doctrine, a Rule not much unlike to our Articles of Religion here
established. Which as it was formerly anno 1583 accepted and approved by the
Reformed French Church in a National Synod at Vitree, so upon the
opportunity of this National Synod the State and Church there recommended
the same to more public judgment for further establishment.

And because two or three Articles thereof concerned Church Discipline, and
avowed a Parity of Ministers, they, prudently foreseeing that the Britain
Divines would never approve, but rather oppose the same, did therefore provide
that before the examining or reading thereof, protestation should be made by
the President of the Synod, that nothing, but the Doctrinall points, was to be
subjected to their consideration and suffrages: and for the surer preventing
opposition or dispute, the Articles concerning Discipline were accordingly
retrenched and suppressed in the reading of that Confession to the Synod.

If therefore the Britain College had in their suffrages only answered ad
quaesita, concerning Doctrine, and uttered no opinion at all de non quaesitis,
concerning Discipline, they think they had not herein been wanting to their
Synodicall duty and calling. The rather for that

1 They were sent thither to endeavor the peace and composure of that
distracted Church, by expressing their judgments in the Points there already
controverted, not by intruding in matters not at all questioned among them.

2 Among the Instructions given them by his Majesty, they had none to meddle
with the Discipline there established, but had charge to use moderation and
discretion, and to abstain from multiplying of questions beyond necessity.

3 In that subject there was no hope, on possibility of prevayling by argument
or persuasion; especially in that Church, where the Civil government is
popular, and so complyeth more easily with Ecclesiastique Parity.

Yet we thought not fit to content ourselves with warrantable silence; but,
upon our return from that Synodicall Session to the place of our private
Collegiate meeting, we diligently perused the Confession, not only for points
of Doctrine; referred to our judgments, but also for those excepted Articles
touching Discipline. And consulting together what was fit to be done in
delivering our opinions the next day, we jointly concluded, that, howsoever
our Church discipline had not been Synodically taxed, nor theirs avowed, yet
it was convenient for us (who were assured in our consciences that their
Presbyteriall Parity, and Laicall Presbytery was repugnant to the Discipline
established by the Apostles, and retained in our Church) to declare in a
temperate manner our judgment as well concerning that matter, though by them
purposely excepted, as the other expressly referred to us. Accordingly the next
morning, when suffrages were to pass concerning the Doctrine comprised in that
Confession, we (having by our place the prime voice in the Synod) gave our
approbation of the substance of the doctrinall Articles, with advice touching
some incommodious phrases; and withal (contrary to the expectation of the
whole Synod) we added express exception against the suppressed Articles,
with some touch also of Argument against them. Which our Contestation, or
Protestation (for so may it be styled) was principally performed by him, whom
for prioritie of age, place, and dignity it best became, and from whose
person, and gravitie it might be the better taken by the Civil Deputees of the
States there present.

Therein he professed and declared our utter dissent in that point: and further
showed that by our Savior a Paritie of Ministers was never instituted, that
Christ ordained twelve Apostles and seventy Disciples; that the authority of
the twelve was above the other: that the Church preserved this order left by
our Savior. And therefore when the extraordinary authority of the Apostles
ceased, yet their ordinary authority continued in Bishops, who succeeded
them, who were by the Apostles themselves left in the government of the Church
to ordain Ministers, and to see that they who were so ordained, should preach
no other doctrine: that in an inferior degree the Ministers, that were
governed by Bishops, succeeded the 70 Disciples: that this order has bin
maintained in the Church from the time of the Apostles. And herein he appealed
to the judgment of Antiquity, or of any learned Ignat. Epist. ad Philadelph.
Tertul. de Baptismo. Hieronym. Epist. ad Marcellam. Aug. in Psalm. 44. Epiphan.
haeres. 75.
man now living, if any could speak to the contrary, etc.

In giving our several suffrages the same exception was seconded by the rest
of us Colleagues, partly by other allegations, and partly by brief reference to
this declaration made communi nomine by our Leader. To this our exception and
allegations not one word was answered by any of the Synodiques either Strangers
or Provincialls. So that herein we may seem to have had either their consent
implied by silence or at least approbation of our just and necessary
performance of our bounden duty to that Church, whereunto they all afforded no
small respect, though differing in government from their several Churches.

Herein perhaps by some we might be deemed rather to have gone too far in
contestation and upbraiding, quasi in as, the Civil Magistrate, and Ministry
there with undue form of government of that Church, whose doctrine only was
offered to our opinions.

But on the contrary part it has bin suggested here at home by some, that
herein we came short of our duty, that we ought to have stepped yet farther by
exhibiting in writing a formal Protestation to be entered, and kept by the
Actuary of the Synod. Whereto we answer.

First that the course there taken for the manner of delivering our judgments,
was not (as in the 5 Questions controverted) by subscription, but only by
vocal suffrage: which gave no opportunity of putting in a written
Protestation; whereas, if we had subscribed our names unto that Confession, we
would infallibly have added with the same penn our exception against the
Articles concerning Discipline.

Secondly in that vocal proceeding had we been overborn by the multitude of
their voices, or received any grievance or affront from them touching
Discipline, we would have releeved our just cause either by written
Protestation, or better means. But when as neither the Civil Magistrate (in
whose hearing our exceptions were constantly uttered) did gainsay us, nor any
of the Divines in the Synod once opened their mouths either in offense of our
government, or defense of their own, what needed we to redouble our stroke
upon those, that turned not upon us? Rixa suam finem, cum silet bostis, habet.

Peradventure some hot spirit would not have rested in a formal recorded
Protestation neither: but would have charged those Churches to blot those
Articles out of their Confession, and forthwith to reform their government;
otherwise not have yielded approbation to any Article of Doctrine, as there
comprised: but renounced the Synod, and shaken off from his feet the dust of
Dort, I have nothing to do with your Conclusions. I have no part nor portion
in them. What ends you have, how things are carried, I cannot tell; nor care.

We confess, we were, and are, of another mind; our own dispositions, and
the directions of our blessed Peacemaking King, kept us from kindling new
fires; where we had work enough to quench the old. We then thought (and so
still in our consciences are confident) that we forgot not our duty to our
venerable and sacred Mother the Church of England, but took a course
conformable to the rules, as well of filial observance, as of Christian
moderation.

And even then (according to our custom of weekly transmitting into England
brief narrations of the proceedings in each several Session to be imparted to
his Majesty) we by the next messenger sent our relation hereof, as no whit
ashamed of our deportment herein. Which, because it was then framed, when we
did not imagine that any quarrel would be picked against us, for more
impartial and unpassionate attestation, is here inserted, as much as
concerns that particular.

1619. April. 29 stylo novo. Sessione 144 pomeridiana.

Gregorius Martine, unus ex politic is ad Synodum delegatis, Haga jam recens
reversus, narrat quanto Dni Ordines gaudio afficiantur de singulorum in
Canonibus sanciendis unamini consensu. Eo nomine Theologis cum exteris tum
Provincialibus gratias habere eorum Domniationes ob labores Synodicos
exantlatos. Proximo in loco postulare vt Confessio Belgica perlustretur: ita
tamen vt sine gravi causa nihil immutetur, nec phrasium Grammaticarum argutijs
curiose insistatur. In eadem judicijs Synodicorum subjiciuntur tantum ea, quae
doctrinam spectant, omissis prorsus ijs, que disciplinam. Intercurrit quaestio
de authentico exemplari. Sumitur illud quod in Ecclesiarum reformatarum
Confessionibus habetur. Totum perlegitur, pretermissis, qui disciplinam
Ecclesiasticam attinent, articulis.

Sessio. 145. April. 30. antemeridiana.

Rogantur de hac Confessione suffragia. Dominus Episcopus Landavensis omnia
doctrinae capita probat. Interea tamen de disciplina paucis monet. Nunquam in
Ecclesia obtinuisse Ministrorum paritatem, non tempore Christi ipsius; tunc
enim duodecim Apostolos fuisse Discipulis superiores: non Apostolorum aetate,
non subsequutis seculis. Nec valere rationem in hac Confessione usurpatam;
nempe quia omnes sunt In the more correct edition (then promised, and since
published among the Acts of the Synod) Articulo 31. the words aque and
aequalem are cashiered.
aeque ministri Christi. Nam and 70 discipuli erant Ministri Christi aeque ac
Apostoli: non tamen inde Apostolis aequales: et omnes omnino homines sunt aeque
homines: non inde tamen homo homini non debet subesse. Haec non ad harum
Ecclesiarum offensionem, sed ad nostrae Anglicanae defensionem se submonuisse
professus est. A reliquis Britannis nonnulla alia sunt subnotata de libero
arbitrio, de passiva Christi obedientia; praesertim vero de phrasi nimis dura
and generali, cum dicatur de Canonicis libris nullam unquam fuisse
controversiam: Quae quidem incommoda phrasis vitio interpretis irrepserat, cum
in originali Gallicana been se habeat. Item exceptioni de disciplina adjioitur
a reliquis Britannis similis exceptio, si quid contra legitimos ritus externos
generaliter ibidem statuatur. Britannorum interpellationi a Synodicis responsum
ne (...) quidem.

About a year after our return the Acts of the Synod were published in
print, wherein among other particulars, the Belgique Confession is at large set
down in 37 Articles. Whereof two or three contain matter of Discipline
received in those Churches; These belike our Censurer viewing, prout jace^ in
terminis, thereupon, without any further search, concluded, that Synod Guilty
and condemnable, as condemning the Discipline of the Church of England. But
still we hold our selves to stand clear, and therefore prosecute our Appeal
from the rash sentence of this Appellant, alleging for our selves

1 Though all and singular the Articles there comprised had passed Synodicall
sorutiny, and been approved canonically, yet will it not follow, that all and
every the Synodiques there gave consent thereto. For this approbation might
have passed by the votes of the major part, etiam reclamantibus Britannis, who
for number were not considerable among so many both other strangers and
Provincialls. And so a favorable construction might have exempted the Britain
Divines from (that which is here covertly put upon them) being thought to reach
forth their hand to the striking their Mother.

2 We deny that upon view of those Synodall Acts we by presumption in Law need
to be put to our purgation herein, as members involved in a Capitular decree of
the whole Body. For in point of Discipline there passed no Act at all, there
was no proposition made: as evidently appears by the same book of the
Synodall Acts, in the narration of the Acta Synod. in folio. edit. Dord. Sess.
144. page 301.
proceedings about this Belgique Confession; where the matter subjected to
deliberation is recorded with limitation, first positive, quae ad dogmata and
doctrinae essentiam pertinerent, points dogmaticall, and pertaining to the
essence of Doctrine: then exclusive, Monitum proinde fuit eo tempore Articulum
The word trigesimum should have been twice repeated, which by mistake was here
cast out as redundant. And upon this error the word utroque crept in for illis.
trigesimum, primum, and secundum non esse examinandum: quia in utroque de
ordine Ecclesiastico, quem exteri nonnulli a nostro diversum habent, ageretur.
Declaration was accordingly made at the same time that the thirtieth, first,
and second Articles were not to be examined, because in them Ecclesiastical
Order or Church government was handled, wherein some strangers (namely the
Church of England) differ from ours, (namely from that of the Church of the
Netherlands.) This recorded testimony of so express withdrawing from the eye
of the Synod all view of Church discipline might demonstrate to any
indifferent peruser of those Acts, that there was no possibility of Synodicall
condemning, so much as upon the Bye, the Discipline of the Church of England in
such examining the Belgique Confession.

As for our manner of examining and judging thereof, though it be not so
particularly set down in the said printed Acts, as we could have wished, and
would have provided for, had we been made acquainted with any intent of their
publication, yet is it in some sort touched in the same page in that very
narration of the next Session, testifiyng a cautelous delivery of our
judgments. Declararunt clarissimi Magnae Britanniae Theologi, se Confessionem
Page 301. Sess. 145.
Belgicam diligenter examinasse, nihilque in ea deprehendisse, quod ad fidei
quidem dogmata attineret, quod verbo Dei non consentiret. The Divines of great
Britain declared, that they had diligently examined the Belgique Confession,
and that therein (for as much as concerned dogmaticall points of faith) they
found nothing, that agreed not with the Word of God. Which reservation implies
that somewhat else (which did not concern point of faith, but other matter)
received not their approbation. It may be said (and so we our selves say)
that the disposers and publishers of these Synodicall Acts had done more right
to the Britain Divines, if special mention had been made of that other
matter not approved by them, and of their particular exceptions against the
Articles, which concerned Church government. But, it seems, (as in most other
vocal passages in this Synod) the Actuary here intended abridgement in what
he set down and meant not to express in particular what was said by any
concerning points not propounded to Synodicall deliberation; especially
touching upon so tender a string as the open impeachment of their own
established Discipline. And so they think that they have given us our due
herein, partly by thus pointing afar off to what we did in our own defense,
leaving the reader to find it by implication, and partly by recording that all
Synodicall proposition and approbation of this Confession was confined to
matter of Doctrine only.

According to which reserved form of expression the President of the Synod,
in the great Church of Dort (immediately after the publication of the Synods
Judgment upon the five Controversies) notifying the approbation of this
Confession said (not that the whole, and every parcel, was approved, but)
doctrinam in Confessione comprehensam, in Synodo relectam, Act. Synod. Page 322.
atque examinatam, -- ut orthodoxam etc. fuisse approbatam. The doctrine
comprised in that Confession, read over in the Synod, and examined, was
approved as orthodoxe. Which style of speech excludes whatsoever is there
comprised concerning, not Doctrine, but Discipline, whatsoever was not examined
Synodically, nor so much as read in the Synod, whatsoever in common
understanding admits not the title of Orthodoxe, which attribute is proper
unto dogmaticall points. In this sense, and of this subject they did, and well
might, there allege the co^cording judgments omnium tam exterorum, quam
provincialium Theologoru^, of all the Divines, as well strangers, as
Provincialls. Nor had we cause to expect, that in such publication of the whole
Synods doctrinall consent they should trouble their own people with expressing
the dissent of some few of the Exteri in matter of Church Discipline. Which our
dissent they have delineated in this Record of their Acts, though over-veyled
for their own peace, yet transparent enough for our defense.

But our ill happ belike it was, that he, who turned over all the leaves of the
Belgique Confession there set forth, to find the Articles concerning
Discipline, could not intend to cast his eye upon the page next foregoing that
Confession, to view the limited manner of both propounding, and approving that
body of Articles. Which limitation had he seen and considered, (so confident
are we of his ingenuitie) he would not have cast this harsh imputation upon us.

And now being better informed by this our true account of the carriage of that
business, he, that has traduced us, will (we hope, and crave) make us some
competent satisfaction, by acknowledging his oversight, and recalling what he
has unadvisedly written to our prejudice. Which reparation we have the more
cause to expect, for that, upon credence yielded to this his Information, this
imputation has of late bin further, upon the Bye, grated on and upbrayded in
the audience of diverse personages of note, whose opinions of us we have great
cause to respect.

As for our selves, in the integrity of our consciences we herein do not
decline the judgment of any indifferent unpassionate man; and such, we hope,
this true and plain Narration will satisfy. But above all, according to our
duty and desire, we humbly submit this, and all other our actions concerning
our calling, to the judgment of our most venerable Mother the Church of
England. From whose sacred rule (we avow) we have not swarved, nor any whit
impeached her Discipline, or authorized Doctrine, either abroad, or at home.
And as in that Synod our special care, and perpetual endeavor was to guide
our judgments by that sound Doctrine, which we had received from the Church of
England: so were we far, and ever shall be, from usurping our Mothers
authority, or attempting to obtrude upon her children any of our Synodicall
conclusions, as obligatory to them: yet remaining our selves never the less
resolved, that whatsoever there was affented unto, and subscribed by us
concerning the five Articles, either in the joint Synodicall Judgment, or in
our particular Collegiate suffrage (styled in the Acts of the Synod
Theologorum Magnae Britanniae Sententia, and at large extant there) is not only
warrantable by the holy Scriptures, but also conformable to the received
Doctrine of our said venerable Mother. Which we are ready to maintain, and
justify against all gainsayers, whenever we shall be thereunto called by
lawful Authority.

Ita attestamur GEORGIUS Cicestriensis Episcopus. JOHANNES Sarisburiensis
Episcopus. Gualterus Balcanquall Decan. Roff. Samuel Ward Pub. profess. Theol.
in Acad. Cant. and Coll. Sid. Prefect. Thomas Goad Sacrae Theol. Doctor.


FINIS.

