A LETTER WRITTEN BY GREGORY THE XV.

Pope of Rome, to the French King.

To our most dearly beloved son health in Jesus Christ, Louis the 13. the most
Christian King of France.

According to the French coppie printed at Paris. 1621.



London Printed for N. B. 1621.

A LETTER WRITTEN BY GREgory the 15. Pope of Rome to the French King.
TO our most dearly beloved son, health in Jesus Christ, and our
Apostolical benediction,
the supreme greatness of the actions of your Royal valor, which have drawn
unto the^ the spirits of all good Christians, yield no small contentment unto
our Paternall care, together with the glory of your armies, and the hope of
your triumphs: for when we consider, with much grief, the impiety of the
heretics, hiding themselves in certain places without all doubt or fear,
and in other places, usurping the body of a cruel government, we are now moved
to give thanks unto the God of armies, who in so fit a time for war, inciteth
your Majesty to enter into arms for the defense of the Catholic religion. O
most notable apprentisage of a royal Justice, and worthy of a most Christian
king, for is it not admirable, that in that age where in others are wont to
pass their time in pleasure and delights, moved thereunto by delicatenes,
faintnes of heart, you employ the same, not only generously but also happily.
To appease differences, to march forward in arms and to besiege the heretics
holds and strong places, and that not without the counsel of God, in whose
kingdom kings live: what? is it credible that in the beginning of your young
years, you should be endowed with so hautie a heart as to undertake so great
and difficult a matter, and that the dangers and difficulties that have bin the
cause to daunt other men's hearts, should move and incite you to so great a
courage? Enjoy (dear son) that renown which your famous name has obtained,
and follow that God which fights with you, to the end, that as at this
present every man esteems you to be the thunder bolt of war, and the
buckler of peace, you may be held and esteemed by all men, in time to come, the
praise of Israel, and the glory of all the world. From the most high top of our
Apostolical dignity, whereunto the hand of God has brought us, (although
unworthy of so great a charge) with our whole spirit and affection we assist
your arms, and by our frequent and daily prayers prepare divine remedies for
you. And although we doubt not but that you will still with constancy persist
there in even unto the end, being incited thereunto by us, and as by your virtue
you have undertaken the same, we hope you will not take it in evil part to be
more and more encouraged therein by good exhortation, that it may apparently
be seen that we have a great care of you and of the advancement of the true
religion, and that we will give place to your glory, you are hitherto much
bound unto God, for his great liberalties, and as we hope and wish both
together; you shall be much more bound unto him for the same in time to come,
and it is to be believed that your spirit so highly elevated and endowed with
celestial Doctrine, and not with the precepts of humane wisdom, as you have
always well understood, that the foundations of kingdoms are grounded and set
upon the truth of one Orthodoxall faith, and that as long as God is not the
keeper and preserver of towns, never any principality can assuredly subsist.
Judge with how much fidelity they will defend your royal throane that have
cast the Saints out of their temple., and that have attempted the means to
extirpe them out of the number of the blessed, yea and out of Paradise, who
with an impious temerete condemn the institutions of our ancestors, the
customs of kings, the decrees of Popes, and the ceremonies of the Church:
these are the troubles of our ancient common wealth, and the reproaches of
France, that God, Emperor of kings has reserved you to extinguish them in your
young years. Know that all Europe that hangs in suspense of the event of your
war, hope shortly under your co^duction to set up their sails upon the Ocean,
to the end that that place which serves for the Seat and defense of rebellious
heretics, may serve for a mark unto the posterity of your great victories. We
are certainly persuaded, that neither fear, nor inconstancy can nor will
divert you from your enterprise: nevertheless, always remember, that the Saints
whose honor men defend, aid and assist that Prince, that undertakes the
protection of religion, and with him fight as companions in the war: you
shall not, without doubt fail of God to be favorable unto you in the waters,
where at other times, he made the land firm as it had bin dry ground, and
where the waters divided on both sides served as a wall giving passage unto his
army: From whence we may assuredly hope, that after you shall have established
an assured peace in your Realm, and overcome and vanquished the impiety that
raighneth therein, you may one day by your great victories, join the East and
the West together, imitating the glory of your ancestors, that yielded as great
honor unto the Popes exhortations as unto the commandments of God. Holy S.
Louis inuiteth you thereunto, whose name, as well as his actions, you bear and
imitate. The principal of your race inuit you thereunto, who in defending the
Apostolical authority, and enlarging religion, laid the good and assured
foundations of your royal house, follow (most dear son) the emament of the
whole world, the commandments of the father, convert your choler and
indignation toward those people that have not known God, to the end that in
heaven you may obtain the treasures of the divine mercy, whereunto, by our
Apostolical authority, with extraordinary affection we give our blessing.

Given in Rome in S. Maria mayor, under the Fishermans ring. 1621. the first
year of our Pontificat.
LETTRE ENVOYEE AV ROY, PAR NOSTRE SAINT Pere le Pape GREGOIRE XV. sur les
affairs de ce temps.



A PARIS. 1621.

A NOSTRE TRES CHER fills en Jesus Christ LOVYS XIII. Roy des Francois
tres-Christien.
GREGOIRE PAPE XV.
NOSTRE tres cher fills en Jesus Christ salut and nostre benediction
Apostolic.
Les hauts faicts de vostre valeur Royale, qui ont attire sur euxles esprits
des Chrestiens, aportent bien du contentement a nostre soing paternel parmy la
gloire de vos arms, and l'esperance de vos triomphes: car comme nous
considerons auec beau coup de regrers l'impiete des heretics croupissants en
certaines lieux sans peur and sans crainte: en d'autres exercans le corpse d'vne
cruelle domination, nous remercions maintenant le Dieu des armees d'auoir en un
temps si opportun pour la guerre, fait prendre les arms a V. M. pour la
defense de la Religion Catholic. Obel apprentissage d'vne Royale Milice, and
digne d un Roy Tres-Chrestien? Quelle merueille, que l'aage que les autres ont
accoustume de passer en jeux and delicer par vne certain mollesse and
faineantise, vous l'employez aussi genereusement qu'heureusement a appaiser les
differents, a conduire les armees, and assieger les places des heretics? and
le tout non sans le conseil de Dieu, au Royaume duquelvinent les Roys. Quoy?
est il croyable qu'aux premiers abbords de vostre adolescence vous ayez
entrepris un oeuure si releue and si difficile, and que les dangers and
difficultez qui ont arreste le course des autres, ayent incite la grandeur de
vostre courage? Iouyssez (tres-cher fills) de la renomee que vostre nom a
acquis, and suyuez le Dieu qui combat auec vous afin que comme maintenaut un
chacun vous, tient pour le fouldre de la guerre, and le bouclier de la paix,
vous soyez estime de tous a l'aduenir la louange d'Israel, and la gloire de
tout le monde.

Du plus haut sommet de nostre dignite Apostolic, ou la main dubou Dieu nous
a conduict, bien que indigne de ceste charge, nous assistons d'esprit and
d'affection vos arms, and par nos frequantes prieres, vous preparo^s les
diuins ramedes Et bien que nous ne doutions point que vous n'y mettiez la
derniere main auec heaucoup de constance, a ce inuit par nous, and comme par
vostre virtue vous auez entrepris, toutes-fois ne trouuez point mannais d'y
estre emflamme dauantage par exhortations, afin qu'il parroisse que nous sommes
soigneux du bien and de l'aduancement de la vraye Religion, and que nous
voulons donner lieu a vostre gloire. Vous estes iusqu'a ceste heure grandement
redeuable a Dieu de ses liberalitez, and comme nous esperons and souhaittons
tout ensemble, vous le serez bien dauantage a l'aduenir: and il est croyable
que vostre esprit si reuele and imbu a'vne celeste doctrine, and non point des
precepts de quelque sapience human, comme vous auez tousiours bien entendu
que les fondemens des Royanmes sont appuiez sur la verite d'vne Foy Orthodoxe,
and de fait tant que Dieu ne sera point gardien des villes, tamais aucune
principaute ne subsistera auec assurance. Que l'on judge auec combien de
fidelite defendront vostre siege Royal, ceux qui ont iette les Saints mesme de
leurs temples, and qui ont tente les moyens mesme de les oster du nombre des
bienheureux, voire du Paradis, ceux qui auec vne impie temerite condamnent les
Institutions de nos majeurs, les coustemes des Roys, les Decrets des Papes, and
les ceremonies de l'Eglise; ce sont les troubles de nostre Republique ancienne,
and les reproaches de la France, que Dieu Empereur des Roys vous a reserve pour
estre estaints durant le course de vos ieunes ans. Scachez maintenant que toute
l'Europe qui est en suspens de l'euenement de vos arms, attandde bien tossed
soubs vostre conduitte dresser ses voiles sur l'Ocean, afin que lieu qui sert
d'asile and de defense aux heretics rebels, serve a la posterite pour
marque de vos victoires. Nous scauons bien que ny la crainte, ny l'inconstance
ne vous destourneront iamais de vostre entreprise: souuenes vous toutesfois que
les Saints desquels on defend l'honneur, assistent au Prince qui prend la
protection de la religion, and combattent auec luy comme des compagnons de
guerre. Vous ne manqurez sans doubt d'auoir Dieu favorable sur les mesmes
caves don't autres foisil endurcit les flors soubs les pieds comme de la terre,
and don't les ondes diuisees deca and dela servants comme de murailes donnoient
passage a son armee: pour lors nous pourrons esperer asseureme^t qu'a pres
auoir mis en vostre Roiame un bo^ establisseme^t, and do^pte l'impiete quis'y
renco^tre, vous pourrez quelque iour par vos victoires ioindre l'Orient a
l'Occident imitant la gloire de vos ancestres, qui ont port autant d'honneur
aux exhortations des Papes qu'aux commandments de Dieu. A cela vous inuit le
tres-sainct Louys le nom duquel vous portez ausibien comme vous imitez les
actions. Les premiers de vostre race vous y connenient, lesquels en defendant
lauctorite Apostolic, estendant la religion, ont iette de bons and asseurez
fondemens de vostre Royalle maisons Suyueztres-cher fills, l'ornement du monde,
les commandments du pere Versez vostre colere and indignation sur les peuples
qui n'ont point cogneu Dieu afin que dans le Ciel vous acqueriez les thresors
de la divine misericorde a V. M. a laquelle par nostre authorite Apostolic
vous donons auec affection extraordinaire nostre benediction.

Done a Rome a saint Marie Maieur soubs l'anneau du Pescheur, 1621. l'An
premier de nostre Pontificat.

