The Muses, Neptune, Mars, and Mercury
Have set their rests up in low Germany.
A GENERAL HISTORY OF THE NETHERLANDS: With the genealogy and memorable acts
of the Earls of Holland, Zeeland, and west-Friseland, from Thierry of Aquitaine
the first Earl, successively unto Philip the third King of Spain: Continued
unto this present year of our Lord 1608, out of the best authors that have
written of that subject: By ED. GRIMESTON.

LONDON, Printed by A. Islip, and G. Eld. Anno Dom. 1608.



TO THE RIGHT NOBLE, AND MOST WORTHY OF ALL HONORS, AND ALL TITLES,
ROBERT Earl of Salisburie, Lord High Treasurer of England, etc. THOMAS Earl
of Suffolk, Lord Chamberlain to his Maiest^e.
MY most Honored Lords, The same form of Inscription wherewith once, and
first, I have sacred your Altars, I make it a Religion now to alter, since
there is nothing required in an Act of Piety, above Constancy; and with that
study I come now, to offer my second devotions. Your Honors indulgent
acceptance of my travels, in the French Story, has lent prosperous winds to
this my course in that of the Netherlands; wherein I have chiefly followed
John Francis Petit, an Author yet living, and residing in our London. What I
have added out of others (who respect the same Center) for the more perfection,
let it be your LL. prerogative, and theirs, that are experienced to pronounce:
I, that know, too much boasting a man's own pains, may spend prodigally, both
of his merit and modesty, am willingly silent. The reason of my undertaking
this work, is the same with the former, for that of France, want of being
employed in more fruitful services: In which I would rather it should be
understood my Fortunes fault, than mine, where the world must see, how
contented I am to labor in the hard and rough quarries. But your Honors, when
you please, may redeem me, not to a course of more ease (I affect it not) but
of more use. To which, since I have vowed my self your LL. already, I will not
now iterate the vow, as if I thought not my self then believed; but with
honest perseverance of my duty, expect your favor. And for your Honors,
since nothing can be added to things perfect, and at their height, my next wish
is, That Heaven will ratify them, and make what he has given to you, most
particular and lasting.

Your LL. devoted in all duty and service, EDWARD GRIMESTON.

John Francis Petit to the courteous Reader.
POlibius a Greek writer (courteous reader) says, that such as think a
private history sufficient for the knowledge of the general, do no less (in
his opinion) err from the truth, than he which seeing the members of a goodly
creature divided, does thereby judge of his perfection: but if you take these
distinct and divided parts, and make it a perfect creature, giving it life and
form, and then show it him again, without doubt he will confess his own
error, and say he was like unto them that dream. True it is, we may have an
apprehension of the whole by the parts, but it is impossible to have any
certain knowledge. For my part, I do herein concur with Polibius: and say
moreover, that he which thinks to understand perfectly the modern story of
any country or state, without knowledge of the ancient, drawn from the
spring, manners, and gestes of their ancestors, whose actions he pretends to
write, is like unto him, that says he knows a man, for that he has seen
him, or heard him speak, and yet cannot say of whence he is, what his parents
were, nor from whence he is descended: even so, whosoever reads the history of
any nation, without knowledge of their beginning, can never be fully satisfied,
seeing he has not laid a true foundation upon antiquity; for by the
comparison and resemblance of ancient deeds with the modern, and conferring
one with another, it is impossible but they should find out the truth, and reap
a singular content and profit by the history. So it falls out with me, who, for
my own delight, and to avoid idleness, having (in the heat of our wars, and
other domesticke employments) undertaken to write the history of these
provinces, I did think I could not be well satisfied with the knowledge of
la^e accidents which have happened since my time, for these sixty years
(whereof I have learned something from my deceased parents, and have been my
self an eye witness, for these forty years; and as the Poet says, Quaeque
ipsa miserrima vidi, and quorum pars magna fui:

Which miseries I wretch did see,
And bore a share in each degree)
if I had not endeavored to recover what I could of the antiquity of the said
provinces, both out of their own ancient chronicles, and from their
neighbors. If I have herein used a ha^sh style, it is no wonder* having not
therein labored to please the French, whose ears are something delicate; but
remembering the manliness of the nation to whom I write, I have left this
womanish niceness, seeking only those things which are proper and profitable
for the story. And in these latter times, I have been forced in many things
to follow the rough style of them of Arthois, Henaut, and of the court at
Brussels, in many declarations which I have been forced to insert, although
they differ much from the manner of French writers. Who so writes a history
should not (laboring to adorn his style) always strive to move men's
affections: neither is it fit to pursue with a continued style the miseries of
the time, by inuectiues or otherwise, the which is more proper for tragical
Poets; but he must make a true relation of men's words and actions: for a
history and a tragedy have contrary ends. In a tragedy (if the truth be not
apparent) we must strive to move the auditors, to hope, fear, care, anger,
joy, and such like passions, by conjectures: but in history, we must
endeavor by all means to relate sincerely whatsoever we will write of men,
and of their actions; for conjectures may serve the one, to entertain and
abuse the audience; and truth the other, for the readers instruction and
profit. I must confess it is a commendable thing in an honest man, to affect
his friends and his country, and to hate their enemies; but he that undertakes
to write a history, must moderate those passions with discretion, sometimes
commending his enemies when their deeds deserve it, and blaming his friends and
neighbors when their faults do merit it, least he be reproached with Paulus
Iouius, of whom it is written:

Dum patriam laudat, damnat dum Iouius hosts,
Nec malus est Ciuis, nec bonns Historicus.
Iouius in praising Italy, and baiting of her foes,
Against the laws of history (though not of duty) goes.
Believe me, as the body of any creature (when the eyes are out) is
unprofitable, even so, if truth wants in a history, the discourse is
fruitless: and therefore, when occasion is offered, they must not forbear to
blame their friends, nor to commend their enemies, neither yet think it light
or dishonest to praise them (upon good occasion) whom in some places they have
justly blamed; for it is not credible, that they of whom we write have always
done well, nor continually erred; we must therefore in our censures judge
gravely and uprightly of men's actions, seeing that truth is the life and soul
of a history, without the which (how goodly a gloss soever it carries) it is
but a fable. To comprehend then the modern with the ancient they shall find
here (not that I will put antiquity out of question, being impossible) for
the better understanding of the history of these provinces, a particular
deduction, wherein we entreat of all things (as far as we could recover) that
have past in the said provinces, whereby they shall receive a great
contentment, comparing the ancient with the modern times. I have begun with
the first institution of the earls of Holland, by king Charles the bald, where
we will set down orderly the genealogy and acts of the said earls, since
Thierry or Theodoric of Aquitaine, the first earl, instituted in the year
863, unto John of Henaut; the race of which Thierry having successively
continued from father to son, for the space of 563 years, ending with John
of Holland, the twentieth earl, son to that Floris, who was slain by Gerard
van Velsen: to which John of Holland, dying without issue, succeeded the said
John earl of Henaut his cousin, son to Alix, sister to William king of
Romans, great aunt to the said John of Holland, who died in the year, 1300.

And from the said John of Henaut unto cont William of Bauaria, the fifth of
that name, surnamed the frantic, son to the emperor Lewis of Bauaria, and
to Marguerite of Henaut, sister to William the fourth, who died without
children; which house of Henaut ending in the said Marguerite, it fell to that
of Bauaria, and had but four heads; all which together, ruled the said
countries of Holland, Zeeland, and Henant, but fifty and one years. In which
family of Bauaria (comprehending the said William the frantic, and the
countess Iacoba or Iaquelyne who died also without children) there were five
heads, which governed in all 82 years, unto Philip (called the good) duke of
Burgoignie, cousin to the said Iaquelyne; whose government, with duke Charles
the warlike his son, and that of Marie daughter to Charles, wife to
Maximilian archduke of Austria, continued but forty five years. After which,
that of the said Maximilian then emperor (as father and guardian to Philip of
Austria his son) of the said Philip having married Jane Queen of Castile, of
Charles the fifth emperor, and of Philip king of Spain last deceased, unto the
year 1582, when as Philip (for the causes specified in this history) was
declared by the general Estates of the united provinces, to be fallen from the
sovereignty and government of the said earledomes and countries of the union,
are ninety three years: and since the said year 1582, unto this year 1608
(Arthois, Henaut, and other provinces, being voluntarily fallen from the
general union) the said provinces of Holland, Zeeland, and others, have
governed under the authority of the said general Estates and the private
governments (having united unto them Gueldres, Zutphen, Vtrecht, etc.) of
William of Nassau prince of Orange, etc. and of prince Maurice his son. All
which work, we have proportionably divided into sixteen books, and continued
it unto these times, as you may see by the course of the history; from out of
which (besides the contentment thereof) the reader may gather good
instructions, as well for matter of religion and government, as for exploits of
war, and most necessary for all sorts of men to know at this present time,
especially for such men as are employed in the managing of any of these three
estates: For seeing that men do judge of al things, either by rules and
precepts which are taught in schools, or by examples and presidents, which
hystories do furnish, precepts without examples making no deep impression, nor
moving the affections, it shall be always good, yea and very necessary, to
confer (in the managing of affairs) the examples of things past with the
present time, that we may learn by others, what we are to do, or not to do,
to embrace or avoid in the whole course of our lives. For as the poet says,

Happy is he that learnes to gather wit
By others harm, yet never feels it.
For this consideration a history was called by the ancients, The testimony
of time, the light of truth, and the mistress and myrrour of man's life; for
that in the person of another, she gives instructions to all those that will
vuderstand how to govern themselves well. They are well worthy of
commendation, which have endeavored to register the memorable acts of time, and
to impart them to posterity. And although that this age has much restrained
the liberty of writing, which did shine in the ancient Chroniclers, Froisart,
Monstrelet, Comines, etc. yet will I never abandon my self to flattery, nor
fear (two plagues in a history, and torments to the mind) but will make my
discourse free and true. I must confess, that in some actions which are to be
blamed, I give my censure, as in like manner I spare not to commend those
actions, whereas virtue, religion, and valor, do shine: but in matters which
are indifferent, I suspend my judgment, rather than to engage my self among
so many difficulties, for there must needs be a confusion; whereas passion
rules. Truth is my North star (and yet it may be, that some now living, and
posterity hereafter, will not give credit to some things which we write, the
which in another age (better I hope than ours) will be held too cruel,
barbarous and inhumane; the which notwithstanding were most true, yea more
execrable and abominable than we have described them: desiring rather to
moderat with modesty, than to aggrauat any thing. In the progress of this
history, I do not follow the Dutch Chronicle, the difference of the style, and
the manner of writing French in matter of history (disagreeing much from the
Dutch) will not allow it: besides, there are so many idle and ridiculous things
in it, more like the Romant of the Rose, or the Legend of Lies, than a true
history, as I have purposely omitted them, and as I hear they are rased out
of the last impression of the ancient Dutch Chronicle. And whereas they shall
find the deeds of so many brave old warriors, earls of Holland, with other
noblemen, and knights, so barely related, in regard of those at this day, and
as the modern French writers describe them; they must not accuse our diligence,
who have searched for them as curiously as we could; but the negligence and
ignorance of ancient writers, who have showed themselves idle, and too too
careless: or else the injury of the time which has suppressed them; or it may
be the wars, which have wasted and consumed them. And for that in these later
times, since the emperor Charles the 5 there have been so many writers of
diverse religions, every one writing according to his passion, or according to
the affection which he bare to them of his religion, I have endeavored to hold
a mean. I will not say, but such as are most passionat, may sometimes discover
what religion I hold most pure (for I neither can nor ought to deny it before
men, no more than before God) yet has it not (in matter of truth) made me to
incline more to one part than to another, to publish or suppress the virtues
and vices, the honor and disgrace of one or other. And for that the ground of
our civil wars is written too partially (or rather inuectiuely) by some; as by
Surius the Chartrous monk, by Ersingerus, vander Haec, Iansonius Documensus,
and others, built upon a mere accusation of rebellion and disobedience to the
king of Spain, and his edicts, touching matters of religion, and the
Inquisition; as those words of rebellion and disobedience comprehend much in
them, and have a large interpretation. But the better to inform posterity,
who (it may be) will not be so partial, as to interpret all things past, to
rebellion and disobedience, as these partial men have done. I have bin very
large in the description of the original and first spring, together with the
causes and motives of our troubles, and of the wars which have followed against
the Spaniards, and their adherents, by the insertion of many declarations,
which I have thought very necessary for this subject, for the explaining
thereof. I have also of purpose extended my self (to serve for an instruction
and direction to posterity) in the description of the most remarkable sieges
of towns of either part, as of Harlem, Leyden, Alcmar, Hulst, and Bomel, by the
Spaniards; of Middlebourg, Gheertruydenbergh, Steenwic, Groningue, and others,
by the Estates: in which sieges have b^ene seen the dexterity, diligence,
industry, directions, errors, and omissions of the commanders of either
army. I would also entreat the courteous Reader, not to stumble, nor take
exception at the terms of Roman Catholics and Protestants, which I use,
speaking of the one or the other: Persuading my self, that the Catholics will
not except against this epithete Roman: as also they of the Religion (who
pretend it to be reformed) will not reject the name o^ Protestants, seeing they
not only pretend it to be reformed, but protest and maintain with all
vehemency, that it is so, be they of the confession of Ausbourg, or others,
howsoever they will call them, be they Luthe^ans, Caluinists, or Zuinglians, as
well of Germany, France, England, the Netherlands, as of other places,
disagreeing from the Romish Religion: all which indifferently, for the above
named reason, we call Protestants. As for that which concerns the war, armies,
exploits, enterprises, surprises stratag^ms, incounters, embasies, sieges of
towns, battles, victories, and routs (although I have seen and learned
something, as well in France as in these parts) I leave the censure of the
style and phrase (which I have used to describe them) to commanders, colonels,
captains, and other soldiers, who happily know them better, and have a better
military method to write them, than my self, who I hope will courteously
supply my defects.

THE TRANSLATOR TO THE READER.
COurteous Reader, it is now almost two years since I published to your view
the Inventory of the French History: I must confess, it had been more safe
to have made that work the period of my labors, and not to have undergone a
new task of greater difficulty. But by the entreaty of some (whom I much
respect) and mine own desire to give my countrie-men some more contentment,
and to acquaint them (that have not read it in the French) with the whole
history of the Netherland wars, as well as with the estate of France, I have
thus venturously once again put forth from a safe port, into an ocean of
dangers, and undertaken the translation of this history of the Netherlands.
Whereunto I was the more encouraged, by the gracious reception of my noble
patrons, and the kind testimonies of approbation of many courteous and well
minded gentlemen, who have bin content to wincke at my weakness and defects
in that work, and to allow of mine endeavors: yet will I not arrogate any
thing that was praise worthy in that story unto my self, nor attribute the
worthiness of those authors to mine own merit, who could both grace
themselves in writing French, and me in teaching them to speak English. I
doubt not but some will think it a great indiscretion to meddle with this
subject, whereas the sovereignty and prerogative of a mighty monarch in those
united provinces is called in question. I confess it were so, if it were
originally done by me; but being written in the French, Italian, Latin, and
Dutch, I thought I might without any imputation impart it to our own nation,
which has had so great a share in those warr^s. I assure my self it will be
diversely censured, as men stand affected to the cause; some (I doubt not) will
read it, to be satisfied of the true causes and proceedings of this long and
bloody war; some I presume, will curiously search out but for matter of
exception, and not instruction; and I fear some will be so transported with
passion, and out of charity, as whereas before they would have exchanged a
friendly good morrow with me, they will now shun my company, and take me for
a capital enemy to their cause. But good God, how are they abused in their
conceptions? I would entreat those men to remember, that I neither take upon me
to be an advocate to plead the cause, nor a champion, to defend it by arms;
but am only a bare translator, who am tied to my teacher, and cannot exceed
the limits prescribed me by mine author. There is nothing of mine own in this
work; neither have I added nor kept back anything that was material for the
subject: and I may lawfully protest, that I have been free from passion,
without aggrauation or detraction, having used all the moderation I could in
the relating of any thing, where there might appear either spleen or
affection. As for the truth of the history, and the integrity of mine author,
I must refer you to John Francis Petit, who must plead for himself: and
therefore I have planted his own preface or apology in the front of this
book; where you may both see his reasons for the course of the history,
beginning with the earls of Holland and Zeeland, and read his protestations
for his sincerity, in the faithful relating of all things that have passed
during the wars. If this may not suffice for his justification, he himself
is yet living here in London, and ready to satisfy any doubt that may arise. I
must advertise the reader, that to make this history more perfect, and to
continue it unto these times, I have been forced to use some other helps, and
especially of Emanuel Demetrius, who has been very careful and industrious
to congest all things which concern this subject; for the effecting whereof,
he has had very good and great intelligence. I have also been beholding to
monsieur Hottoman, a french gentleman, who at my late being in France, did
furnish me with sundry excellent discourses, concerning this history: And I
have had some observations in written hand, by the means of that worthy
knight, sir Peter Manwood, the which were gathered by sir Roger Williams, when
he first bore arms under Julian Romero, a Spaniard in the great Commanders
time: all which I have presumed to insert, knowing they will be a grace and
beauty to the story, and a benefit to the reader: And therefore I hope I
shall be excused, if I have borrowed a little of the laws of translation,
seeing it belongs unto the subject, and is but a supply of that which my author
wanted. My design was, to make it a particular History of the Netherlands,
wherein I have not willingly inserted any thing, which does not directly
concern the prince or the provinces. If you shall find any thing related here,
which you have formerly read in the French Inventory, as the donation of the
Netherlands to the Infanta, the death of the king of Spain, the combat of
Briaute, etc. I pray you consider, that they do chiefly belong unto this
subject, and were drawn out of this original.

But leaving the subject and the author, I must be a suitor unto you for my
self and the Printers: my first suit shall be, That in reading of this
history, you will not expect the succinct style of John de Seres, nor the
fluent discourses of Peter Matthew, but (being written by a soldier, and, as he
himself confesses, in harsh unpolished Wallon French) you will accept thereof
in this course English habit, being bare, and without ornaments of Rhetoric;
my chiefest care and study having always been, to enrich it with good
matter, for their better instruction which are desirous to learn. I must
confess my style is harsh and plain, for so is my authors: Besides, I have
been forced to use the help of a harsh translator, for some things, out of
the Dutch tongue, the which (being surprised with the shortness of time) I
have been constrained to insert, being not so exactly reformed as I could have
wished. Which defects of mine, with all others committed at the press (the
which must needs be many in so great a volume) I must entreat you to supply
with your judicious reading, and to censure favorably. I must also crave your
patience for a misprision in the Titles: for being my self at court, and
absent from the press, the Printer has continued the earl of Leicesters name
in the Title, long after his death; and has forgotten to set prince Maurice
his picture in his due place: the which is but an offense to the eye, but no
alteration in the subject. My last suit unto you is, in respect of the verses
under every picture, I must confess, they were out of my element, neither was
I willing to trouble my self therewith, being oppressed with the shortness of
time, and the greatness of this work: I referred them to the Printers care,
who (being no good poets themselves) have employed one, which has scarce made
good rhyme of many of them. Our joint suit is, That if the rhyme please you not,
you would be satisfied with the reason: or at the least (being not pertinent to
the matter) pass them over as blanks. And so, wishing you as much content in
the reading, as I have had care to give you contentment in the writing, I rest,

Yours ever, E. G.

A CHRONOLOGY OF THE
First, of the beginning of the inhabitants, the situations, greatness, and
ancient manners of those provinces.
THe Batauiens or Hollanders had their first beginning from the Hermodures, The
first beginning of the Batauiens.


The chief cause why these Hermodures Batauiens were chased from their first
country and habitation, was, that in the country where they did first use to
inhabit there was a river Battus or Batton, and his brother Zelandus (according
Mattion, whereupon the Zeelanders are called Mattiaques) sons to the king of
Catthes, being fallen into the hatred of their mother in law, who (by their
fathers sufferance) did them all the disgraces she could, yea sought to poison
or murder them; to avoid these ambushes, they left their fathers country, and
came down unto this island within the Rhine, the which prince Battus called
Battauia, of his own name the which is Holland. His brother Zelandus or
Mattion, past on with his train, and retired himself into the extremities of
the islands of the Rhine, the which in like manner he called Zeeland, of his
own name, or else of his other name, the Mattique land, the which is the
county of Zeeland: in which quarter he continued his triffique to sees and
make salt, as they do yet use at this day in all the islands of Zeeland: In
one of the which islands, since called Walchren, he caused Metellus his father,
the which The foundation of Middlebourg.
he called Metell^burgum, which is the famous town of Middlebourg in Zeeland,
and the chief of the county.

We find that there were two other Battons, one a Germane, and the other of
Dalmatia. The Batton Desidtate, who moved the people of Dalmatia to rebel
against the Romans, seeing them too much oppressed with tributes and exactions;
making such sharp war against them, as Tiberius the emperor asked him on a
time, why he had caused the people to take arms? to whom he answered boldly,
that the Romans were the cause thereof, for that in stead of sending them
shepherds with good dogs to preserve them, they had sent the^ wolves which
devoured them.

As for Batton the Hollander, although he did inhabit the country which lies
betwixt the rivers of Rhine, Wahal, Lecke, and Issel, yet (as it commonly falls
out in all barbarous nations) we cannot rightly describe his successors, no
more than of Mattion or Zelandus his brother.

Prince Battus having settled his abode in Batauia, he began to build a town,
which in succession of time was grown great and mighty; the which by his name
he called Batauodurum, The foundation of Wyckterduyrstede.
at this present Wyckterduyrstede, three leagues from Vtrecht, and of that
dioces. Since in the time of Hungerus the 11 bishop of Vtrecht, it was quite
destroyed by the Danes and Normans. It is at this day but a small town,
whereas in auncieut times it was wont to be 3 miles in circuit, and to have
six and thirty parish churches: there is a goodly castle, whereas the bishops
of Vtrecht were wont to keep their court. The river of Rhine was wont to The
Rhine.
Woerden, Bodegraue, and Leyden, unto Rhinbourg and Catwycke, whereas it enters
into the British ocean: but eight hundred years since (as it sometimes
happens) a strong north-west wind, drove the river backward; so as the
countries of Holland, Vtrecht, and a good part of Gueldres (especially the
Betuve) were subject to inundation. The inhabitants of these countries did
agree together to give it a more oblique or crooked course, turning it from
Wycke, and causing it to enter into the Lecke (being then but a small river,
but by the flowing in of the Rhine, it is now grown great and spacious, as it
is at this day) bounding it in on every side with great banks or rampars,
which they call dikes, unto the town of Schoonhouen in Holland, entering a
little farther off, at Crempen, into the old river of Meuse, two

The river of Wahal, the first point of the Rhine (which seperates it self at
the fort of G^uensweerd) The Wahal.
has from that place, the towns of Nymeghen, Tyel, Bomel, and many goodly
castles, unto Louvesteyn, whereas it ioynes with the Meuse, passing by the
towns of Gorrichom and Vandrichom, one opposite unto another; which two rivers
fortify themselves at Gorrichom, with the river of Linghen, which comes out of
the Betuve, washing, as it passes, The Meruve.
growing straiter, it takes the only name of the Meuse, passing before
Rotterdam, Delfshauen, Schiedam, Vlaerdinghen, and Bryel, all good towns,
having goodly and rich havens, entering that way into the great ocean. All which
quarter, unto the towns of Gonde and Delf, with the Sturmers and Maeslanders,
is called south Holland. There begins another part of Holland, which generally
are called Catthes, whereas the Rhine (as we have said) was wont to have his
right course, and to enter into the sea at Catwyck; in the which are seated the
towns of Woerden, and Oudwater, the Rhinelanders, and their chief town
Leyden, of the which

In this island of the Rhine, after the Hollanders, Batauiens, and Catwyckers,
are the Kennemers, Cananifates, taking their beginning from the torrent of
Kennemer (which they call Kennemers beek) near unto Grauen-Mey, and extends
along to Harlem, which is the chief

After the Kennemers are the North Hollanders, or West-Frisons, beginning on
the North side, at Amsterdam, whereas in old time was the great town of
Veronna, the ruins whereof are yet to be seen, and near unto it is Alcmar, a
fair and pleasant town, then the Merchant Tornes of Horn, Enchuysen,
Medenblick, Eedam, Monikendam, and Purmerende; all lying upon the sea, with a
great number of good boroughs and villages. In which quarter the men are great,
mighty, strong; and hardy; as the Spaniards have sufficiently tried, in the
wars of the first troubles of the Netherlands, where they have bin often
beaten, and could never get any

All that we have spoken in general of Batauia, or Holland being well
examined, we shall How Holland is divided.
find five nations; that is, the Batauiens, lying beneath and above Gorrichom:
the Wilthes, under Dordrecht, with South-Holland: the Catwyckers, and
Rhinelanders, under Leyden: the Kennemers, or Cananifates, under Harlem: and
the West-Frisons, with the Waterlanders, which they call North-Hollanders: The
which notwithstanding are all of one name, and are generally called Hollanders:
and all these pieces and portions joined together in one body of an estate,
make the country of Holland.

Seeing we have discoursed somewhat of Holland, it shall not be impertinent to
speak somewhat Definition and properties of the river of Rhine.
of the Rhine also, which does embrace Holland, as it were betwixt her two
arms. We Rein, which signifies pure and nete; not for the pureness and
cleerenesse of her water, but as some will say, for the purity of the nuptial
bed, whereof the Heathens have made her judge: For such was their superstition,
as if they doubted a child was not lawfully borne, they did use to lay it upon
a targuet, and suffered it to drive down the stream; if it were adulterous,
it sunk, if lawful, it did float. The which Julian writing to Maximus the
philosopher, describes thus. Rhenus Germanus The Rhine in old time the judge
of Bastards.
iniurius non est, qui nothos infantes subsidere mergique aquis patitur, veluti
illiciti thori iustus ar^ter: quos vero legitimo conceptos semine cognouerit,
fluctuantes ^ndis offert, pauidaeque matrirestituit, reddens illi sospitem
prolem, ceu indubitatum casti atque integri connubij testimonium: the which
Galen, Naziansene, N^nius, and the poet Claudian do witness.

And although that the ancients before Julius Caesar's time, have known but one
gulf of the Rhine, which is that which was wont to be at Catwyck; yet after
that, Germani^us (going to fight against the Frisons) caused the channel to be
dug as far as Doesbourg in Gueldres, the which did fall into the river of
Issel: there is yet another, which runs near unto Campen, into the Zuydersee,
beginning his course at Issel-cort, betwixt the which and the gulf, are the
the towns of Doesbourg, Zutphen, Deuenter, Hattem, Campen, and many goodly
castles: for before they had cut off her course at Wickter-duyrsted, she had
two gulphs, the one which ran directly to Catwick, the other by one of her
branches, called the river of Wahal, the which ioynes with the Meuse at
Louestein, and so mingled together falls into the Meruve before Dordrecht, as we
have said, and runs into the British sea, near unto Bryele. And the third of
this

Some learned men make a question, whether Holland (for that it is environed by
the three A question, whether Holland be of Germany or of the Gauls*
gulphes of the Rhine, a German river) be a member of Germany, or of Gaul
Belgike. Among others, Raymond Marlian puts the Hollanders in the number of the
Belg^ke nations, yea he will have Batauodurum, which is Wyckter-duyrsted, to
be of Gaul Belgike. Doctor Adrian le Ieune, of Horn, using the testimony of
the ancients, of the limits of Rhine, does appropriat it unto Germany,
according unto the authority of Pliny, who does expressly number the Batauiens
among the Vbiens, Gurgemiens, and other islands of the Rhine, all people of
Germany. plutarch in Otho's life, says, That the Batauiens, among all the
Germans, are the most excellent in horsemanship, and does attribute the island
beginning at the town of Deuenter. Cornelius Tacitus, in the twentieth book
of his hystory, Bataui dum trans Rhenum agebant, pars Catthorum, seditione
pulsi, extrema Gallicae orae vacua Cornelius Tacitus his opinion.
cultoribus, simulque insulam Rher Rheni inter vada sitam, occupauere. Whereby
he frees that doubt, when he says, That the Batauiens did occupy the
frontiers of Gaul Belgike, being watered by the Rhine, and unpeopled: He
means the frontiers of Germany toward Belgia; for he adds, the Rhine (which
is a river of Germany) comprehending this island in her circuit. He says
moreover, That the Catthes which came out of Germany, have enjoyed this
island, not by the right of arms, but by a long and quiet possession. If
Tacitus then, in his book of the manners of the Germans, puts the Mattiaques,
which be the Zeelanders in the number of the Germans, how much more then should
the Hollanders be reputed of the appurtenances of the Rhine, and by
consequence of Germany: Of which controversy, that flood must needs be
Vibius Sequester, in his book of floods and rivers, where he says, Rhenus
Belgas a Germanis seperat. Tacitus does auerre the same, placing the Wahal,
which is the other branch of the Rhine, toward the South, upon the limits of
the Belgike coast: whereby we may see, that the frontiers of Belgia do not
extend any further than the Rhine: The which the author Panegerike to Maximion
Augustus does also teach, in these words, Rhenum videtur ipsa sic natura
duxisse, vt eo limite Roman a prouinciae ab imanitate Barbarorum vindicarentur.
Saint Ambrose says also in one place, Rhenus memorandi Romani Imperij murus S.
Ambrose his opinion.
aduer sum feras gentes. Pliny says also, That the soundest part of Batauia
has been cut off from Germany, by Drusus army (called, according unto
Tacitus, Cysrhenane, that is to say, beyond the Rhine) namely the Veluve, and
all the diocese of Vtrecht. Hereupon there may Claudius Ciuilis, a great
captain of the Batauiens, issued from the blood royal, speaking to Alpinus
Montanus, being come to persuade him to forbear to make war against the
Romans, when he said unto him in these words; En ego praesectus vnius cohortis,
and Cananifates Batauique exigua Gallorum portio, vanailla castrorum spacia
excidimus. Whereby, at the first sight, some one would say, that the Batauiens
and Cananifates, were a small portion of the Gauls: But you must understand,
that Montanus being known to Ciuilis to be a man apt to all innouations,
being a Gaul, who might assist him much in his designs, to draw him to his
party, knowing him to be a man of great authority among the Gauls, he used
this kind of speech; as if he would say, If I, who am chief of a colonie with
the Batauiens and Cananifates (who in respect of the Gauls are but a handful
of men) Charles the bald, king of France, had erected that country into a
county, and given it to Thierry, son to the duke of Acquitaine, seeing that
the said Charles was also emperor of Germany: And it is also most certain,
that the emperor Lewis his son, gave unto the said cont Thierry the
carledome of Zeeland: neither can it be read, that the earls of Holland Arian
le Ieune of Horn.

As there are two chief and principal means to lead a man to honor, and to
make Two principal means to win honor.
him famous; that is to say, eloquence, and prowess, or experience in wars:
reaping by the first the ornaments of peace, and by the second, avoiding the
dangers which grow by war. By the first point the Hollanders have never
gotten any glory, being heavy and dull among men of spirit: wherefore they
must attain unto this degree of honor (the gift of the tongue failing them)
and purchase it by the force of their arms, joined to their wisdom and
loyalty: for which cause they were admitted into the fraternity of the Roman
empire: and by the same means having made themselves to be redoubted and The
virtue of the old Hollanders.
have sought the way to honor. For proof whereof the Romans in old time did so
much honor the Batauiens, as they not only received them for companions (as
they have done other nations) but for their brethren and friends: the which
they did witness by marble tables set up in their Tacitus in his book of the
manners of the Germans, says, Omnium haru^gentium praecipui Bataui, insulant
Rheni amnis colunt, Catthorum quondam populus and seditione domesticain eas
seeds Tacitus testimony of the Batauiens.
transgressus, in quibus pars Romani imperij fierent. Manet honos and antiquae
societatis insigne: nam nec tributis contunduntur, nec publicanus atterit;
exempti oneribus and collationibus, tantumque in vsu praeliorum sepositi, velut
tela ac arma bellis reseruantur.

Julius Caesar was the first that did employ the Batauien horsemen, whom for
their valor and great force, he thought to be fit for the wars, whereof he
raised some bands, as he says in the 7 book of his French wars. Labor
antibus iam suis Germanorum circiter quadring entos submittit, quos ab initto
secum habere instituer at, horu^ impetum Galli sustinere non potuerunt, atque
in fugam coniecti, multis amissis se ad agmen receperunt. Behold how Caesar
calls the Batauiens Germans. Germanos (seeing the Saxons have been always
enemies to the Roman emperor, until that Charlemaine did subdue them) this
should not be referred to the Batauiens only, but to the Frisons, Esterlings,
and other people lying upon the sea coast, as far as the river of Elbe, whom to
avoid the confusion of the diversity of names, Caesar did generally name
Almanes; for we must not doubt but in these Germane horsemen of the Romans,
there were some of Cleues and Gueldres also (the which were called Sicambres)
confining also upon the Rhin. As for the Frisons there is no difficulty, but
they were so, being ordinarily taken for Batauiens, as well as the Batauiens
for Frisons, by reason of their proximitie and neighborhood; and that all of
them in that time did not acknowledge any one but the empire: for Strabo says,
That the Northern people, and those which inhabit the Strabo.
Dion Niceus, when he says, That Augustus Caesar had a Dion Niceus.
choice band of horsemen (which were called Batauiens) the which he employed
against Marc Anthony, whereof he made squadrons apart, whom he did allow in
sign of honor, and for their merits, to carry riding rods in their hands,
after the manner of captains. Orosus in his sixth book does witness that with
the help of these Batauien horsemen (which by a general term he calls Germans) he
subdued the Gauls, which were co^spired against the Romans. Plutarch in Othoes
life, Plutarch,
says, That Varus Alphenus captain of the Batauiens (the which were these
excellent Germane horsemen) brought them to serve this emperor. And by the
laws and military orders of the emperor Adrian, the old and new Batauien
horsemen were put in the rank of the ensigns Palatins, Caesar's person, as also
the Mattique Zeelanders, both old and new, were reputed among the Palatin ayds.
Tacitus reports, that Domitius Corbulo led the light horsemen of Batauia into
Capadocia against the Persians. Suetonius in the life of Sergius Galba says,
that the Germans (by which word he would generally call the Batauiens,
Cananifates, Frisabones, Suetonius.
Mattiaques, and others of their confines) were appointed as archers to guard
the first emperors; whereof there is an old epitaph found. Hilarious Neronis
Caesaris corporis custos, natione Friso, vixit annos trigintatres.

Tranquillus describes how well the emperor Galba entreated the Batauien army
which was sent into Alexandria by Nero, to pacify some trobles, showing thereby
howmuch he did esteem them, and how curious he was of their health. Germanicus
Caesar committed the rereward of Carioualde a Batauien captain made his valor
apparent above all the rest, dying after his horse had been killed under him,
having his body covered with arrows.

Tacitus in his 17 book writes, That Vitellius, having caused Claudius Ciuilis
to be put in prison (being one of the Batauien captains) for some mutiny,
suffered him to depart free, fearing, that if he should have punished him, this
nation would have risen against him, being then The brave exploits of the
Batauiens.
eight cohorts or bands. He says also that the Batauiens with their squadrons,
had always the point in those battles which the Romans had against the
English men and Tongres, to the end that by their example the rest of the army
might be encouraged to fight well: and that the Batauiens drew their enemies to
fight by skirmishes: yea, near unto Plaisance, when as

The Batauiens were excellent swimmers, making no difficulty, either armed or
unarmed, Tacitus says, Batauorum auxiliariorum The Batauiens good swimmers.
open, Julius Agricola, tentatam antea (sedinfoeliciter) Monam Britanniae
insulam in deditione accepit: quando non class aut nauibus insulam ingressi,
sed patrio nandi vsu, quo se pariter and equos and arma regunt, difficultatem
omnem superauere, depositis in littore sarcinis, quum obstupefacti hosts
mentem oculosque in classem nauesque intenderent.

Dion Niceus says, in another place, That the Batauiens horsemen, which served
the emperor Adrian against the Hongarians, were armed with all pieces, and that
having past the river of Istra, they did so terrify them, as they were forced
to submit themselves, and to acknowledge the emperor. Tacitus says moreover,
That the Romans being put once to rout, Claudius Ciuilis being known (for that
he was blind of one eye) being assailed of all sides with their arrows, Drusus
making war against the Cherusques, had at a low water past the strait of the
river of Ems (at this present called the Dullard) the Batauiens making the
rereward, swimming over during the ebb, could not retire in time, but that
many of them were carried away with the violence of the stream, and drowned.
Some will say, That the Batauiens made themselves fearful, by reason of the
brightness of their arms (as in truth it is a commendable thing in a
soldier) whereas contrariwise, by reason of the waters which they did usually
pass armed, they were more rustie than any others, not caring to keep them
clean, desiring rather to be valiant indeed, than to make a show with the
brightness of their arms.

The Roman writers, as Tacitus, Orosius, Suetonius, and others, write, That
among all the nations of Germany, the Batauiens (by the which was meant the
Hollanders and Frisons) have always been the most strong and able men, the
most valiant, courageous, and apt to arms; more vigilant, active, laborious,
and moderat in all their actions, than any other of their soldiers: whereof
the emperors, Otho, Galba, and Vitellius, had made trial, and had well
observed, when as they had them in their armies. They say also, That the
emperor Caligula, and Claudius (who built the castle of Britt^n, near unto
Catwick upon the sea (for there are two Catwicks) to serve as a lantern for
such as did sail from the river of Rhine into England) had most commonly the
Batauiens near unto his person, as the archers of his guard: Which emperors
would not assail England, without the Batauiens, for that Julius Caesar had
bin infortunat Vitellius did, when he made war against Otho, for when Varus
Alphenus, co^mander of the Batauiens (of that place which at this day they call
Alphen in Holland) went to succor him with his Hollanders he defeated Otho,
and put his army to rout. And in succession of time, the Batauiens were so
practiced in arms, so famous, and in such credit, as they persuaded
themselves, that they had power to create a Roman emperor, or to displace him.
Once the Batauien horsemen did vaunt, That they had done more at the last
battle, than any other nation, that did serve the Romans, having overthrown
fourteen legions, and taken Nero, vaunting, That all the fortune of the
battle had bin in their hands, and consisted in their forces: as if they would
say, That hereafter whosoever were on their side, should be sure to prevail.
These proud presumptuous speeches were troublesome to hear, and hard to
digest for the captains and soldiers of other nations, which were in the
camp. Whereupon Flaccus Valens, general of all the Roman army, resolved to
^perat the Batauiens (being such bold speakers) from the rest, to avoid all
jealousy and tumult: The which they of the army hearing, the legions began to
mutine, and to be discontented; for that they would take from them, the aid
and support of their valiant men (meaning the Batauiens) whom they could in no
sort want, seeing that whenever there were any matter of danger to be put in
execution, they were still the first no reason disioyne them, and to withdraw
them from their company: wherefore, if their general The Batauiens exempt
from tributes.
of the Romans, being only received to serve them in the wars with their
persons, arms, and horses, at the charge of the emperors, or the Roman
commonweal. So as this province of Batauia, and the rest adjoining, did serve
the Romans as a storehouse for men of war, in all occurrents, when they had
need; finding them both ready and resolute (as we may see at this day of the
Switsers) when as there was any cause to levy men, and that the Romans
demanded succors from all places under their obedience. Writing to the Gauls,
Germans,

That the Batauiens, by reason of their fierce count^nance, strange manner of
habits, and arms, were terrible, not only unto strange nations, but also unto
the Romans themselves, it appears by these verses of Martial, in the time of
the emperor Domitian.

MARTIAL. Sum figuli lusus ruffi persona Bataui,
Quae tu derides, haec tim^t ora pater.
This potters clay presents the Dutch; and know,
Your fathers feared them, though you scorn them now.
This was spoken by the image of a Hollander, made of potters earth, the which
a citizen of Rome had caused to be set before his house, whereat the children
in the street did make a jest, and yet their fathers were afraid to look on
them. He did paint him red, for that the Batauiens as well as the Germans, were
delighted in that color; the poets (among others, Silius Italicus) giving them
the epithet of Auricomes, that is to say, golden locks. And if by nature they
had not their hair somewhat red or flaxen (the which Pliny, in his 2 book
and 78 chapter, says, does happen by reason of the temperature of the air,
and that their children, both sons and daughters, do usually go, even unto
this day, bare headed) they made them red, or yellow, of pilas Mattiacas, and
the lie, spumam Batauam, as the said Martial says in his Epigrams. MARTIAL. Et
mutat Latias spuma Bataua comas.
The Dutchmans ointments dye the Italian locks:


And by reason of the fiery force which is in the ashes, whereof the lie is
made, they gave it an epithete of Caustique, that is to say, burning, by these
verses. MARTIAL. Caustica Teutonicos accendit spuma capillos.
With Caustique drugs the Dutchmen scald their hairs.


The which the Romans did so imitat, after the example of the Batauiens, as the
emperor Antonius was not ashamed to put on a periwig ofred hair, to imitat the
color of the Germans, according to the saying of Herodian, as in like manner
Domitian did, as Martial writes. Tacitus writes, That the Germans and Batauiens
had blew eyes, and shining or flaming hair, as I^al does witness.

IVVENAL. Cerulaquis stupuit Germani lumina, flauam
Caesariem, and ^adido torquentem cornua cirro.
Who wonders at the Germans when he sees
Their danke flame-coloured curles, and blew did eyes.
And withal, they did bind up their hair in trusses like horns. Vitellius
being general of the army to the emperor Nero in Germany, the Batauiens and
Cananifates being in Gaul, being Ciuilis writ unto them, and countermanded
them. And as in marching they came near unto the troops of Flaccus Ordeonius
(one of the commanders of the Roman army) they gave them to understand, That
for certain reasons they were resolved not to serve the Romans any more, or
else they would have double pay, demanding a supply of horsemen, the which they
said were much diminished in subduing the Bourguignons and Auuergnacs; and
above that, the honorable reward which Vitellius had promised them, else they
would never go any more to Rome, nor serve the Romans: the which they spoke at
the instigation of their captain Ciuilis, that they might have some occasion
to return home, having served above twenty years continually, without seeing
of their houses and families. Ordeonius refusing to give them leave, would have
them to serve still. But the Ciuilis, to do as he should command them: the
which Ordeonius seeing, he writ unto Herenius Gallus, governor of Bonne, lying
upon the Rhine, in the country of the Vbiens (which now is the diocese of
Cologne, being within four leagues of it) that he should cut off the Batauiens
passage, and that he would charge them behind, so as not any one of them should
return into his country. The Batauiens, Catthes, Cananifates, and their
associats, had alredie sent an embassage unto Bonne, with letters of this
substance.

To captain Herenius Gallus health: We Batauiens, and our companions, require
you to The Batauiens letter to the governor of Bonne.
give us free passage to return into our country: we have no war nor hatred
against the Romans, for whose service we have so often shed our blood, and
exposed our lives: wherefore now that we are weary of the wars, and of
carrying of arms, we desire to go and see our dear country, and hereafter to
live in rest, if no man hinder us; in which case we must make our way by force.

Those of Bonne having a desire to charge them, and to stop their passage,
Herenius their governor, The Batauiens get a great victory.
sent forth a legion of three thousand men, with a great number of peasants of
the country of Treues, trained up in arms. Those like men greedy of spoil,
sallied out by all the ports of the town, to affront the Batauiens, being
very few in number, in regard of them that came to assail them (the Batauiens
showing their ancient courage and valor, joining so closely together, as they
could not force them in any part) but the Batauiens, without fear, and with a
wonderful resolution, charged this great multitude of Bonne, with their small
troop, whom The Batauiens habits.
use to wear a cassock, and a cloak upon it, made fast with a great button of
gold or silver, the cassock being close to the body, and a thin pair of
breeches, being plain down unto the knee, so as under the cloak you might see
the proportion of all the members of their bodies. Those which did inhabit
along the sea coast, were covered with the skins of wild beasts, wherewith the
country at that time (being full of woods) did abound: but the women wore
linen kerchiefs, The women's habits.
The Virgins estate.
did not marie if they were not pure virgins; and if any one were corrupted,
how rich, fair, The manner of their marying.
loyal. The day of their marriage, the husband was wont to offer a yoke of oxen
to plowe withal, a horse bridled and sadled, a target and a sword for the
wars; with which gifts the marriage was confirmed in presence of the father,
mother, kinsfolks, and friends. The bridd did learn thereby, that she must
bear and endure with her husband whatsoever happened, and that she came unto
him to be an aid and companion in all travels, voyages, and dangers, and to
live and die with him, if need were in war; yea in battle. The mothers did
nurse their babes with their own breasts, being a great reproach unto them to
put them The Batauien^ great drinkers


They were accustomed to assemble once a month to hold a council touching the
affairs of the country, where every one might speak his mind freely; whereof
the prince or governor, with the nobility and wise men gave resolution, not
by authority or sovereign command, but only by persuading the people with
good and lively reasons: if the action or resolution did please, they would
presently lift their swords above their heads, flourishing and slashing one
against another: if it did not please them, their exclamations and murmurings
did witness their disauow. In this assembly every one might make his
complaint, and call his adverse party, to have it concluded there, were it to
life or death, or otherwise ciuilly or Their manner of fighting for their
liberty and country,
children spectators, to be witnesses of their valors, for that they held
them to be their best witnesses; from whom they received most honor. After
the battle they did run unto their mothers and wives, to show their wounds,
and to suck out the blood with their mouths, rejoicing that their children and
husbands had fought so valiantly. The wives would stand by their husbands
during the battle, exhorting and encouraging them to fight well for their
liberty and country: so as many times they did win goodly battles, which
otherwise it may be they had lost, if the women had not animated them with
words. And for this cause The estimation of the women in Holland.


The sumptuousnes and wealth of the countries of Holla^d, Zeela^d, Frisela^d,
Vtrecht, Oueryssel, The commodities and traffic of these countries.
and Groningue, all which in old time were reputed Batauiens or Mattiaques,
witness sufficiently their pleasant situation, and the great commodities which
do daily arise by their commerce and traffic, which makes them so to
prosper. First, there are in them many little hills may travel in summer by
wagon, and in winter in sleds on the ice, from one town unto another. The
rivers and fishing.
as salmons, trouts, eeles, and other sorts; the which they powder up in
barrels, and send into foreign countries. These provinces have goodly, great,
strong, and well peopled towns, well walled, flanckt and fortified to endure
great sieges, many borough towns (whereof the Hage where the court of Holland
is resident, excels) villages, castles and forts. The people are very neat and
cleanely in their apparel, be it woollen cloth, linen, or silk, the which
is now more frequent there than ever: there is not any petty clarke of aband,
but he wears velvet, satin, taffata, and silk stockings (but all at the
poor soldiers charge.) The houses within are decked and trimmed with all
sorts of moueables, so as you shall not see them more neatly drestvp, nor
better accommodated in any country of the world. They are also very The
provinces have there mines richer than any other. Herrings and other fish.
Horses and other cattle. Butter and cheese.
of another sort, and of greater revenue, the which exceeds all other traffic
and commerce: out of the which there rises such a great gain, as it is not to
be valued. The first is the exceeding gain, they make of herrings, and of all
sorts of fish dry and salt, which they send into Their firing.
the which is nothing but mudde, they cast them upon the land, and having cut
them in equal proportions, they let them dry, treading upon them with bords,
until they be very firm; then cutting them four square, they lay them upon
hie heaps like a pyramides, packt in such sort as the sun may pierce from the
top to the bottom, and the wind through them on all sides, which makes them to
dry, and then they lay them in garrets, and barnes which lie open to the wind
and sun; after which they are carried by boats through all Holland, Zeeland,
and into Brabant. They have another kind of turffe, which they dig out of the
earth

The nuptial chastity was in old time so strictly observed there, as if a
woman were found in adultery, they did not put her to death (as at this day,
how great soever the crime be, they Nuptial chastity of the ancient
Hollanders and Frisons.
put not any woman to death in some parts of Friseland, but keep them in
perpetual prison) but (in sign of ignominy and reproach) they did cut of the
tresses of their hair, which the

Having described Batauia, according to Petit, and set dowee the manners and
customs of Emanuel Demetrius has set it down in his History.

Holland is little, for that in length from Marsdiepe to the Meuse, it is but
eighteen Dutch The description Holland, of as now it is. Emanuel Demetrius.
miles, but if you should reckon from Heusden to the lands end, called Texel,
there is not any province in the Netherlands so long; and it is so narrow, as
wheresoever you be, you may go to the confines in half a day. A third part of
it is water, for that within the land it has five great waters, or seas, as
Harlem sea, Scheermeer, Bemster, the Waert, and Purmeer, being all full of fish.
This little country (being most part meadow ground) is preserved by many great
ditches, dammes, sluices, and water mils, besides the downs and sands on the
shore, which have been cast up by the waves of the sea. The cost and charges
to make and entertain these ditches, Costly water mils.
the water forcibly up, and casts it through diverse sluices into the sea.
These sluices are made in the ditches, and have double doors, which, when the
sea ebs, do open of themselves, and when it begins to flow, then they shut
again, either by the sea water, or of themselves: the charge whereof is so
great, as being set down, no man would believe, that such a country could be
able to maintain so great wars.

This province of Holland has above 30 walled towns, and 400 villages in it,
full of people, Their manner of living.
all living by sea faring, fishing, trade of merchandise, seething of salt,
making of ships, ditches, nets, and all necessaries for sea faring and fishing;
besides building, which is great and costly, and cutting of turffes, whereby
many thousand get their living. They have the sweetest meadows, and
fruitfullest cattle in the world, all kinds of wildfoule, and great store of
conies, hares, and dear. They have not corn enough growing to suffice the
fourth part of the inhabitants. The superfluity of their store they send into
all other countries. The butter and The reuenews of butter and cheese.
cheese only which they send abroad, besides their own store, amounts
yearly to above an hundred thousand pounds sterling. The women (being many in
regard of the men, who are much cousumed by the wars, and at sea) are so
industrious, as by their spinning and weauing The commendation of the women of
Holland.
traffic and travel from place to place, as well as their husbands, in their
absence, without any touch of lightness or dishonestie. The like of them are
not to be found in any country, being for the most part big, tall, fair, and
well proportioned, and so active, as they are more respected than women in
other countries, whereas jealousy, lightness, and pride, reigns, more than
simple honesty.

The Rhine runs through Holland and Zeeland, the which divides it self
into two The rivers of Holland and Zeeland.
great arms, the Wahal and Leck, which run into the sea, and the rivers of
Meuse and Scheld, which come out of France: all which rivers these provinces
can shut up and open when they

In time of war they bring in great revenues for conuoy and license money,
so as those Their abundance of shipping:
provinces have almost as many ships and barks, great and small, as there are
houses; by the traffic whereof they make their towns as it were sellers,
packhouses, warehouses, spice chambers, and staples for all kinds of wares,
which they transport in Summer toward the East, and in Winter to the West.

The great number of their ships, and sea faring men, may partly be gest by
this, that in the year 1587 there were above 600 Holland and Zeeland ships
arrested in the Sont, by the king of Denmark, besides others which went on the
Vly for Norway, and others that sailed into 27 hundred great ships, from two
hundred to eight hundred tuns burden a piece, which An incredible number of
ships in Holland, Zeeland, and Friseland.


It is well known, that every year (although there be no timber growing in
the country) The great number of ships that are yearly made.
there are above a thousand ships great and small built, fit to sail into the
ocean; the which one with another, some more, some less, cost betwixt a
hundred and two hundred pounds a piece: all which valued, with those that are
already made, would breed wonder and admiration in any man, and persuade him,
that this little country may well be able to withstand so potent an enemy;
and that Spain may well assure himself, never to bring this country under
his subjection again, being able to aid themselves against any power entering
by land,

You have now understood, the beginning, description, and situation of the
country of Holland, and of the inhabitants, Batauiens, Wilthes, Cathwyckers,
Kennemers, Frisons, and Waterlanders; of their valor, virtues, and manners,
commodities, and traffic, which they used in old time, and of the estate of
the province at this day: let us now discourse of Zeelan^, which is also a
county apart, and yet it has been ever under the earls of Holland.

As for the definition or ^tymologie of this word, it is very manifest, seeing
that this earldom consists of many islands, whereof those of Walchren,
Schouen, and Suytbeuelandt, are Descri^tion of Zeeland.
the chief among the rest, and the richest; wherefore they are rightly called
Zeelands, that is to say, countries of the sea: to give it the name of Zeeland,
who they say was brother to Batton, in my opinion is not allowable, being
doubtful whether there were any such Zeeland, if it were not he which gave
name to that quarter of Oueryssel, which is called Saland, from whence are
issued the old Saliens, and the town of Oldenzeel; and from the which some
(but without any ground) say that the Salique law of the French was derived;
which opinion is ridiculous. Besides, these three principal islands above
named, there are four more, as

Speaking in general of the county of Zeeland, we say, that it lies upon
that part of the ocean which is to the west and south-west, and behind, it lies
open to the north-west. This country has certain gulphes of the sea* as if
they were channels; and namely that of Flackee which diuides Zeeland from
Holland: to the south is the left arm of the river of Escaut, called the
Hondt, which parts this country from Flanders: and eastward is the right arm
of the same river of Escaut, the which retains her name still, and parts
Zeeland from Brabant: toward the west is the British ocean, which looks
toward England.

Some writers have held opinion, that these islands are part of those which
Caesar says were Caesar does testify) into the Meuse, where at this day that
part of the Escaut enters into the Meruve: Cornellis Batten says, that he
has seen manuscripts of great antiquity, which affirm, that about the first
year of our salvation, and sometime John Reygersberg, who has written a
little chronicle of Zeeland, and other authors, show that some of these
Islands, at the least those that are nerest together, were in old time united,
and made a firm body of a province (as it is likely) with Zeeland some times
^oyned to Flander.
Flanders, but they were separated by the fury and violence of the sea, which
made a new way or passage, in the year of Christ 938. Some have said that
there was but a little bridge of wood, yea, a planke to pass from Walchren
into Flanders.

That the Zeelanders be those which were called Mattiaques, Tacitus does
witness by these words, in his book of the manners of the Germans: Est in
e^dem obsequio Mattiacorum gens Batauis similis, nisi quod terrae suae solo ^c
coelo acrius animantur: (and in truth the air is much Lewis Guichardin in his
Belgicke description, seems to maintain, that the Mattiaques are not
Zeelanders, but that they were a certain people in the country of Hessen made
noble, for that they had hot fountains which they used for bathes. We have
already confessed* that the Batauiens and Mattiaques are descended from the
Catthes in Hessen; but Guichardin deceiues himself, interpreting these words,
Mattiacas pilas, to agree with hot bathes; for (as we have said before) these
Mattiaque pills or balls, were used to make the Zeelanders hair red, as Spuma
Bataua, which was a lie made of ashes by the Hollanders. It were an absurd
thing to say, that the Mattiaques, neighbors unto the Batauiens, should dwell
so far off, as in Hessen; unless that Guichardin did suppose that the
Mattiaques did remain still among the Catthes, when as Battus and his brother
Mattion,

For the better understanding of the continent of the country of Zeeland, it
shall be needful Many islands in Zeeland.
to describe all these islands particularly one after another, for that most of
them have bin transported by the tempest and inundation of the sea, from one
place unto another, and have changed their beds, sometimes one increasing, and
another diminishing, one was swallowed up, and another laid bare by the water;
as it happened in the year 1598, that they have recovered all the island of
Noortbeuelandt (in the which there were two towns, Cats and Cortgeen, and
seven or eight villages) the which was drowned in the year 1515, and has
remained under water, until the said year 1598, but now they have made up the
banks, and it

We will therefore discourse of those which hold firm, and are for the most
part discovered, whereof we find, that there are seven divided by an arm of the
river of Escaut, nere unto Seven chief islands in Zeeland, and their towns.
her gulf, where it enters into the sea, and are divided into 2 branches, that
is, the 3 which are Schouen, Duyuelandt, and Tolen, the which looking toward
the East, are called the East islands; and the other four, with another arm
which in old time was firm land, and joined unto the others and the island of
Walchren, for that they look toward the west, are called the Western
islands, the which are Walchren, Suytbeuelandt, Noortbeuelandt, and
Volfersdyke. In all these islands there are eight good towns, whereof six
have their deputies

All theso islands above named toward the sea, are defended and preserved by
the downs,

These banks (which we may rightly call rampars against the assaults of the
sea) are made How they make their d^kes or banks
of fat earth, or flagges, mingled with timber and great stones; on the outside
they are covered with great wispes of straw made fast in the fat earth; so as
a man would say, those dikes or

The charge to make these dikes is very great, for that every rod of twelve
foot, does commonly cost six pounds starling, which for every mile is eight
thousand and four hundred pounds; so as the outward dikes of Zeeland, being
forty miles in compass, amount to fifty six thousand pounds starling,
besides the yearly charges for the maintaining thereof: for the which they
take so good order, and with such proportion, as the proprietaries which owe
the land or pasture adjoining to those banks, are charged and taxed for the
entertaining thereof, which money must be speedily levied. For the preservation
of which banks, there are officers

The country of Zeeland is very fat and fertile for all kind of tillage, more
than for pasture, Zeeland fitter for tillage tha^ for pasture.
the which is nothing so ordinary there, as in Holland and Friseland: above
all, it yields good corn, especially the island of Zuytbeuelandt, where there
is very fair white wheat. They

It is prohibited to cut out this darinck within a certain distance of the
dikes or banks, lest that the country should in the end turn into ditches and
quagmires, but in certain places, whereas the ground is higher than in others,
where it is necessary to be taken; for that thorough the acrimonie and
sharpnes of the mould, it kills any good thing that grows upon the superfic^es
of the earth, and the trees which are planted there, when as the root comes to
that soil, prosper not: but being taken away, and by that means the ground
made lower, the soil proves good for pasture, tillage, or planting.

At the convocation of the ^states of this earldom, in times past there was
but one which did represent the whole nobility of the country, which is at
this present the marquess of la Vere and Flessingue, the inheritance of prince
Maurice of Nassau, governor of the said county, at this present is the court
of Zeeland, and prince Maurice his lodging when he comes there.

For the government of justice, and the revenues of this county, there are two
sovereign The chief for justice in all Zeeland.
officers, who are as it were lieutenants to the earl, called rent-masters;
that is to say, receivers, who have proportionably great authority and
pre-eminence: one of the which is to reside (as he does) in the town of
Middlebourg, and is rent-master of the chief part of the west quarter, which
they call Bewersterscheldt. The other has his abode in Ziricxee, and has
charge of the east part, which is called Beoosterscheldt. These two in their
several jurisdictions, receive the rights, fees, and revenues of all the
earldome: they are honored with

They have also authority in all the villages and places of their
jurisdictions, to apprehend or cause to be apprehended (for the execution
whereof, they have their lieutenants and sergeants) all delinquents and
malefactors, whom they are to represent in the two chief towns of the islands
of Walchren and Schouen, that is Middlebourg and Ziricxee, and there to demand
justice; be they to be punished or absolved.

The chief trade of the inhabitants of this country, bordring upon the sea,
is navigations Their course of living.
and fishing both far and near, sailing and traffiquing at this day to the
islands, to the east and west Indies, and to all parts of the world. Those
which dwell within the land, give themselves

In all the towns of the island of Walchren, especially at Middlebourg and
Flessingue, they do daily build goodly great ships, which go to the Indies
and to all parts of the world, for that they are very commodiously seated for
navigations: and these towns of Walchren (especially Middlebourg) since the
wars began, have much increased, both in people, wealth, and trade of
merchandise, for that their traffic is far greater since that Antuerpe fell
into the Spaniards hands; so as they have been forced to make their town
greater, and to beutifie

Having described the earledomes of Holland and Zeeland, their beginning,
situation, and Henaut joined to Holland and Zeeland.
manners, we will hereafter set down the number of their princes, who had but
the titles of earls; whereunto in continuance of time, by right of succession,
according to the alliances of marriage was added the earldome of Henaut, or at
the least the counties of Holland and Zeeland were united to the earldome of
Henaut, the race of Thierry of Aquitaine the first earl of John son to cont
Floris the ninth, to whom John d'Auesnes earl of Henaut his cousin succeeded;
which three seigniories of Henaut, Holland, and Zeeland, although they have no
other title but of earl, are richer, better peopled, and more mighty, either
of them apart, than many dukedomes, principalities, or marquesates, in
Germany, France, and Italy: for there is no common weal, how mighty soever
(no not Venice it self) that can put so many ships to sea, and entertain them
continually, either for war or trade of merchandise, aduenturing themselves
in long voyages, as the Hollanders and Zeelanders do at this day; which makes
them so mighty, as all the forces of the king of Spain, nor of all the
princes of the house of Austria, could not for these forty years greatly
hurt them, nor restrain their command at sea.

To enter therefore into this subject, we will first show how that Holland and
Zeeland, in ancient time being much and often tormented by the daily incursions
of the Goths, Danes, Normans, Saxons, Sicambres (which were they of Gueldres
and Cleues) and other their neighbors, (being freed some thousand years
since from the subjection of the Roman empire) did govern themselves in form
of an Aristocraticall common weal, by the nobility, Charles the bald, king of
France, and Lewis king of Germany (desirous to provide for the spoil and
ruin of these two provinces) gave them a prince and lord, which was Thierry of
Aquitaine.

A HISTORY OF THE NETHERLANDS, OR SEVENTEENE PROVINCES.
Containing the Discents, Genealogies, and memorable acts of the Earls and
Princes of the said Provinces, from THIERRY of Aquitaine, the first Earl of
Holland and Zeeland, successively to PHILIP the third of that name, king of
Spain, and last Earl of Holland, Zeeland, Friseland, etc.
The Argument of the first Book.
HOlland erected into an Earldom, and who was the first Earl. The Viount of
Leiden and the (...). of Wassenare oppose themsel^es against Thierry of
Aquitaine the first earl of Holland. The earldom of Zeeland given also to
Thierry. The Normans and Danes make great spoils in Holland. Thierry 2, earl
of Holland and Zeeland, succeeds his father: he makes war and ranquisheth the
Frisons Arnulph or Arnould son to Thierry the second, the third earl of
Holland and Zeland, this earl was vanquished and slain by the Frisons.
Thierry the third, the fourth earl of Holland, and son to Arnulph. The
Bishop of Virecht rises against him, he defeats the Bishop and tak^s him
prisoner. The death and ^pitaph of the three Thierries. Thierry the fourth, the
^ft earl of Holland: he s^e the bishop of Collogns brother at a tourney. The
Germans to revenge it come into Holland, take Dordrecht, the which he recouers,
and being victor (...) slain from a window with an arrow. Floris the first,
the sixth Farle, brother to Thierry the 4. The bishop, of ^ollogne and Liege
inuades Holland ^he defeats them twice, and being a conqueror he is slainely
the earl of Cuycke, who was also slain there. Gertrude of Saxony his Widow,
Gouernesse to young Cont Thierry the fifth, her son, being yet a child. She
marries again with Robert the Frison* son to the earl of Flanders. They are
chased out of Holland by Godf^ey the Crookebacke, duke of Lorraine, called in
by William bishop of Vtrecht. Godfrey is the ninth Earl of Holland, accounting
Gertrude and Robert for two heads: he vanquished the Frisons, built the town
of Delf, and was slain in* Antuerpe, easing of himself. Robert the Frison
being earl of ^landers, restores Cont Thierry to Holland and Zeeland, who
vanquished the bishop of Vtrecht and took him prisoner. He made war against
the Frisons who would be free under the Empire, and defeats them: his death.
Floris the Fat, the sonn^ of Thierry the fifth, the eleventh earl of Holland;
etc. he makes war against the Frisons, subdues them and dies, having reigned 30
years. Thierry the sixth, of that name, the twelfth Earl, he makes war against
the Frisons, with whom Floris the Black his brother ioins: these brethren
being afterward reconciled, the earl of Cuycke kills Floris: Thierry reuengeth
his death and besieges Vtrecht The Frisons defeated by him in Holland, and
then he dies, having reigned forty years. Floris the third, the 13 earl,
son to Thierry the sixth. War against the Frisons. War betwixt the earls of
Holland and Flanders for the island of Walchren. The prow^sse of the Hollanders
at the siege of Damiette, in which voyage the Earl died. Thierry the seventh,
the 14 earl, succeeded his father: he was in quarrel with William of Holland
his brother, who joined with the Frisons, but they were afterward reconciled.
Dying, he left one only daughter. Ada, daughter to Thierry the seventh, the 15
commanding in Holland: she governed but one year, and died without children.
During her life she was still in war against the earl of Eastfriseland her
uncle, who succeeded her, and was William the first of that name, the sixteenth
earl of Holland: the crown of Scotland fell unto him by his mother, but he
neglected it. Dying he had ruled 19 years in Holland, and 26 in Friseland.
Floris the fourth succceded William his father, the seventeenth Earl. Strange
war with the bishop of Vtrecht. He is slain at a tourney at Clermont. William
the second succeeded Floris his father, being yet a child under the guard of
his uncle the Bishop of Vtrecht. He was crowned king of Romans. He went against
the Frisons where he was slain. Floris the fifth, the nineteenth Earl, he had
great war against the Frisons, whom he vanquished, and brought back his
fathers bones: he was sl^ne by Gerard van Velsen knight. John the first of
that name succeeded his father Floris, the 20 Earl of Holland. Being returned
out of England where he had married the kings daughter, he revenged his
fathers death. He died without children, and in him failed the race of Earls
descended from Thierry of Aquitaine.

THE year of our Redemption 863, Charles the Bald, king of How Holland was
erected to an Earldom, and who was the first Earl.
France, being in Brabant in the Province of Campeigne, at a town called
Bladell, he called a general assembly of his Princes and Barons, to consult
of the best means to repel the Normans and Danes, who made daily incursions
into Germany, Friseland, Holland, Zeland, and into the realm of France.
Thither came many Princes and great Noblemen, both Spiritual and Temporal,
from all parts: whether in like sort the Pope (being then at Mentz upon the
Rhin) sent his Legates. Among other Princes and Noblemen there present, came
Cont Haghen of little Troy (which at this present is the town of Zanthen
Zanthen in Cleueland called little Troy.
upon the Rhin, betwixt the towns of Nuys and Cleefe) bringing with him his
sister Mathild, wife of Sigebert duke of Aquitaine, with her two sons; the
eldest was called Walger, whom Charles did then make Earl of Teysterbaudt, the
which did at that instant and long after contain and comprehend the towns of
Tyel, Bommell, Arkell, Heusden, Altem, Vianen, Culembourg, Buren, Leederdam,
Aspren, and Henckelom, with a great circuit of country, unto the river of
Meuse. The youngest was Thierry, who as yet had no siegneorie nor command, but
was a valiant and hardy knight, who with his father Sigibert* had done many
valiant exploits both in Prouence and Aquitaine, against the S^rasins, who made
many incursions into those countries: so as for his valor and prowess^ he was
much esteemed in Court, and well favored of king Charles.

THIERRY of Aquitaine, the first Earl of Holland.


King Charles surnamed the Bald, first made me Earl by name
O^ Holland, (...) his brother Lewis of Zeeland did the same:
'But troubles manifold soon (...) my honor ^ent
Down to the grave, if the Emperor had me no succor lent.
Twice twenty years I held the Danes still in alarmes,
And did abate thou pride of heart by valor and by arms,
Of Aquitame I was surnamed, borne, and bred,
Gune my wife, and in Egmont my corpt lies buried.
At this assembly of Bladell, the earl Haghen (his uncle) besought the king
to remember Thierry his nephew, and to advance and inuest him in some part of
the country which the Normans and Danes had lately spoiled and destroyed,
knowing him (as that was well known to all men) to be valiant, strong, able to
endure travel, wise, temperat, and discreet to keep that which should be
given him in charge: besides, he was honorably descended, issued from the
blood of France, by the ancient Trojans. King Charles hearing so many good
testimonies of this young knight, at the request of the Popes Legates, and the
instance of the Holland and ^ela^d given to T^erry of Aquitaine.
Earl Haghen his uncle, gave unto Thierry of Aquitaine all the country of
Holland, with a part of East-Frizeland, from Dockum to the river of Lanuers (as
the Chronicles of Holland do maintain, which the Frizelanders seemed to
dislike and impugn, saying that Charles, who was then but king of France, and
not Emperor, could not dispose nor give away Frizeland,

This assembly at Bladell being ended, king Charles went with this knight
Thierry into Holland, to put him in possission of the country by force of
arms: the vicount of Leyden, and the lord of Wassenare his cousin (these two
houses being since united in that of the vicounts) gathered together what
forces they could, to make head against king Charles, and to hinder Thierry in
the possession of that which was given him, refusing absolutely to receive
Thierry Opponents to Thierry.
Thierry marched against them and gave them battle, Hollanders and
Friselanders defeated and subdued.
whe^in there was great effusion of blood of either side, and those two
noblemen of Leyden and Wassenare were both slain. After this defeat all the
people of the country submitted themselves to the kings obedience, and (as he
commanded them) did acknowledge Thierry for their ^ege lord and earl of
Holland. The king and cont Thierry marching on, forced them of Friseland to the
like obedience, and to acknowledge Thierry for their lord, taking an oath of
fealty to remain for ever under the obedience of the earls of Holland. This
done, Charles returned into France, leaving the new earl Thierry in full
possession of these provinces of Holland and Friseland, where he lived for a
time in peace.

Some years after, the Friselanders impatient of a new lord commanding over
their magistrates and rulers, seeing earl Thierry remaining alone in Holland
living in peace and rest, they The Hollanders and Friselanders rebel.
took counsel with the Hollanders, how they might with their common forces
expel him out of their countries. The earl having discovered this
conspiracy, and fully informed of all their practice, he went speedily into
France to king Charles, complaining of the rebellion of his subjects of
Holland and Friseland. The king did write unto the Pope, asking his advise in
this action (for at that time the Hollanders and Friselanders were good
Christians, yet free:) the Pope having read the kings demand, he took the
same letters, the which he did cut into long lab^ls, and then he cut off the
tops of them. At night walking in his garden with the kings ambassadors, with
his knife he cut off the tops of the highest plants, and of some smaller. The
pope does covertly advise the king to subdue the Hollanders.
plants. Whereof the ambassadors having made relation unto the king, he
presently conceived what the Pope meant,

Having therefore levied a goodly army, he returned into Holland with Thierry
to see who durst presume to oppose himself: where being arrived, every man
shrunk; but the king having intelligence who had been the authors of this
conspiracy, tending to a general revolt, without making any great bruit in
the beginning, seeing there was no rising nor taking arms, Those of Holland and
Friseland punished.
he sent to seize upon some of the chief and greatest personages among them,
as also of some of the common sort of Holland and Friseland, whom he knew to be
guilty of this practice, whose The rest reconciled.
and oath taken to continue for ever faithful and obedient to cont Thierry.
Thus was Thierry

In the name of the holy Trinity. Charles by the grace of God king of France,
As it is well befitting Letters of donation of the county of Holland.
our royal greatness, to honor and advance our well-beloved and faithful
servants, we give all men to understand both present and to come, that our
well-beloved and faithful the earl Haghen of Zanthen, has presented himself
before us, and humbly entreated us to advance our well-beloved and faithful
knight Thierry, to the siegneorie of Egmont, and the appurtenances depending
thereon, with all the country which is from Suydherders-haye unto the
Fortrappe and Kumen. Whereunto being favorably inclined, we have given, and do
give by these presents unto our said faithful knight Thierry all the country
above mentioned, with the vassals and homages therein contained, or that may be
hereafter, with all the woods, marshes, waters, rivers, pastures, and all that
depends of them. Inioining all men to obey him, and not to give him any let or
hinderance, but to suffer him and his successors for ever freely to enjoy, use,
and possess the same, by this title of donation which we have made unto him,
as of all his other goods, lands, and siegneories of inheritance. And for that
our pleasure is that these present Letters pattents shall remain firm and
stable for ever, We have sealed them with our royal accustomed scale. Given at
Bladell in the year of our Lord 863, the 17 of the Kalends of June, on S. Vits
day. The Archbishop Rutger high Chancellor has seen and allowed it.

By the tenor of these letters it is manifest that the earldom of Holland
was not given to Thierry by king Charles the Bald at the Popes request, as some
write, to maintain the Christian faith, which S. Willeuord bishop of Vtrecht
had planted there; but at the especial instance Haghen earl of Zanthen uncle
to cont Thierry, to defend and preserve it from the invasions of the Danes,
Normans, and other enemies. We must understand that Suydherdershaye is now
Hillegums Meerbeeck; the Fortrappe was near unto Casant in Flanders; and the
Kumen is a stream of water betwixt Al^mar and the old cloister of the Carmes,
where West-Friseland begins, the which they call North-Holland. Cont Thierry
being by virtue of these letters of Donation, invested and confirmed as well by
force as by love, in the quiet possession of the county of Holland, his aunt
lady Emme wife to Lewis king of Germany, brother to king Charles the Bald,
caused the forest of Waelsdael to be given him by her husband, W^lsdael, or
the county of Z^land given to Thierry.
the which at this present is the county of Zeeland, and at that time
consisted of many islands, divided by rivers. Of which donation mention is made
in these letters following.

In the name of the holy Trinity Amen. Lewis by the grace of God king of
Germany, to all those 868
to whom these present letters shall come, greeting, We give them to
understand, that our dear and well-beloved spouse and companion, has entreated
us to give unto our dear and faithful nephew Cont Letters of donation of
Zeeland.
Thierry of Holland, son to her sister, the forest of Waelsdael, ioining
unto his earldom, with all the fields and land that was usually labored and
fed, together with the waters and rivers as well within as without, woods,
heath, and forest, and all that depends thereon. Being favorably inclined to
the suit and request of our said Spouse, and being desirous to gratify her
therein, We have given and do give by these presents, unto the said earl
Thierry our nephew, the said forest of Waelsdael, with all the appurtenances
depending thereon: to possess, hold, and quietly enjoy, for him and his
heirs, or for any other to whom he would sell or engage them; for ever,
without any contradiction. And for that our will and pleasure is, that this
donation shall remain firm and stable for ever, We have sealed it with our
royal seal. Given in the year of our Lord at Engelshem, 868, the 13 of
April. Gezo vicechancellor in the absence of the archbishop Othelrie, high
chancellor, has seen, allowed, and subsigned it.

Hereby we may understand that from Tournay, and higher, unto Vtrecht, all that
did lie betwixt the two branches of the river of Rhine, which Ptolomie calls
Naualia, for that the ships must of necessity pass there and pay tribute: the
which since has been called Traiectum (that is to say, a Trauers, of
traijciendo) was nothing but a thick and fearful forest, which they called
The forest without mercy. By these Letters we may also see, that Holland The
forest without mer^e.
and Zeeland were the furthest limits and frontiers of Germany (the which did
extend unto

Thierry of Aquitaine being then by the bounty of the kings of France and
Germany become Marcomir, Pharamond, and others their successors, kings of
France, whose descent may thus be reckoned: for this Priam come from Troy
(being so called by the name of his great grandfather, king of Phrygia and of
Troy) was the first king of Franconia, who had to son Marcomir, that first
came into France: he had Pharamond, Pharamond had Clodion, Clodion had Meroue,
Meroue had Childeric, Childeric had Clouis the first The Genealogy of Thierry.
Cristian king, Clouis had Childebert, Childebert had Clotaire the first,
Clotaire had Cherebert, Cherebert Chilperic, Chilperic had Clotaire the second,
Clotaire had Dagobert the first, Dagobert had Clouis the second, Clouis had
Clotaire the third, Clotaire had Childeric the third, Childeric had Theodoric
or Thierry, Theodoric had besides Clouis the third king of France, another
son called Chilperic or Childebert, this Childebert had Diedericke duke of
Aquitaine, Diedericke had Lothaire, Lothaire had Didier, Didier had Engelrim
who died a martyr, Engelrim had Sigisbert, Sigisbert had of his wife Mathild
sister to Cont Haghen of Zanthen and lady Emme queen of Germany, two sons,
that is to say Walger earl of Teisterbaudt, and Thierry of Aquitaine earl of
Holland and Zeeland lord of Friseland.

This Cont Thierry carried the arms of his ancestors: and for that king Pepin
would not have any but himself and those of his blood carry the arms of
France, he therefore gave Diederic or Thierry duke of Aquitaine, other
different arms, which some say were those of Hector of Troy, that is A Lion
rampant Gueules in a field Or, armed and lampassed Azure. And The blason or
arms of Cont Thierry.
for that the said Cont Thierry drew his original in the right masculine line
from the said Diederic duke of Aquitaine, he might by right carry the same
arms. He was also honorably married to Genna or Ienna daughter to Pepin the
Bald, king of Italy, son to the emperor His wife.
Charlemagne, who died before his father, to whom king Charles the Bald was
uncle by the fathers side, and she his niece, daughter to his brother, a very
wise and virtuous princess.

This Thierry did valiantly suppress and vanquish the Danes, who at that time
did possess the town of Vtrecht, the Wiltes and the Slaves; who seeing they
could no more set footing in Holland, through the valiant resistance which they
found in Cont Thierry, they made an Lewis king of Germany having intelligence
of the great spoil which the Danes made in Zeeland, sent Lupold thither (a
brave Franconian knight, the son of Vrancke duke of Suawbe, and grandchild to
that Lupold which was driven out of his country by Nicephorus emperor of
Greece) to succor Cont Thierry his nephew, who jointly together made good
proof of their valor and forces against the Danes, in many a gallant
encounter. Of this first Lupold are descended those of the last house of
Borssele in Zeland: for he had to wife Elizabeth daughter to the great Maroth
king of Hungary, by whom he had three sons, that is to say, Lupold who was
earl of high Hungary, and Frederike duke of Austria, from whom are descended
those of Walchi, which is the noblest house in Austria: the third was Vrancke,
father to the second Lupold, whom king Lewis The beginning of the house of
Borssele.
he married an heir of the first house of Borssele, and was the founder of the
town of Borssele, at this time drowned.

After this victory Cont Thierry lived in peace and rest, studieng to
beautify his countries, and to furnish them with good laws: so as having
reigned forty years, he died very old, to whom his son succeeded.

THIERRY THE SECOND OF THAT name, peaceable Earl of Holland and Zeeland, and
Lord of Friseland.
Theodoricus Secundus.


THIERRY the second Earl of Holland, by degree
I was, and twice in two years space obtained victory
Against Frisons, that my fathers bones did take out of his grave,
And all the silly virgin Nuns out of their cloisters drove:
The which my father first for maids did make and frame,
Of Wood, and I of Lime and Stone for men new built the same.
King Loys daughter, Hille named, I had to wife,
And at full foureskore years and eight, did end my mortal life.
THierry the second of that name, by the decease of Cont Thierry of Charlemagne
had granted them. This Cont Thierry had to wife Hildegard daughter to Lewis
the stuttering king of France, and sister to king Charles the Simple: by whom
he had Egbert his eldest son, a devout man, who was Archbishop of Treues,
and Arnulph or Arnoult, who succeeded him in the said Counties, and one
daughter called Alix or Erlinde.

Cont Thierry seeing the wilfulness and obstinacy of his subjects of
Friseland, leuyed a strong and mighty army of the best soldiers he could
recover, as well in his own territories The Frison^ subdued.
time to resist so mighty an army, making of necessity virtue, and yielding
to the time and force, they submitted themselves to the Earls mercy, who
received them into grace. And then without any loss of his men, being laden
with spoil, he returned into Holland. But the year following they revolted
again, and came with great troops into West-Friseland (the They rebel again.
which obeyed the Earl, and therefore it was called North-Holland) besieging
the town of Alcmar; the which they did with such speed, as the Earl could not
have his army ready in Ruin Alcmar and burn the Abbie of Egmont.
time to hinder them, before they had forced the town, and slain all that
they found within Thierry that he should come speedily to succor them, else
they should not possibly hold out long. The Earl who had no need of any
persuasions to hasten his resolution, hearing in what danger those of Leiden
were, flies thither with his army, being assisted by the lord of Borssell and
other great A great defeat of the Frisons.
Their punishment.
constrained them to make their doors and the entries into their houses so
low, as they must bend their backs and stoop very much, in sign of humility,
before they could enter. Then they took a new oath of fealty, as to their
liege lord and Sovereign, with all such honor and respect as the case
required. The year following the Earl caused a Temple to be built in the
place where the defeat had been given, the which he dedicated unto S. Laurence,
where since Petronelle Countess of Holland did erect a convent of religious
virgins, of the order of S. Benet.

Cont Thierry having been thus revenged of the Frisons, he caused the Abbie of
Egmont to be reedified at leisure: his father did at the first build it of
wood, but he caused it all to be made of masons work: and in steed of
Religious women, he placed monks of the same Order, Monebaldus was the first
abbot. This earl Thierry the second having reigned a long time peaceably after
his subduing of the Frisons, left the counties of Holland and Zeeland more
flourishing than ever, so as being fourskore and eight years old, after that he
had reigned about fifty years, he gave up his soul to God, leaving two
sons, Egbert the eldest, and Arnold who succeeded his father, for some
reasons that I will presently specify.

3 Arnoldus Hollandiae


I was as you me see. when I espoused my wife,
The G^ecian Emperor Thophans child, the s^lace of my li^:
The lands of Brederode to her I did assure,
And (...) one of my youngest (...) f^r ^uer to indur^.
The (...) sals^, pro^d (...) come,
And though ly valor I had put them to extremity,
Yet ^dst of (...) it was my cruel chance to die,
And in the Abbie of Egmont my corpt ^e c^d does lie.
ARNVLPH OR ARNOLD, THIRD
ARNOLD after the death of Cont Thierry his father, the second of that name,
succeeded in the countries of Holland and Zeeland, as also in the siegneorie of
Friseland. He had to wife the lady Lutgard, daughter to Theophanes emperor of
Greece, of whom he had one son, called as his grandfather, Thierry the third
of that name, who succeeded him. This Cont Arnold had an elder brother, called
Egbert, who having ben sent in Egbert eldest son to Cont Thierty the second,
becomes a monk.
embassage by his father to the archbishop of Treues, touched with zeal to
religion and moved with devotion, he professed himself a monk of the order
of S. Benet: and sending back unto his father the dispatches of his embassage,
by the noblemen that Andrew.

Cont Arnold obtained of the emperor Otho the third, to hold the earledomes of
Holland Holland, Zeeland, and Friseland made subject to the Empire.
and Zeeland with the siegneorie of Friseland in fee of the Empire, and no more
of the crown of France. In his time there appeared a very fearful comet, and
there were great eclipses both of sun and moon red as blood, with horrible
earthquakes: there fell a fire from heaven as big as a great tower, the which
burnt long; then followed so great and violent a plague, as the living died in
burying of the dead. This earl had all the time of his reign continual war
Horrible Prodigies.
The Hollanders defeated by the Frisons, and their earl slain,
having the worst, cont Arnold with a great number of the chief of his
nobility were slain, in the year 993, the day after S. Lambert, which was
the eighteenth of October; having governed Holland and Zeeland five years
after the decease of his father: he is interred in the abbie of Egmont by his
father and grandfather, leaving his eldest son Thierry the third for his
successor in the said earledomes. He had also another son called Ziffrid
(the 993
Frisons call him Sicco) who being fallen in disgrace with his father, to avoid
his displeasure, Gosso Ludingama then Potestat or governor of the Frisons,
with whose daughter he fell in love, and married her without the priuitie of
the earl his brother: of whom he had two sons, the eldest he called
Thierry by his grandfathers name, and Simon. Afterward Ziffrid being reconciled
to his father, was made his lieutenant in the quarter of Kennemerland, and The
beginning of the house of Breederoed,
had for his part a portion of land measured with the great yard (the word of
Breede-roede signifieng a Great Yard) so as ever since the siegneorie of the
said Ziffrid has retained the name of Brederode unto this day.

His father did also give him the castle of Theylingen, the which Ziffrid did
give and bequeath And of the family of Theylingen.
unto Simon his yoongest son: from whom descended the family of Theylingen,
at William of Hainalt the fourth of that name, their prince, as we shall
hereafter see, and how that also by the like accident of war we have seen die
(without leaving any issue) four brave knights of the house of Brederode,
being yet in the flower of their youth, not any one remaining of that house at
this day, but three brethren; Walrauen lord of BREDERODE, baron of Vianen and
of Ameyden: Florent the second brother lately deceased, left one son, lord of
Cloetinghen, heir apparent of the whole house; and Maximilian the youngest,
who lives in Brabant. There are many of the same house bearing the same
surname, and arms, (but broken) gentlemen come of bastards. The Epitaph of
this earl Arnold preserved with many others in the ruins of the said abbie of
Egmont (whereas most of the earls of Holland have been interred) having been
recovered by me, although it be but grossly composed (as also the rest that
follow) yet could I not omit them, for that they showed their antiquity, the
which is not wholly to be rejected. Such was the Epitaph of the said earl and
the lady Lutgard his wife.

Gloria carnalis pernicibus euolat alis,
Et quasi non fuerit, cum moriente perit.
Hic Comes Arnulphus patrioe tutela sepultus,
Expectat requiem, Iudicijque diem.
Iste venustauit hac sancta locumque beauit,
Terris, mancipijs, oedibus, Ecclesijs.
Qui bis septenas Octobre rotante Calendas,
Hostili gladio transijte medio.
Laudibus and merito, similis Lutgarda marito,
Complexu fedei, consepelitur ei.
Per tauri sydus ternas Maius regit Idus,
Dum Comitissa pijs fungitur exequijs.
This Countess Lutgarda wife to Cont Arnold, and daughter to Theophanes
Emperor of

THIERRY THE THIRD OF THAT name, son to Cont ARNOLD, was fourth Earl of
Holland, Zeeland, and Lord of Friseland.
4 Theodoricus Tertius.


This THIERRY to revenge his fathers death, in have
With forces great to Freeseland marched, and laid the country wast,
Sa^ked the towns, and slew the townsmen cruelly,
And made the bishop of Vtrecht his prisoner valiantly.
On pilgrimage he went unto the Holy land,
And there the Turks in Palestine did mightily withstand,
And being home returned unto his spouse most true,
At six and forty years of age did yield to death his due.
THIERRY the third of that name, after the death of Cont Arnold his father,
Withild, daughter to the emperor Otho the second, duke of Saxe, whom he His
wife and children.
had of his second wife, daughter to the Marquis of Austria. Of which Withild,
Cont Thierry had two sons, the eldest was called as his father, and the
fourth of that name, earl of Holland: the second was Floris, earl of
East-Friseland, who after the death of his brother without children, succeeded
in the said counties of Holland, Zeeland, and siegneorie of Friseland. Anfrid
the 18 bishop of Vtrecht, issued from the race of Charlemagne, Adelbold
descended from Manson a nobleman of the country of Friseland, was chosen
Bishop, for his great knowledge as well in Divinity as in other liberal arts:
he had been Councellor to the emperor Henry the second, he was the first
bishop that began to advance himself, and to The first warlike bishop of
Vtrecht.
make war against the Hollanders. For when as Thierry the third, earl of
Holland, had lived some time in rest and peace; and that Walbold deane of the
Cathedral church of Vtrecht was made bishop of Liege, who before had been
chief chancellor to Adelbold, dissuading him still from all attempts of war:
this Walbold being thus retired to his bishoprike, Adelbold desirous of
alterations, would needs without any color make war against the Earl and
the Hollanders. The causes and motives of this war were, That Adelbold had
animated the Frisons and Thierry their natural lord: moreover, this bishop had
advanced a gentleman called Didier Bruno to be earl of Bodegrauen and of
Suvamerdam, The Earl of Bodegrauen.
who did greatly wrong and oppress the Hollanders his neighbors: whereupon
Cont Thierry went with his troops to assail him, and having defeated him in
battle, he expelled him by force out of his siegneorie.

The bishop bearing it impatiently to see his vassal thus expelled, levied an
army, with an intent to restore him by force: so the 9 of June in the year
1018 the bishop having brought his men to field betwixt Bodegraue and
Suvamerdam, the earl Thierry went to charge them, being accompanied by his
brother Ziffrid lieutenant of Kennemerland, by John lord of Arkel, the siegneor
John of Persin, the vicount of Leyden, and many other brave knights and
gentlemen. The bishop of Vtrecht defeated in battle by the Hollanders.
rout. There died on his side among the most remarkable, Wyger, Aduoe, that is
to say, Aduocat general of the diocese of Vtrecht, Wickin and Gadezo earls,
Lazo, Alger, and Zuveer (that is to say Asuerus) knights, with a great number
of squires and gentlemen, besides the men at arms and common soldiers, which
were very many.

The bishop Adelbold was much perplexed for this defeat, yet he fainted not,
but gathering together his dispersed troops, would make a second proof and
hazard another battle, the which was more prejudicial and fatal unto him
than the first: for not only his army was defeated, but himself was taken
prisoner, having lost among the men of mark, Volckert a priest Defeated the
second time a (...) taken prisoner.
and chanon, Bertold a deacon, John and Godfrey earls, Hiddo, Halmeric,
Wabtelin, Hubert, and Hildebold knights Zidfrid and Heyman barons, with a great
number of brave soldiers. Cont Thierry after these two victories, his men
being laden with spoil and good prisoners, returned into Holland, leading his
bishop with him, whom he entreated very courteously, seeking to comfort him
and to moderat his passions in this his adversity, being much troubled for his
overthrow and imprisonment.

One day among the rest, Cont Thierry asked of him by way of familiar
discourse, What had moved him so to malice the Hollanders, and to make war
against them, seeing that neyth^r Familiar talk betwixt the earl and bishop
they nor he himself had ever wronged him or don him injury? The bishop
answered, Sir, I confess that I never received any wrong from your self nor
your subjects, neither yet from any of your predecessors; but that which moved
me to attempt war against you, and to my predecessors: for this cause I did
move and incite the Frisons to rebel, that by the help of Thierry answered:
Gods will be done in all things, both in my countries and elsewhere, according to
his good pleasure: yet I would have my lord bishop understand, that the princes
of Holland do little esteem the town of Vtrecht: but I grieve for the poor
commons, who endure much through the spoils and insolences of men of war:
Yet if you will promise me under your hand and seal, never to stir up nor
The Earls kind offer to the bishop.
Charles the Bald, king of France, and afterward Emperor, having succeeded by
the death of his father Lewis the Gentle (son to Charlemaigne) in the
countries of Holland and Zeeland, as well as in the realm of France, and other
countries of his inheritance, after that he had defeated the Normanes, gave
them to my great grandfather, Cont Thierry the first, son to Sigehert Duke of
Aquitaine. And for the better assurance and confirmation of the said grant, at
the instance of Pope John the 9. he himself in person, put the said Count
Thierry in full possession of the said Earledomes, and subjected them unto him
by force of arms; instituting him, as his royal letters patents make mention,
the first Earl, to protect and defend them against the incursions of the
Danes, and by good and mild courses, to draw this rough and uncivil people to
his devotion; as he has done. The like I may affirm and prove by good
testimonies, that Friseland is of the jurisdiction of Holland, for that Lewis
king of Germany, brother to Charles Thierry, unto the river of Lanuvers, and
beyond it, bending toward the East. Charles the Great, king of France and
Emperor, gave it unto Godefroy king of Denmark, in dowery with his wife, upon
condition, That he should be baptized, who afterward was slain. And therefore
if Godefroy has made any cession or gift unto the bishop of Vtrecht, I am well
pleased therewith, and will not pretend any interest to that which lies beyond
the said river of Lanuvers. My lord must also understand the great ingratitude
of them of Vtrecht, for the benefits which they received of my great
grandfather: for he and his brother Walger Earl of Teysterbaudt, remaining at
Anezaet, near unto Till, made so long war against the Danes, which did then
possess the town of Vtrecht, as they forced them to abandon the place, and
restored the bishop Rabod (who as an exiled prelat kept Adelbold having well and
duly considered of all Cont Thierries reasons, confessed his error, The bishop
yields to the Earls reasons
and that being ill advised, he had first attempted war against him: and that
in all the lands and seigniories of the said Earl he had no other jurisdiction
but spiritual, in that which concerns Willebrord the first bishop, as far
as it may extend unto this day. It is true, said the Earl, and we acknowledge
you for our spiritual father, commander in divine things, and which concern
the salvation of our souls. And we do also confess, that by reason of your
bishopric, you have much land, and many rents, tithes, possessions, and other
revenues,

After these two goodly victories, which Cont Thierry had gotten against
Adelbold bishop of Vtrecht, he resolved to revenge the death of his father in
Friseland; for the effecting whereof, he was assisted by the Emperor Henry the
2, who sent Godefroy with the great beard, duke The Emperor sends succors to
the ^arle to subdue them o^ Friseland.
of Lorraine, unto him, with goodly succors of soldiers. The Earl having also
levied a goodly army of his own subjects, leading the bishop prisoner with
him, entered into the country of Friseland; where going to affront the Frisons
army, a sudden terror and fear seized upon The Duke of Lorraine prisoner to
the Frisons, and the bishop escaped
the bishop escaped from the Hollanders, retyring himself unto the Frisons,
incensing them more and more against Cont Thierry: who having made his retreat
to Harlem, he speedily gathered together his scattered army, with the which he
marched directly to Heyligerlee, where he met the Frisons, with the bishop, who
came boldly and resolutely to charge him, having forced the Duke of Lorraine to
accompany them to the battle, the which was fierce and very The Frisons
defeated, the duke of Lorraine escapes.
bloody, whereas the Earl had the victory, with great slaughter of the
Frisons: the Duke The bishop being wounded ^ues himself.
troops, fell upon the country of Friseland, putting all to fire and sword, and
destroying the whole country, vnpeopling it of men and cattle, taking and
carrying away all they could find. And thus the Earl reduced all the country
of Friseland under his obedience, the which he gave to his younger son Floris,
and forced the inhabitants which remained, to acknowledge him for their lord
and to take an oath of fealty, holding the said seigniorie notwithstanding in
fee of the Earl his father, who returned victorious into Holland. Floris
remained in Friseland, the which he governed with power and authority all his
lifetime. Friseland given to Cont Flor^.


Cont Thierry finding himself at rest from all his wars, and having subdued
all his enemies, The Earl goes ^rimage to Jerusalem.
to Jerusalem, where the said lord of Arckel died of sickness, and was
honorably interred there by Cont Thierry: who being returned into Holland,
after that he had finished his pilgrimage, lived some years intrest and
quietness, with his wife and children: then having ended the course of his
life, he died in the year 1039. having reigned 46 years, and was buried in the
church of the Abbey of Egmont, by his fathers. The lady Withilde his widow, The
Earls death, Anno 1039.
returned into her country of Saxony, where she died four years after.

In the said Abbey of Egmont, there was found preserved from ruin, the Epitaph
of these three Earls, Thierry the 1. 2 and 3. Earls of Holland and Zeeland,
Lords of Friseland; of the lady Gena, wife to the first, and of the lady
Hildegarde, wife to the second, as we have extracted

The odericorum tria corpora magnific^rum,
Hic sita sunt, titulis quaeque not at a suis.
Hi funda^rant loca nostra, Patresque fuerunt,
Istsus ornatus, ordinis, atque status.
Hic Comitissarum sociantur membraduarum,
Virtus est quarum non celebrandaparum.
Genna prior dicta, tum pracipue benedicta,
Hild^ garda suo digna legititulo:
Auropraecl^ am tabulam quae struxit ad aram,
Multi^dis donis iure sequendabonis.
Progenies borum, mores imitare tuorum,
Quos coeliregio sumpsit ab exilio.
In the said Abbey is also found, the Epitaph of Sicco, or Ziffrid of Holland,
first lord of Brederode, son to Arnould, and brother to Thierry the 3. Earls
of Holland, as follows.

Status sepe morum statu immutatur honorum,
Quod Comes exegst, quem lapis iste tegit.
Siccog^nus Comitum, Comitatum ponit auitum,
Dum quod amat sequitur, sic minor efficitur.
Sed fundis, seruis, aerisque nitebat aceruis,
Inferior solo Principe fratre suo.
Qui dum perpendit, quo mundi gloria tendit,
Iuris multa suitradit huic domui.
St^rps de Siccane processit in hac regione,
Florens diuitijs, viribus, ingenijs.
Julius in N^nis tulit hunc, vt conditionis,
Cui vera sit quies, perpet^sque dies.
THIERRY THE FOVRTH OF THAT name, and fifth Earl of Holland and Zeeland, Lord
of Friseland.
5 Theodoricus Quartus


Nine years I lived Earl of Holland fortunate,
Not knowing, nor yes caring what belongd to marriage state.
The Germans I compeld the town of Dort to leave,
That sought by all the means they could my life for to bereave;
Who being overcome, and put unto the flight,
Turned back, and shot a shaft at me, which in my thigh did light.
The names of three of my forefathers I did bear,
And with them in their sepulcher my bones interred were.
THIERRY the 4. of that name, after the decease of Thierry the 3. his father,
Thierry went thither in like sort, accompanied with many Noble men and Barons,
his vassals. As the Princes and Noble men were at the torney, it happened by an
unfortunate blow, that the Earl slew the brother of the bishops of Cologne and
Liege: so as the noble men of Germany sought to revenge the death of this young
knight. Thierry unable to make his party good, retired secretly with all his
train out of the city. The Germains advertised of his retreat, pursued him,
and having overtaken the last of his train, they slew some, among the which
were two knights. Cont Thierry having recovered Holland without danger, went to
Dordrecht, and caused all The bishops of Liege and Cologne, assail the Earl,
and take Dordrecht.
the command of the Marquis of Brandebourg their cousin; who coming down the
Rhine, entered into Holland, and by treason, (some say by a popular tumult)
surprised the town of Dordrecht.

Cont Thierry being somewhat amazed at this loss, was advised by the seignior
Gerard of Putten, to make an adventure to enter the town by night with his
men; the which succeeded happily. Sounding his trumpets, and with a fearful
cry, at midnight, he began to spoil The Earl recouers the town, and expels
the Germans.
all the Germans he could encounter: so as after some resistance, the
Germans were forced

The next day in the morning, the Earl being weary of the nights fight,
being disarmed, and desirous to refresh himself, walked up and down, and
passing by a narrow street, was shot in the thigh with a poisoned dart, by one
of the enemies which lay hidden in a garret; so as ever since unto this day
that street is called Grave street, that is to say, the Earls street: of The
Earl slain.
which wound he died two days after, which was the 15. of May 1048, having
governed his Countries nine years. He was interred with his father in the
Abbey of Egmont During the life of this Earl, was built the first Fort in the
Island of Schauven at Ziricxee: and the Island of Walchren in Zeeland was
conquered by Baldwin of l' Isle de Buc, Earl of Flanders, assisted Robert his
youngest son. Then began the ships of the East Countries to frequent the
seas of the Netherlanders, and not before.

FLORIS THE FIRST OF THAT name, the sixth Earl of Holland and Zeeland, Lord of
Friseland.
6 Florentius Primus


My brothers heir I was, and sixth Earl by degree,
And married with a Saxon dame, of great nobility:
The Liegios I subdued, and valiantly did take
The Earl of Loven in the field, and him my prisoner make.
Twice did the Prince of Collen feel my force and might,
Between the rivers Wale and Mase: but to my great despite,
(As all things subject are to change) my self being taken,
When I had ruled 14. years, in cruel wise was slain.
FLORIS the first of that name, was before Earl of West Friseland, who Thierry
the fourth his brother, was the sixth Earl of Holland and Zeeland. He had to
wife the lady Gertrude, daughter to Heyman Duke of Saxony, son to the
Emperor Henry the second; of Cont Floris his wife and children
whom he had four sons: Thierry his successor in the said Earledoms, Albert,
Floris, and Peter, which were Chanons at Liege; and one daughter; called
Mathilde, or Mahault, who was married to Philip the first of that name, king of
France.

The bishops of Cologne and Liege, who had not yet forgotten the death of their
brother, slain at a turney, by Cont Thierry the fourth, the burning of their
ships, the ransoming of their merchants, and the defeat of their men, at the
enterprise of Dordrecht; to be revenged The bishops of Cologne and Liege,
assail the ^le of Holland.
of Cont Floris, brother to Thierry, made a league with the Marquis of
Brandebourg, the Albert of Loos, or of Louvaine, Wichard Aduocat general of
Gueldres, and Herman Earl of Cuicke, who gathering what forces they could
together, resolved to set upon Cont Floris and the Hollanders. The Earl having
intelligence of their design, sent for all his knights, gentlemen, and
vassals, commanding them to bring what troops they could, either of his
subjects, or strangers: the which they did, making a g^odly army to oppose
against his enemies, and went to lodge in the town of Dordrecht: causing
(during his abode there) many ditches The Earl attends them at Do^drecht.
to be made in South-Holland, and pit-falls covered with straw and grass,
which could not be discovered. He had also sent for succors out of Friseland,
from whence there were sent him a troop of the most valiant soldiers, that
were in all the country.

The Earl attending his enemies in his town of Dordrecht, the Germans
marching in the country, thinking to besiege him there, being entered into
South-Holland, there lost a great 1058.
number of their men, which were smothered and drowned in these ditches, thus
covered and hidden, the which they could not discern in the night, neither
knew they which way to march, for thinking to avoid one danger, they fell into
another by heaps, so as very many were slain. And withal, the Earl (who
knew all the passages of the country) pursuing them, made them to fall into
these ditches; which they could not avoid, unless they would be subject to
the enemies sword, who attended them on every side. There was a furious
battle, where the Earl was victor, in the which there were forty thousand
men slain, and twenty six A bloody battle won by the ^rle. The bishop of
Liege slain.
thousand drowned and smothered in those ditches, and all this great army of
Germans was Floris got this victory on S. Adolphs day, in the year 1058.

Four years after, in the year 1062, the bishop of Cologne, the Marquis of
Brandebourg Cont Herman of Cuicke, and other noble men, their allies, levied a
new army, of the which the 1062.
Marquis was General. These noblemen being entered into Holland, their men began
to spoil The bishop of Cologne leuies another ar^e.
and burn the country. Cont Floris, who was never daunted for a small loss,
like a valiant and hardy knight, went to encounter them with his army, and
charged them furiously: the The Germans defeated again.
Hollanders laden with spoil, and a great number of prisoners, returned to
their houses. This battle was on S. Martins day in Summer.

After this victory, Cont Floris marching with his army, and making his
retreat, resting himself under an elm, in the village of Hemert, betwixt the
rivers of Meuse and Wasal, Cont Herman of Cuick (who before had fled) rallying
his men together, came and charged the Earl and his troops, whom he surprised
unawares and in disorder, being disarmed to refresh themselves, so as having no
leisure to arm themselves again they were defeated, and Cont Floris Floris
had after his brothers death reigned 14 years in Holland, and in Friseland 21
years. He was interred at Egmont.

The Epitaphs of these two Earls, brethren, Thierry the fourth, and Floris the
first, are found

Ecce iacent fratres, Regni spes, gloria, Patres,
Regum stirpe sati, vermibus aesca dati.
Bello magnificus prior horum Theodoricus,
Hostibus in Patriam iure negando viam.
Per Caprae sydus dum Ianus volueret Idus,
Caesar erat fomes, quo cadit iste Comes.
Florens flos florum, Florentius alter eorum,
Splendidus eloquio, viribus, ingenio.
Cui Troiae rector bellanti cederet Hector,
Dum nimis emicuit, host latente ruit.
Morte viri, flendas, quarto decimoque Calendas,
Iunius axe gerit, cum Comes iste perit.
Destructor mortis, vitae reparatio fortis,
Raptos valle soli, collocet arce Poli.
GERTRVDE, WIDOW TO CONT FLORIS, Mother and Guardian to young Cont Thierry,
son to Floris.
7 Gertrudis Saxoniae


I was by blood and line of Prince HEMMES house,
And to the first Earl FLORIS was his first and only spouse:
In widow-hood I ruled the Country full a year,
With care for my young infants weal, as plainly did appear:
The Frison sought of me a second marriage state,
Which I accepted: but such was my hard and cruel fate,
That death restored me unto my former love,
To lie with him in earthly tomb, my soul in Heaven above.
ROBERT CALLED THE FRISON, Aduocat General to young Cont THIERRY, second
husband to the Countess Gertrude.
Robertus Cognomento Frisius,


Like Hector valiantly, my Countries defense
I sought, resisting the emperor, and drove the Germane thence.
Becoming amorous, I married FLORIS wife,
And did defend her son and her, in bloody war and strife:
Protecting them eight years by my victorious hand.
Cypres, Salamine, Amathont, I wan in Heathen Land:
But shunning of my foe within my native soil,
At Cassel death encountered me, and put me to the soil.
AFter the death of Cont Floris the first of that name, and the sixth Earl of
Gertrude his widow, daughter to Heyman duke of Saxony, governed these four
Countries in the name of Thierry her eldest son, being in his nonage.
Afterward, in the year 1063. (with the consent of all the Nobility and the
Estates of the Country) she married again with Robert 1063
the Frison, a wise and valiant knight, son to Baldwin of Lisle de Bucke,
earl of Flanders: who The lady Gertrude ^es again with the Earl of Fland^s.
by the valor of this Robert his son, overthrew the Emperor Henry the
fourth in battle: and for his virtues, was by the Estates of Holland and
Zeeland made guardian of young Cont Thierry, son of the Earl Floris, and of
the said Lady Gertrude; who in this second marriage Robert, that is, Robert the
young (who went with Godefroy of Bouillon to the conquest of the holy Land, and
after the decease of his father was Earl of Flanders: then The children of
Robert and (...) Lady Gertrude.
Philip, who was father to William of Ixre: and the third was Baldwin, bishop
of Teroanne. She had also three daughters by him: the eldest was called Alix or
Alice, married to Canutus, king of Denmark and of Norwey, by whom she had
Charles, which was Earl of Flanders: the second Gertrude, who was Countess of
Louaine, and afterward married to a Landtgraue of Elsatia, mother to Thierry
of Elsatia, who was also in his time Earl of Flanders.

This Robert the Frison was not so called, as if he had been borne in
Friseland: but (as the Chronicle of Holland says) for that he was strong, big,
and courageous, as a Frison borne (in Why Cont Robert was (...) the Frison.
such esteem and reputation of valor those of Friseland have always been,
as when they Scipio the Africane, and others by the names of the Provinces
which they had conquered and subdued. This Robert was a valiant and a virtuous
Prince, and who had liberality in singular recommendation, the which moved
the Nobles of Holl^nd and Zeeland to choose him for their governor, during the
minority of their prince Thierry; wherein he carried himself both wisely and
valiantly for the space of eight years.

Having at his coming to the government subdued them of Friseland, hearing of
the death of Baldwin de Mons his brother, Earl of Flanders, he demanded to be
admitted to the Earldom grounding his pretencions upon a certain division,
the which he said, Baldwin de Lisle Robert the Frison should succeed in the
said County to Robert de Mons, notwithstanding any lawful heirs that he should
leave. But he found so great opposition, made by the Countess Richild, widow
to Baldwin de Mons, and by her two sons, being favored by the Nobles and
Commons of the Country, as for a time he did forbear to attempt any thing.
Afterward the said Richild behaved her self so insupportably in her
government, as she became R^ert ouerc^mes the French, and re^aines Earl (...)
Flanders.
odious to all the Flemings, so as they sent secretly to call in Robert the
Frison, who came and overthrew the king of France in a great battle: so as
there was an accord made betwixt the said Robert, and the Countess Richild,
and her son Baldwin, who remained satisfied with the County of Henault; so
as Robert remained peaceable Earl of Holland: where having ^bert goes in ^mage
to Jerusalem. His death.
1077


GODFREY THE CROOKED, DVKE of Lorraine, the ninth in number of the Earls of
Holland, the which he usurped for a time.
9 Gothiphredus Lothari^gae Gibbus.


I am (if you will know) that crooke-backt GODFERY,
That by the favor of Vtrecht wan Holland valiantly:
Whereas, in four years space, to show my great renown,
I built the goodly Town of Delft, in the Septentrion:
The Frisons I subdued, that could me not withstand,
And manfully maintained war, both on the sea and land:
Till I in Antwerpe traitrously my death did get,
And left no issue; but now serve to crawling worms for meat.
THe quarrel of them of Vtrecht against Holland (as Bishop Adelbold, prisoner
Thierry the third, had prophesied unto him) not able to be reconciled; William
son to Widikind, prince of Gelderland, the 21. bishop of Vtrecht, mindful of
the taking of his father, in a battle which the bishops of Cologne and Leege,
together with other Germane princes, had against Cont Floris, father to the
Infant Thierry Earl of Holland, thrust on by ambition, and an insatiable
desire to augment his estate (although it were but too great for the
maintenance of a Churchman, and one that made profession of sanctity) went to
the Emperor Henry the fourth, to whom he made great complaints, and suggested
falsely, that Thierry of Aquitaine, the first Earl of Holland, and his
successors, The bishop of Vtrechts false suggest one to the Emperor against
the Earl of Holla^d
had violently taken away from Odibaldus, the twelfth bishop of Vtrecht, and
his successors Adelbold, and forcibly usurped the Earldom of Holland; which
the Emperor Henry the second, Conrade the second, and Henry the third, had
confirmed to the bishops of Vtrecht: And by these abusiue and slanderous
suggestions, he did secretly obtain letters of a reiterated donation from the
said Henry the fourth, under his seal.

This reverent bishop seeing that he should never find a better opportunity to
seize upon Holland, than during the minority of Cont Thierry the fifth, having
called all his friends to his succor, and among other, Godfrey the Crooked,
Duke of Lorrain (the which at that time was called Lothier) of Brabantand of
Ardennes, made a mighty Army under the command Godfrey duke of Lorraine,
inuades Holland in the bishops name.
of the said Godfrey, with the which he went to invade Holland in the year
1071. in the country of Rhynland, near unto the Town of Leyden. The Earl
Robert the Frison governor Thierry, having gathered together what men he
could, went to encounter these two inuading princes, where there was a battle
fought, and the charge was furious on both sides: but in the end, Robert thus
suddenly surprised, being otherwise employed about his affairs of Flanders,
and not able to levy sufficient forces to encounter his enemies, who were
twice as strong the loss fell upon the Hollanders, The bishop a conqueror,
and Robert retires himself.
and the bishop remained victor Robert taking his wife and children speedily
with him, saues himself in Flanders in the Town of Gand, as the Chronicles of
Holland say, but those of Flanders write, that he fled into Saxony to his
wives father, from whence he was called back by the Flemings against the
Countess Richild, as we have before noted, speaking of the said Robert.

After this victory, bishop William caused Godfrey the Crooke-backe to take
possession of all the Towns of Holland, and to hold the whole Earldom in fee
and homage of his Duke Godfrey poss^eth Holland.
Bishopric of Vtrecht; the which he possessed and governed five whole years
after that donation, during the absence of Robert, who was busied in Flanders.
This Prelate of Vtrecht caused all the frontier Towns to be manned with good
garrisons: among the rest he built a strong Castle at Isselmonde, upon the
river of Maeuse, betwixt Dordrecht and Rotterdam, the which he fortified with a
good garrison. Duke Godfrey for a perpetual memory to posterity, caused a
new Town to be built, betwixt the villages of Auverschyer and Foundation of
the Town of Delft.
Risuvicke, the which is at this present the goodly Town of Delft, and without
it a Castle, where he made his residence during his government.

This Duke seeing all things succeed so happily, and that nothing did cross
his desseignes, he resolved to make war against the Frisons, making a road
into the country, and bringing a great booty, with many prisoners into the
Town of Alcmar. The East-Frisons, Godfry makes war in Friseland.
neighbors to them that were thus spoiled, came down like men half mad
with a mighty Army, and besieged Godfrey in the said Town of Alcmar, for the
space of nine weeks. Seeing himself thus besieged, he called the bishop of
Vtrecht to his succor, who posted thither with all his forces, and compelled
them to raise the siege: he gave battle to the Frisons, whom he defeated, and
put to rout, where there were slain above eight thousand upon the place,
besides prisoners: the rest were all scattered and put to flight. So Duke
Godfrey, The Frisons defeated with the help of the bishop of Vtrecht.
with the help of the said bishop, got possession of both Friselands, East and
West, the

Afterward, in the year 1075. Duke Godfrey being in Andwerpe (some Authors
say in Friseland) easing his body in a low chamber which was over the ditch of
his lodging, he was discovered by one called Ghisbrecht, servant to young Cont
Thierry, who thrust him in Godfrey being thus wounded, desirous to return into
his Country of Lorraine, he caused himself to be transported into the Town
of Maestrecht, whereas he died in the month of March, leaving no children of
his body, nor any other The death of Godfrey the Crooke-back, without heirs.
heir, but one only sister, wife to Eustace, Earl of Blois, by whom she had
three sons; Godfrey of Bouillon, Baldwin and Eustace. After which Godfrey the
Crooke-backe, his nephew Godfrey of Bouillon, succeeded in the Dutchies of
Lorraine and Brabant, although at that time Godfrey of Bouillon succeeds
Godfrey the Crookebacke.
the Dukes of Lorraine did not write themselves Dukes of Brabant. But since in
the year 1251. Henry the third of that name, Duke of Lorrain, began to entitle
himself Duke of Lothier and of Brabant: the which the Dukes of Brabant
(although they have no pretension unto Lorraine) have continued unto this day.
This Duke Godfrey of Bouillon, with many great Princes Hugh the great, brother
to the King of France: Robert, brother Godfrey of Bouillon General to the
Holyland.
to the Duke of Normandy: Robert the young, son to our Robert the Frison,
before mentioned, Earl of Flanders: Raymond, Earl of S. Gilles: Steven, Earl
of Blois: Brunamond or Baymond, Prince of Appulia: Eustace and Baldwin,
brothers to Duke Godfrey of Bouillon: Anselme of Ribemont, and some Noblemen of
the house of Borsele in Zeeland. Among the Gentlemen of Friseland, were Tiepko
Fortman, Iarich Ludingama, Epo Hardtman, Igo Galama, Frederick Botnia, Eelcko
and Sicco Liaucama, cousins, and Obbo Hermana, with 300000. which were marked
with the sign of the Cross, and therefore this voyage was called, the
Croisadoe: in which expedition they recovered the holy Land, and the said
Godfrey of Bouillon He is crowned King of Jerusalem.
was crowned King of Jerusalem, to whom succeeded his brother Baldwin.

THIERRY THE FIFTH OF THAT name, Earl of Holland and Zeeland, Lord of
Friseland.
(...) Theodoricus Quintus,


THIERRY attained to years, his valor for to show,
Found means to cross the Priest that sought his utter overthrow:
Man oftentimes does win great honor, wealth, and fame,
But by industry and by force he must preserve the same.
The Frisons he subdued by valor and by might,
That secretly conspired had, to work him some despite:
His wife WITHILD was, and as full seventeen years
His Earldom he assigned to death, as by record appears.
THIERRY the fifth of that name, son to Cont Floris, the first of that 1077
of Godfrey the Crooke-backe, Duke of Lorraine, who (as we have said) by the
instigation, support, and favor of William of Geldre, bishop of Vtrecht, had
dispossessed him, being yet in his minority, of all his country of Holland
and Friseland; he levied a mighty Army, with the help of Cont Thierry
prepares to recover Holland
Robert the Frison, his father in law, and his other kinsfolks and friends, to
recover his Country and ancient Inheritance.

At the same time (which was in the year 1077.) died the said William, bishop
of Vtrecht, having governed his bishopric in bloody wars (in the which he
was often victor) for the space of two and twenty years, carrying himself
more like a Captain than a Pastor: to Conrard, issued from the Dukes of
Suaube, who was installed in the said bishopric, the better to defend the
Conquest of Holland and Zeeland, which his predecessor William had made. This
Conrard took great delight in the Castle of Isselmond, whether the Earls
Thierry and Robert the Frison marched with their Army, knowing his usual
residence Conrard besieged in his castle at Isselmond.
to be there. The bishop Conrard hearing that they came to besiege him, and
seeing his said Castle invested, sent to his subjects of his bishopric of
Vtrecht to come to succor him, and to free him from this siege. Whereupon
great numbers of soldiers came to him from all parts: so as there was a
furious battle fought, betwixt the bishops Traiectins, and the Hollanders and
Flemings of Cont Thierry and Cont Robert, the which was long in suspense, to
whether part the victory would incline: but in the end the bishops men were
broken and The bishops men defeated by Cont Thierry.
Garlar Earl of Zutphen, Lambert Provost Cathedral of Deuenter, Volckmar
Priest of S. Boniface, Chisbrecht and Warembault, knights. And of Cont
Thierries side, John of Arckel, Euerard of Bockhorst, with many other Gentlemen
and brave soldiers.

The bishop having lost this battle, and seeing his men quite defeated, and
without any means to rallie them again together, sought to fortify himself
in the dungeon of the Castle of Isselmond, rampiering up the base Court: But
Cont Thierry by the advice of his Hollanders, having won the said base Court,
forced the bishop to yield both himself and The bishop forced to yield
himself prisoner, and to restore Holland.


After this triumphant victory, and before that he dismissed his Army, Cont
Thierry having recovered his inheritance, entered into Holland, from the which
he had been long expelled, and was there received with great joy and pomp,
and acknowledged for their Prince, Earl, and natural Lord: But the Frisons,
who had so often rebelled, were restic, and refused the homage which they ought
him, seeking to remain free Imperialists: although that Egbert, competitor to
the Emperor Henry the fourth, having subdued them from the Fly to the river
of Lanuvers, had made them his vassales, and given them to the bishop of
Vtrecht; and the said Egbert being vanquished and slain in a mill by the said
Emperors William of Geldre, and annexed unto his bishopric by the said
Emperor Henry. The Frisons therefore seeing the said Conrard vanquished, would
not acknowledge the one nor the other, but only the The Frisons will neither
acknowledge the bishop, nor the Earl of Holland.
Emperor and the Empire, relying upon their ancient privileges. Thierry
seeing their obstinacy, attended the opportunity of a sharp and violent
Winter, with some hard frostes, which made the foul ways, waters, marshes,
and quagge mires firm and hard as stone. Then he marched with all his forces
to assail them; the Frisons attended him upon the ye, where a furious
battle was fought: But in the end, the Frisons (not able any longer to endure
the force of the Hollanders and Flemings) were put to rout, and above forty
thousand slain upon the place. Yet the Frisons fainted not for this defeat:
but having The Frisons defeated by Cont Thierry.
honor and spoil, and the Frisons for their liberties, lives, and goods; yet
they were charged A second battail^, and the Frisons defeated.
little and little to recoyle and give back, and in the end fled, so as the
slaughter was very great: for the Earl was much incensed against them,
commanding all to be slain, so as there died above six thousand in this
second battle: And marching into the Country, he took men, women, and
children prisoners, that were under the age of twelve years; putting all that
could be taken in the fury, to the sword, that exceeded this age, being
resolved to ruin and unpeople the whole Country. Then he went to besiege the
Town of Staueren, and the inhabitants were forced to compound, to have their
lives and goods saved, paying thirteen Staueren besieged, and yielded to the
earl
hundred Crowns of gold for a ransom, and leading with him forty of the
inhabitants of the Town for hostages, causing all strange soldiers that were
found in it, to be stripped and

Thus Cont Thierry recovered all the Country of Friseland, and returned a
Conqueror into his Country of Zeeland: where, soon after he married Withild,
daughter to Frederick, Cont Thierries wife.
Duke of Saxony, by whom he had one son called Floris, who was Earl after
his death, and one daughter named Mathild, the which was married to the Duke of
Orleans. The said Cont Thierry confirmed by letters of State, the donations
made by the Earls his predecessors, to the Abbey of Egmont.

Conrard bishop of Vtrecht, being (as we have said) freed from prison, having
yielded up unto Cont Thierry his Earldom of Holland, was not well satisfied,
that the said Thierry had conquered Friseland, the which he maintained did
belong unto him; but with such informations William of Geldre his predecessor,
had made unto the Emperor Henry the The bishop of Vtrecht obtaines a grant of
Friseland from the Emperor by a false totle.
fourth, he obtained by letters patents, bearing date the Ides of February in
the year 1088. a grant of the said Country of Friseland: in the which are
specially named the quarters of Oostergoe and Westergoe, unto the river of
Lanuvers, the which the said bishop Conrard did afterward give in the year
1092. to Adolph of Fornenburch, to hold them in fee of his bishopric of
Vtrecht. This knight Adolph had to wife Anne, daughter to the Lord of Ameland,
by the which he had no children.

In the same year Cont Thierry being fallen sick, died the fifteenth of the
Calends of July, The death of Cont Thierry.
after that, the Lady Gertrude of Saxony his mother, from the decease of Cont
Floris her husband, father to Thierry, had governed the Countries of Holland,
Zeeland, and Friseland, two Robert the Frison, his father in law, eight years,
Godfrey the Crooked, duke of Lorrain, four, William bishop of Vtrecht one
year, and he himself fifteen, making in all thirty years, from the death of
the said Cont Floris his father. He was interred in the Abbey of Egmont, by
whom also does lie the Countess Withild his wife.

In his time there were many brave knights in Holland, besides his brethren,
and among others, William Lord of Brederode, Gerard Lord of Theilinghen,
Baldwin Lord of Heusden, Fox The chief nobility of Holland in those times.
Lord of Arckell, Dodo Lord of Leederdam, the Seigneurs of Lerke, of Putten, of
Poleuanen, of Streuen, of Altena, Vernard of Buchorst, John of Persin, Aleuvin
of Wassenare, the Vicont of Leyden, Scha^aloth and Trusing his brethren, Dodo
of Riswicke, the Seignior Ysbrant Gruytwater, with many other Gentlemen of
mark.

The Epitaph of this Cont Thierry the fifth, was found in the Abbey of Egmont,
after this manner:

Viribus haud modicus situs est hic Theodoricus,
Qui pulsus Patria, viredit in propria:
Nam Dux gibbosus, puer^ fuit insidiosus,
Sed Ducis interitus, fit Iuueni reditus.
Vibs Traiectensis, fulmen tremit ipsius ensis,
Mortes multorum dum gen^it omne forum.
Capto Pontifice, Comes inclitus egit anice,
Non quod vi poterat, sed quod honoris erat.
Hostibus iste grauis, patriae tutissima clauis,
Quem decuere been, verba, statura, genae.
Iuli, quindenas ^eproducente Calendas,
Qua Comitem rapuit, mors lachrimosa fuit.
FLORIS, SVRNAMED THE FAT, THE second of that name, and eleventh Earl of
Holland and Zeeland, Lord of Friseland.
11 Florentius Cognom Pinguis.


Inbountie and in piety 'twas I that did surpass,
As likewise in great store of wealth, the Princes of my race,
My wife was daughter to the Emperor LOTHARIE,
And in Rhynsburg a cloister new for N^nes did edify.
Full thirty six years time my Earledomes I possessed,
And forced the Frisons unto peace, that seemed it to detest:
At last, as God ordained has, that man shall die,
To death I yielded, and my bones in Egmont Church do lie.
FLORIS the second of that name, and eleventh Earl of Holland and Thierry the
fifth, was commonly called the Fat, or the Gross, an active man, well membred,
and of a tall stature, a politic Prince, enclining to peace, and liberal in
giving, ready to pleasure every man, and to hurt no man: He had to wife
Petronelle or Parnel, daughter to Didier Duke of Saxony, sister to the
Emperor Lothaire, of whom he had three sons, Thierry the sixth, his Cont
Floris wife.
successor, the twelfth Earl of Holland, Floris the Black Prince of
Kenemerlandt, and Simon; with one daughter named Hadewicke, which was Countess
of Geldre, a very beautiful Lady. He was much given to favor Churchmen, by
reason whereof, he gave great revenues to the Abbey of Egmont.

In the year 1119. Cont Floris had a quarrel with a knight of Friseland,
called Galonges of Galama, by reason of hunting in the forest of Creyl, whether
the Earl lying at Ten^kelhuysen 1119
(now called Tuchuysen) or at Medernblyck, went usually for his recreation. On
a certain time among the rest, he took from Galamas servants three of his
Greyhounds, and two Hares, which they had taken; whereof the said Galama
(according to the threats of the country) swear to take a bloody revenge. The
Earl making no account of his threats, coming A quarrel betwixt the earl
and a knight of Friseland.
after his accustomed manner to hunt in this Wood, Galama met him, being
accompanied with a good troop of his friends and partisans: At their first
encounter he audaciously demanded of the Earl reparation of the wrong he
had done him, in taking away his dogs and venison, or else he would take it
with his own hands, using withal many proud and hautie Galama passing from
words to blows, thrust at the Earl with his rapier, thinking to have passed
it through his body: but he slipping a little on the one side, the Earl was
hurt in the arm, and was rescued by his Gentlemen, of whom, Galama overthrew
two, before they parted. The Earl thirsted after revenge, but to avoid
effusion of blood, and the ruin of their subjects, this quarrel was
compromitted to Godfrey Duke of Brabant, who dying soon after, it was left in
suspense until the year 1165. that the Emperor Frederick Barbarousse
reconciled The Emperor compounds this quarrel.
these two houses of Holland and Galama: by the which accord it was said, that
Ioub Galama and his heirs should hunt freely in the Forest of Creyl, and
enjoy a moytie thereof for them and their heirs for ever.

At the same time, Staueren, the chief town of all Friseland, rich and
abounding in all wealth, the which had been the only Staple for all
Merchandise, whether ships came from all parts, whose inhabitants through ease
knew not what to do, nor desire; showing themselves in all things excessive
and licentious, not only in their apparel, but also in the furniture of their
houses, gilding the seats before their lodgings: so as they were commonly
called, The debauched children of Staueren. As it is in the common course of
this world, when as The declining of the town of Staueren in Friseland.
things are at the highest, or that men are at the height of their prosperity,
to decline and fall again: even so it happened to this town of Staueren, by a
wonderful or rather miraculous accident, proceeding from the providence of
God, enemy to all pride and contempt; which was in this manner: There was in
the said town a widow, who knew no end of The pride of a widow of Friseland.
Wheat, fraighted his ship therewith, with the which he returned to Staueren:
the which did so discontent this foolish and glorious widow, as she said unto
the Master, That if he had laden the said Corn on the starre-boord side, he
should cast it into the Sea on the lar^boord, the which was done, and all the
Wheat powered into the Sea. But note the wonders of Gods just judgment, the
whole town, yea all the Province did smart for one woman's error: for
presently, in the same place where as the mariners had cast the Corn into the
Sea, there grew a great bar of sand, wherewith the Haven was so stopped, as
no great ship could enter: in Friseland, the inhabitants, by reason of their
wealth and pride, being grown intolerable to

Cont Floris having lived long in peace (as he was a man of a quiet spirit) the
Frisons began The Frisens rebel.
to rebel again, and being jealous of their liberty, would no longer obey
his lieutenants, and officers of justice, nor receive any commandments from
them. The Earl being much moved at this contempt, went with an army to reduce
them unto reason. Being entered into the country, some young gentlemen of his
army, being lodged in a village, called Schoerle, went with some few
soldiers, to discover their enemies. The Frisons lying in ambush, brake forth,
and having compassed them in on every side, they slew many: the most apparent
of them Simon of Anuers, William of Voorhout, Baldwin of Harlem, Floris
Roesschen, Gerard Drossart, Allard of Egmont, Bruyn of Castrichom, Euert of
Noortwick, Gerard of Monstre, all Gentlemen of Holland defeared in Friseland.
knights; the which were drawn from among the dead, and buried in the Abbey of
Egmont.

After this unfortunate skirmish, Cont Floris having fortified his army, he
went himself in person against the Frisons, whom he did wonderfully destroy,
to revenge the death of his The Frisons subdued.
knights, his soldiers killing all they could encounter, both men and women.
The Frisons seeing their own misery, submitted themselves to his mercy, and
promised under their hands and seals, never to rebel against him, nor his
successors, the which they held not long. Being thus reduced unto reason, the
Earl returned into Holland, where he lived the remainder of his days in
peace.

In the year 1131, the regular Monks of Middelbourg in Zeeland, were for their
disordred 1131
life, expelled their Covent, by Gombault bishop of Vtrecht, who placed other
Monks there, that came from Antuerpe (which was to change a pour-blind man, for
one that had no sight) the said town of Middelbourg being then but a village,
with a castle, which they called Burcht: but by little and little they began to
wall it in, by reason of the ordinary incursions which the Flemings made into
the isle of Walchren, And the other islands began to erect seigniories, among
the which, that of the family of Borssele, as the most ancient of all, was the
most advanced, and rich in lands.

In the year 1133, Prince Floris, Earl of Holland and Zeeland, Lord of
Friseland, having The death of Cont Floris.
governed his countries in peace (except the troubles of Friseland) for the
space of 31 years, died

O Florens species, lege, cerne quid cito fies,
Quod teres tumuli, forma decet tituli.
Floruit vt palma serie Florentius alma,
Cultor Iustitiae, iura tuendo piae.
Duxerat vxorem claram, Regisque sororem,
Ambo praeclari, parbene iuncta pari.
Larga manus dantis, altar sacrum venerantis,
Donis non minimis, praecipue decimis.
Tempus ei pacis: labor est victoria Patris,
Attulit, optato suppede Mart dato.
Quum senas nonas Sol, martis tempore donas,
Contigit hanc lucem morte mutare ducem.
THIERRY THE SIXTH OF THAT name, and twelfth Earl of Holland and Zeeland, Lord
of Friseland.


THIERRY espoused the daughter of the Earl PALATINE,
SOPHIA called, that travailed with him in Palestine,
Where wearied with long ^yle it was (...) to die.
Twice in one day the Frisons he subdued valiantly.
Vtrecht he did besiege, and ruled forty year:
And in the Abbey of (...) his bones ^rred (...);
Intombed with a diadem of thorns, the which the King
Of Idumeas ensign was, which he from thence did bring.
THIERRY the sixth of that name, son to Floris the second, was twelfth Earl
Sophia, daughter to Otho Palatin of Rhin, of whom he had four sons; Floris the
3. that succeeded him, Otto Earl of Benthem, Baldwin bishop of Vtrecht, The
wife and children of Cont Thierry 6
and Peregrin Vicont of Montfort: with three daughters, Sophia, that was
abbess of Fontenelle, Hedewic, that was a religious woman there and
Petronelle, who was a fair and lovely lady, but I know not to whom she was
married. He had also one bastard, called Robert of Holland.

We have formerly said, That in the year 1086, the Emperor Henry the 4. upon
slight suggestions, had given the counties of Oostergoe and Westergoe, in
Friseland, to Conrard bishop of Vtrecht, which Marquis Egbers had given to the
bishopric of Vtrecht, to hold them of Henry: but Lothaire, Friseland given by
the emperor Lothaire, to the Earl of Holland.
uncle by the mothers side to this cont Thierry the 6, revoked this donation,
as soon as he came to the empire after Henry, as purchased unlawfully and by
stealth, restoring those two quarters of Oostergoc and Westergoe, with the
seven Forests (in the which three parts consists al Friseland) unto Cont
Thierry his nephew, annexing them to the estate of the Earls of Holland. Who
so desires to know the limits of these three jurisdictions, of Oostergoe,
Westergoc, and the seven Forests, let him read our particular description of
Holland, Zeeland, Vtrecht, Friseland, Oueryssell, and Gronningue, which are
six Provinces of the united Estates of the Netherlands, governed by Prince
Maurice of Nssaau, and Cont William of Nassau his cousin.

In the year 1132, the Frisons rebelled again against Cont Thierry; whom he
suffered in The Frisons rebel against the Earl of Holland.
Two battails in one day, in the which the Frisons were defeated.
in both which they were defeated, with such loss of their men, as the number
of the dead could not be known. After this victory the Earl returned
triumphing into his country of Holland, and his men laden with spoil and
prisoners.

The said Cont Thierry (as we have said) had one brother, called Floris the
black, a bold man Hatred betwixt Cont Thierry and Floru his brother.
and proud, who, whether that he envied the estate and prosperity of his
brother, or for some other private and domesticke quarrel, the which is easily
kindled among great men, through Floris was very welcome, hearing of the
hatred that was betwixt his brother and him, making him their General; with
whom he entered into Holland, ruining Floris retires to the Frisons, and makes
war against his brother.
all the Castles, and places of strength, in the earldom, even unto Harlem
he spoiled the town of Alcmar, and all the villages round about; the which
they did daily, and at night they returned laden with spoil into Friseland,
being not above five or six leagues distance. And the said Floris had yet done
worse unto his brother and the Hollanders, if the Emperor Lothaire, The
Emperor reconciles the two brethren.
their uncle (having intelligence of the quarrel of these two brethren, his
sisters sons) had not reconciled them together, as they were soon after.

The emperor had a great desire to be revenged of the Frisons, who had rebelled
against cont Thierry, by reason of the donation, which he had made unto him of
the countries of Oostergoe, Westergoe, and the seven Forests: but having great
wars in Germany and Italy, he could not pursue his intent, and therefore this
grant did not greatly advance him nor his successors. Besides Andrew bishop of
Vtrecht, brother to the Earl of Cuick, found himself grieved: saying, That
those jurisdictions belonged unto him, by the gift of former Emperors whereupon
he A new quarrel against the bishop of Vtrecht, for Friseland.
went to Conrard, competitor to Lothaire in the empire, who dis^lled that which
Lothaire had given to Thierry; and confirmed that which the Emperors their
predecessors had granted to former bishops. And withal, bishop Herbert,
successor to Andrew, after the death of the Emperor Lothaire (to whom Conrard
was forced to give place) obtained of the said Conrard Lothaire) a new
^tification of the said grant. But as all those which had been made, were but
in paper, or p^ment, either party wanting force to take possession thereof; the
Frisons maintaining themselves in their ancient freedoms and liberties, by
force of arms: which liberties had been given them by ancient Emperors, and
namely by Charlemaigne, and which they had purchased with the dear price of
their lives

The quarrel of the two brethren, Cont Thierry, and Floris the Black, being
pacified, and A greatquarrel betwixt Floris of Holland, and two Earls,
brethren.
they reconciled, the said Floris had another with the Earls Gouard of
Arlisberg, and Herman of Cuick, brethren. These two Earls had one niece, the
daughter of Arnoult van I^ochem, a knight, and of Alice their sister: who after
the decease of her father and mother, lived with Cont Herman of Cuick, her
uncle. Some of the friends and servants of this young gentlewoman, to whom the
valor and merits of Floris were well known, did greatly wish and desire a
marriage betwixt them two: but these two Earls would by no means yield
thereunto, devising all the trauerses and crosses they could. Those of Vtrecht,
as well for fear of the Emperor Lothaire, Floris into their town, giving him
free egresse and regresse, when he pleased, with all his train. He being
much moved and discontented, that the Earls of Arlisberg and Cuick, with
Andrew bishop of Vtrecht, all three brethren, had refused him this gentlewoman
their niece, resolved to be revenged of the said bishop, and to do him all the
injury he could, for that he hated him most: whereupon entering with an army
into his diocese of Vtrecht, he burnt the town of Lermeude. Cont Herman
knowing well, that by open force he could not avoid him, by reason of the great
aid and support that he had from the Emperor, his uncle, and from the Earl
his brother; he laid an ambush to surprise and take him prisoner. One morning,
attending Floris Floris of Holland, ^reacherously slain by the Earl of Cuick.
he went to charge him: Floris meaning to save himself, turned his horse head,
and fled toward the town, with such have, as both he and his horse were
overthrown. Cont Herman pursuing him, and ouertaking him, slew him, before he
could recover himself. The Emperor hearing of his nephews death, called Cont
Herman by proclamation of the empire and for his contumacie, and not appearing,
deprived him of his seigniorie, and degraded him of all arms and honor, for
so soul a murder. On the other side; the Earl of Holland entered with a great
A revenge for this murder.
army into the Earl of Cuicks country, burning all the castles, and chasing
Cont Herman and Andrew bishop of Vtrecht, his brother, out of their te^ories.
Notwithstanding after the death of the Emperor Lothaire, by the intercession
of some noblemen, Herman was reconciled to the Earl, doing him homage, and
taking an oath of fealty: and the bishop was likewise Floris, when he was
slain, there ^lerman and the bishop his brother, reconciled to the Earl of
Holland.
was a knight, called Herolt of Barn: he being on a time chased by Cont
Thierryes men, leaped with his horse into the Meuse, and so escaped, swimming
over to the other bank. At that time Cont Otto of Benthem, son to Otto
Palatin of Rhin, brother to Sophia Contesse of Holland, brother in law to Cont
Thierry, upon an old quarrel entered into the country of Tuvent, and upon the
bishop of Vtrechts territories who presently levied some small troops of horse
The Earl of Benthem defeated, and prisoner.
and foot, under the command of Hugh Butterman, lord of Buttersloot, Botslandt,
and Spicke, who went to encounter the Earl of Benthem in the open field,
defeated him, and took him prisoner: in which encounter, the Earl Otto of
Biel was slain, with many gentlemen. Cont Thierry hearing of this defeat, and
of the taking of his brother in law, went to besiege the town of Vtrecht.
Bishop Herebert, successor to Andrew, finding himself unable to resist, and to
preserve the town from ruin, sought to relieve himself by spiritual arms:
and going out of The bishops policy, to avoid the ruin of the town.
the town with all his Clergy, crosses, and banners, as if it had been to a
general Procession, carrying a book in his hand, went to excommunicat him.
Cont Thierry and his Hollanders seeing them come a far off, thinking it had
been a sally made by the besieged, fell to arms. Approaching near unto them,
the Earl seeing the bishop and his clergy thus attired in their
Ecclesiastical ornaments, goes from his horse, and bare headed goes to crave
for mercy of the bishop, that he might not excommunicat him, as he had
determined: The bishop taking him up with a kiss of peace, they were
reconciled together, and Cont Otto Palatin of Rhin set at liberty; Otto was
The Earl of them slain.
slain by Cont Herman van Staelwyck, to whom there succeeded in the earldome
of Benthem, Otto of Holland, his nephew, son to Cont Thierry the 6, and to
the lady Sophia, for that Floris their eldest son, who was to inherit and
succeed in the county of Holland, Zeeland,

In the year 1155 the Frisons upon Drent made a road into Holland, with an
army, where The Frisons invade Holla^d
they did spoil and sack the town of Zande. The nobility and inhabitants of
the town of Harlem, with the contrymen of Exdorp, fell upon them, and slew
900 upon the place, recovering their booties, and taking many prisoners, with
the which they returned victors to the town of Harlem.

Cont Thierry, after that he had governed his countries of Holland, Zeeland,
and Friseland The death of Cont Th^rry 6
40 years, died in the year 1163. He had much war against the Frisons, the
Vltraiectins, or them of Vtrecht, and his other neighbors. The principal and
most memorable noblemen of his time, being his vassals, were Floris the Black
(who was slain, as we have said) and Simon, The nobility of Holland, aad his
other vassals.
Floris the Fat: then his eldest son Floris 3, who succeeded him: after him
Otto Earl of Benthem, Baldwin bishop of Vtrecht, Thierry, and Peregrin
lieutenant of Holland; all four his sons, and Robert his bastard: then
William lord of Brederode, and Floris his son: Gerard lord of Telnigen, Hugh
lord of Leck, William seignior of Heusden, John lord of Arckell, Folpert
seignior of Lederdam, Didier lord of Altena, of Putten, and of Strenen, Hugh
seignior of Bottersloot, brother to the lord of Arckel, Gerard seignior of
Aspren, son to the lord of Lederdam, Floris seignior of Voerne, Thierry his
son, Adelwyn Vicont of Leyden, Didier of Persin, Baldwin of Harlem: these
were held in the rank of barons. Then Ieams Vanden, Vuode, Gerard of
Poelgeest, Albert Bauiard, Ghisbrecht Porckyn, John of Croonenburch, Floris of
Woert, Ogier of Reyswick, all Knights. After those Berthoul Spysdrager,
Berthould aduocat of Egmont (who was the first of the house of Egmont, the
which was since erected to an earldom) with Dodo, Allard, Didier, Berthoult,
and Wermbold, his sons; Godefrey of Harnesbergh, Herbert of Liethen, Thierry
of Schoten, Ludolph of Adrichone, Vastardt of Reynigem by Leyden, Ysbrandt the
Frison, and Berthould his brother: Hugh of Arckersloot, Bruyn of Castrichom,
Hugh of Monster, Didier of Ween, John Heereman, Hellnick van Doornick, Philip
of Bloot, William of Voorhout, Henry of Heylygerlee, Gerebrandt of Alcmar; al
squiers: and many other brave gentlemen.

And this was the Epitaph of the said Cont Thierry, as we found it in the
Abbey of Egmont.

Collige, vide Ciuis, quam sit caro plena ruinis,
Quid sit, and ad quid eat, quam cito dispereat.
Pandit honorifici Comitis caro Theodorici,
Quis tibi sit finis, incinerande Ciuis.
Hic Comitumnonus, Patriae Pater, atque Patronus,
Ingenio vigui^, victor vbique fuit.
Augustinonis, signo currente Leonis,
Deposuit quod erat, esse quod est videras.
There was also the Epitaph of his son Peregrin, who was his Lieutenant in
the government of Holland, written in this manner.

Pompas mundanas animaduertens homo vanas,
Quaere quod est and erit, nam status iste perit.
En caro glorifici duodenis Theodorici,
Instar abit fumi, and tabida puiet humi.
Hunc Comitum nonus nostrorum Theodoricus,
Spem patriae genuit spe^ s^ulisque ruit.
Iste Calendar^ Ia^, lachrimar^,
Extractus pu^eo, (...) in aethre De^.
FLORIS THE THIRD OF THAT name, the thirteenth Earl of Holland and Zeeland,
Lord of Friseland.
13 Florentius ^ius


In youthful years I set my lo^ upon a danie
Of Scotland (and did her espouse) that ADA had to name.
The proud rebellious Frisons, that did scor^ (...) yield
Subjection unto me, by force I conquered in the field.
And valiantly won towns and forts in Syriae,
And in the land of Palestine, did pass my days away.
For ere I could return out of that countery
I died, and in S. Peter's church in Antioche do lie.
FLORIS the 3 of that name, eldest son to Cont Thierry the 6, after the Ada,
daughter to the king of Scotland, Cont Floris wife and children.
by whom he had many children: first, Thierry, who succeeded him in the said
Earledomes; William Earl of Friseland, Floris Cathedral Provost of Vtrecht,
Robert President of Kenemerlandt: and four daughters, Marguerite Contesse of
Cleues, Beatrix, Elizabeth, and Alix. This Floris had great troubles in his
time, whereof we will discourse succinctly.

In the year 1163, Cont Floris having succored Godefrey of Rhemen, bishop of
Vtrecht, 1163
against the Earl of Cleues, and the Baron of Batenbourgh, being besieged in
the town of Gronninghen (whereunto he pretended an interest) the which the
Emperor Frederic did pacify: Godefrey (like unto the rest of his predecessors)
building upon the graunts unduly purchased and obtained from Emperors. But as
the Earls of Holland had the more ancient grants, and had been longest seized
thereof, Cont Floris was then fully resolved to dispossess the bishop thereof,
once for all; seeing that having so lately, and so willingly succored him, and
freed him from his enemies, he now provoked him to arms, by his unkind usage.
The bishop entreated the Emperor Frederic, to succor him, and to maintain
him in the rights which his predecessors had granted to the bishops of
Vtrecht: the emperor went himself in person, and reconciled them; so as they

In the year 1166, the West Frisons knowing that Cont Floris had other lets,
came with 1166
that quarter of Kennemerlandt; they took Alcmar by force, where they slew
four bourgesses, and burnt the whole town, except the church, which they
labored to preserve from fire. Cont Floris forbear to take revenge, until the
year 1168, in the dead of Winter; at what time he led his army into Scoerle,
where being camped, some of his knights and gentlemen (notwithstanding the
defense of their Prince) would go to the war: and being come as far as
Schagen, they spoiled and burnt it, carrying away a great spoil. The Frisons
lying in ambush, Hollanders slain by the Frisons.
and expecting their return, charge them, and spoil them in a manner all,
rescuing the booty. Among the which there was slain Simon of Antuerpe,
William of Voorhout, Baldwin of Harlem, Gerard Spisdraeger, Floris Ruysch,
Allard of Egmont, Bruyn of Castrichom, Gerard of Monstre, Euerard of Nortwick,
all knights, who were buried at Egmont.

The year following 1169, the Frisons returned again to Alcmar; but the Earls
garrisons, with the contrymen of Kennemerlandt, pursued them by water and by
land, and slew The West Frisons half vanquished.
some thirty of them, and the rest retired, for that the Earl sent his
Flemish forces against them. Soon after the Earl marched himself in person
with an army: he burned Winckell and Nieuvoort, and subjected under his
obedience, the islands of Texel, Wyernighe, and Fly, the inhabitants whereof
he did ransom at four thousand marks of silver: and then he returned a
conqueror into his country of Holland.

About the same time that the Frisons were reduced unto reason, Cont Floris
demanded A controversy betwixt the Earls of Holland and Flanders, for the
^sle of Walchren.
the isle of Walchren in Zeeland, of Philip Earl of Flanders, the which his
predecessors had detained Philip answered, That he would defend and keep that
by force, which his fathers had left him, and whatsoever he held coming from
them. Cont Floris called to his succor, the Earls of Cleues, Geldre, and
Bergh, who came to assist him in this quarrel, with ten thousand men, the
which being joined unto his army, they entered the country of Alost in
Flanders, which they spoiled: and from thence Philip being assisted by Matthew
earl of Bologne, his brother, levied an army of Piccards, Artesiens,
Hannuiers, and Flemings, with the which he went to charge the Earl of Hollands
camp, where there was a very sharp and hard encounter: but in the end these
three earls were defeated, and their army put to rout. Cont Floris much
grieved at this defeat, fought still, and would not yield, until that he found
himself wounded almost to the death. The earl of Flanders having taken him
prisoner, received him with all courtesy and humanity, as his cousin german
and nearest kinsman: and causing his wounds to be dressed, he led him with him
into Flanders. The news of this defeat An accord betwixt these two princes.
concluded, That Cont Philip should enjoy to him and to his heirs, for ever,
the land of Waes (which is one of the best quarters of Flanders, the which the
Earls of Holland had* formerly held) and that Cont Floris, besides his
liberty, should be restored to his island of Walchren: and moreover, he should
send unto Cont Philip, a thousand men expert in making of ditches, to stop the
hole which had been made near unto Dam or the Sluice, whereby the country was
drowned round about at every high sea, the which the Flemings could by no
means fill up, neither with wood, nor any other matter, for that all sunk as
in a gulf without any bottom: whereby in succession of time, Bruges and all
that jurisdiction, had been in danger to Floris having taken possession of the
isle of Walchren, returned into Holland, from whence he sent the best workmen
he could find in all his countries, into Flanders, to make dikes and causeies,
and to stop the hole near unto this Dam, or Sluice, and to recover the drowned
land. These diggers being come to the place, they found at the entry of this
bottomless hole a Sea-dog, the which for six days together, did nothing but
cry out and howl very fearfully. They not knowing what it might signify,
having consulted of this accident, they resolved to cast this dog into the
hole. There was a mad-headed Hollander among the rest, who going into the
bottom of the dike, took the dog by the tail, and cast him into the
midst of the gulf; then speedily they cast earth and torfe into it, so as
they found a bottom, and by little Philip gave unto all these Hollanders,
Zeelanders, and others, that would inhabit there, as much land as they could
recover from Dam to Ardenbourg, for them and their successors, for ever, with
many other immunities and freedoms: By reason whereof many planted themselves
there, and in succession of time, made a good town there, the which by reason
of this dog, which they had cast into the hole, they named Hondtsdam, that is
to say, a Dogs Sluice; Dam in Flemish signifying a Sluice, and Hondt a dog^ and
therefore at this day, the said town (the which is simply called Dam) carries
a dog in their a^es and blason.

About the same time, the emperor Frederic, Philip king of France, Richard
king of England, The Christians besiege Damiette.
William son to Cont Floris of Holland, concluded with his Hollanders of the
town of Harlem, to arm the forepart of his ship, with a long and strong saw
of steel, made of purpose, expecting the first strong gale of wind that should
blow into the haven: the which they effected upon the first occasion, so as
through the violence of the wind, the force of the ship, and the cutting of
this saw, they brake the chains in pieces; and gave entry to all the whole
fleet of the Christians, into the haven of the city of Damiette, by The prowes
of the earl of Ho^lands son.
which only means it was taken. The emperor Frederic knowing, that through the
Valor and William and his Hollanders, he had conquered this city, which was
almost invincible, he made William knight, honored him, with his royal
bounty, and received him with the other princes, under the imperial standard.
And for a testimony of the virtue of those burgesses of Harlem, betwixt the
four stars which they carried in their ensign, being the arms of the town,
he added a sword, and the Patriarch of Jerusalem, a cross above

In the time of this Cont Floris, they began to fish for herrings at the mouth
of the river of The first fishing for Herring.
Meuse, and in the British sea, along the coast of Holland, Zeeland, and
Friseland: the first fishing, was about the island of Bryele, where as they did
fish with small barks, called Sabards. Those of Zirixee were the first that
did fish, and packt them up in barrels. Those of Bierulyet, a small island upon
the coast of Flanders, the better to preserve them being salted, invented the
means to gill them, and to pull out the garbage, or else they would soon
corrupt.

In the year 1190, the emperor Frederic being in Nicea, a city of Bythynia,
having extreme 1190
heat, he went into a river to bath him, but the violence of the stream
carried him away, and he was drowned in the presence of all his people, who
could not help him. About which time Death of the Emperor Frederic, and of the
Earl of Holland.
Floris the third, Earl of Holland, fell sick in the army, died in this
voyage, and was interred by the emperor Frederic, having governed his provinces
seven and twenty years. Ada his his wife did survive him eighteen years,
and died in the year 1208, being interred in the abbey of Middlebourg in
Zeeland. William their son having accompanied his father (as we have said)
at his return, passing through Germany, he married the daughter of Frederic
duke of Suabe, whom he enjoyed not long.

THIERRY THE SEVENTH OF THAT name, foureteenth Earl of Holland and Zeeland,
Lord of Friseland.
14 Theodoricus Septimus.


In peace I was most mild, in war both stout and bold,
And did my brother overthrow, and Frisons pride controld.
In Flanders, Gelder, and Brabant victoriously
I overcame my enemies, and Boisleduke valiantly
Did enter: but by chance there prisoner I was made,
My wife that was a lady fair, to name ALIDE had.
Irul'd full thirteen years, and did much feared of many,
For that for courage in my time, like me there was not any.
THIERRY the seventh of that name, and fourteenth Earl of Holland, Floris his
father, in Palestina, succeeded in all The wife and children of Cont Tbierry.
his earledomes. He had to wife Aleyd^, Alix or Adella, daughter to Didier
earl of Cleue, by whom he had notany sons, but two daughters, excreding
fair: whereof the first, called Adella, was married to Henry of Gueldre, and
died without children, there Ada, whom the mother, after the decease of her
father, against the liking and consent of all the noblemen of Holland, married
to Cont Lewis of Loos, who was but of mean calling, she being Contesse of
Holland.

This Cont Thierry having after the decease of his father governed his
countries quietly, for the space of five years, the lord William of Holland
being returned from Palestina (where he Floris their father) upon some false
reports entered into contention with him. By reason whereof, William retired
himself into Friseland, to the Dreuthers: with whom being entered into league,
he made many roads into Holland. On the other side, Baldwin earl of Flanders
entered with an army into the isle of Walchren, which lay near unto him. Cont
Thierry seeing himself assaulted on two sides, levied all the men he could,
and divided them into two armies: the one he took with himself, and the other
he left to the Contesse Adella, his wife, to lead against William his brother,
and to suppress the Frisons. Cont Thierry embarked Cont Thierry chaseth the
Flemings.
with his army, and landed in Zeeland, from whence, after a great battle, he
chased the Flemings. His wife with her troops went from Egmont toward Alcmar,
to fight with the Frisons. The lord William of Holland came to encounter her
with his men, and presented himself William seeing his Frisons waver, and
ready to Break, encouraged them so wi^words, and behaved himself so
valiantly in his own person, as having long defended themselves, in the end
he carried them back into their own country, with small loss. The Frisons
seeing his endeavors, and how faithfully William of Holland had assisted them,
they trusted him more than before, making him their head, their podestate, and
their captain general. Cont Thierry having succesfully ended the wars in
Zeeland, returned with his army into Holland, into the quarter of
Kennemerlandt, to make more violent war against the Frisons, and his brother
William. But to the Baldwin bishop of Vtrecht, Didier cathedral provost of the
said bishopric, and Otto earl of Benthem, uncles to these two brethren,
labored all they could to reconcile them: by whom it was concluded, That
Thierry, as the elder brother, should remain Earl of Holland and Zeeland, and
that William should hold of his brother in fee, the country of East and West
Friseland, on either side the river of Fly, unto that of Lanuvers: and
moreover, should receive for an annual pension out of the custom of
Ghoervlyet, the sum of eighteen hundred livers. The Frisons understand not
how, nor by what title, this division of Friseland was made, whereof there is
not any mention made in their Annals: yet some writers confess, that they
yielded hereunto in favor of William of Holland: but they deny, that it was
upon condition to hold it in fee of Cont Thierry, and to do him homage, or to
any other The Frisons will acknowledge no other sovereign, but the empire.
given them by ancient emperors, whereof they have always been very jealous,
and strict obseruers, even unto the death. This peace made betwixt the two
brethren, William returned into Friseland, where he was honorably received,
and from that time during his life, acknowledged for their prince, where he
built a castle, called Osterzee, in the which he made his ordinary abode and
residence.

After the death of Baldwin of Holland, bishop of Vtrecht, uncle to Cont
Thierry, being ready to proceed to the election of a new bishop, Thierry Earl
of Holland, and Otto earl of Gueldre, Didier cathedral provost of Vtrecht,
brother unto Baldwin the last bishop, and uncle to the Earl of Holland: others
had chosen Arnould of Isenbourgh, provost collegiall of Deuenter, who was
supported by the earl of Gueldre, and by all those of the country of
Ouerissel, The emperor placed Didier of Thierry entered the Veluve with an
army, destroying and burning wheresoever he came so at the carried Wars
bewixt the Earls of Holland and Geldres.
away a great spoil. Cont Otto did also l^nic what men he could following.
Con^ Thierry as far as Heymens bergh, to rescue the prey; wherethere was a
sharp encounter: but the Gueldrois seeing his men slip away, he saved himself
through the swiftness of his horse Cont Thierry pursuing them that fled, took
many prisoners, among the which were some gentlemen. William earl of
East-Friseland, hearing of the victory which his brother had gotten, ^ame to
him to the castle of Horst, to congratulate with him, for this his happy
success. Cont Thierry A new quarrel betwixt the two Brethren of Holland.
imagining that he came now to attempt something against him, he commanded an
officer of his, called Henry Craen, to seize upon his brother, and commit him
to prison, the which was done. But soon after, William having broken prison,
he retired himself secretly to the earl of Gueldre, to be supported by him
against the earl of Holland, his brother, where he remained some time. Otto
earl of Gueldre knowing him to be very valiant, having seen good proof
thereof in Palestina, against the Sarracens, considering also the goodly
portion which he had in Friseland, gave him his daughter Alix in marriage; by
whom he had one son, named Floris (who was afterward Earl of Holland) Otto,
William, and two daughters, Ada who was abbess of Rhinsburgh (the which was an
abbey of noble women) and Ryckwyf, who was a religious William and Alix,
celebrated in the town of Staueren, Otto of Gueldre returned into his
country, and William was honorably received with his wife, and acknowledged
throughout all the country of Friseland for their lord. Soon after, and the
same year, the Earls of Holland and Gueldre were reconciled together, The
Earls of Holland and Geldre reconciled.
upon condition, That Adella, eldest daughter to Cont Thierry, should marie
with Henry, son to Cont Otto; but he lived not long, and died without
children.

In the year 1198, Didier of Holland, and Arnould of Isenburgh, both elect
bishops of Vtrecht, pleading their cause at Rome, the pope adjudged the said
bishopric, through the favor of 1198
some courtiers in Rome, and the advantage of his election, to Arnould, where
he was consectated the 30 bishop of Vtrecht. But as he died soon after, and
was buried at Rome, pope Innocent Didier of Holland, who had been his
competitor, and was in like sort consecrated at Rome. At his return to take
possession of his bishopric, he fell sick at Padoua in Italy, where he died,
and was there buried: To whom succeeded Didier vander Are, collegiall provost
of Nydrecht upon Meuse, being in commission in the realm of Sicile; who after
the death of these two bishops, was sent for to come and take possession of the
said bishopric, the which at his first entrance, he found very much charged
with debts: so as by the advice of his barons, nobles, towns, and chapters, he
went into. Friseland, to demand some aid or gratuitie, to free himself of
debt. William earl of East-Friseland, would not suffer his subjects to be
charged with any imposition, or extraordinary subsidy: for the preventing
Trouble in Frizeland.
whereof, he went to Staueren, whither the bishop was come unto the abbey, of
whom he laid hold at the end of mass, thinking to carry him away to his
castle of Osterzee: but the monks, Thierry Earl of Holland, and Otto earl The
Earls of Holland and Geldre fall upon the bishop.
of Gueldre, father in law to Cont William of East Friseland (being reconciled
to his brother, and freed him from any bad conceit of him) banded themselves
jointly against the bishop. The earl of Gueldre, seized upon all the country
of Ouerissel for his part, chased away all the bishops officers, and puta
garrison of Gueldres into the town of Deuenter. The Earl of Holland spoiled
the whole country, on this side the river of Yssel, and besieged the bishop in
his city of Vtrecht: during the which time, the earl of Gueldre going with a
safeconduct toward the emperor Otto the 4. (competitor to the emperor Philip)
he was stayed by the way, by the William of Paruis; and Henry of Cuyck,
brethren to the duke of Brabant. The Earl thinking to retire with his
prisoners into Holland, the duke being assisted by the Archbishop of Cologne,
the bishop of Liege, the Duke of Lembourg, and the Earl of Thierry finding
himself ouercharged at a passage, after that he had long defended himself,
being vriable to resist so great forces, was in the end taken: and so the Duke
of Brabant had the two Earls of Geldre and Holland his prisoners. The bishop of
Vtrecht seeing these two provinces without Lords to defend them, entered the
country of Holland with all the forces he could gather together, The bishop
reuengeth himself of the Earl of Holland.
as well of his own, as from his allies, from whence he carried a great
spoil: the Nobility and Commons of Holland pursued after to rescue it, and
defeated some knights and soldiers of Vtrecht in the rereward, burning in
their return some villages of his jurisdiction. The next day the bishop entered
into the Veluve, the which he spoiled, took the town of Zutphen, and went to
Deuenter, which yielded unto him, so as he recovered great store of treasure.
Soon An accord betwixt the two Earls, the duke of Brabant, and the bishop.
of Geldre, both which were afterward reconciled with the bishop of Vtrecht,
whereby all quarrels were ended.

In the year 1203, Thierry Earl of Holland fell sick at Dordrecht, lamenting
much the absence of his brother William, Earl of East-Friseland (although
there had still remained some 1203
small seeds of hatred) to recommend his daughter Ada unto him (being yet to
marry) and her Cont Thierry sick.
countries of Holland and Zeeland. Alix wife to the said Cont Thierry, even
before the death of her husband, and during his sickness, without the council
or advice of any one, of her own proper motion, desirous to marry her daughter,
had contracted her secretly to Lewis Earl of Lewis being far inferior in
quality to her daughter, would not dare to oppose himself against her, not
caring in the mean time if her daughter were well or ill married. In the mean
time Cont Thierry died, having governed his The death of Cont Thierry.
countries thirteen whole years in continual wars. In his time there
flourished in Holland Didier bishop of Vtrecht, Otto Earl of Benthem, and
Peregrin, Lieutenant of the County of The Nobility of his time.
Holland, al three his uncles, brethren to Cont Floris, who was father to Cont
Thierry, and Robert also his bastard uncle; then William Earl of
East-Friseland, Floris Provost of Vtrecht, and Robert Earl of Kennemerlandt
his brethren, Henry of Geldre, husband to Adella, the eldest daughter to Cont
Thierry, William Lord of Brederode, Hugues Lord of Teylingen, and William
Robert of Heusden and Altena, issued from the Earls of Holland, with a great
number of knights and squires. This Epitaph of the said Cont Thierry, the
seventh of that name, was found in the Abbey of Egmont.

Terricus iacet hic, peperit quem filia Regis
Ada: Comes Comitem genuit Florentius istum.
Quiclausus tumulo virtutum pondere micans,
Siccatur, merit^que doles Hollandia tantum
Amisisse virum, per quem suffulta, labores,
Insidias, rabidos sopisti tuta tumultus.
Quem pietas, quem ver a fides probit are magistra,
Virtutumque cohors tutum seruauit inermem.
Soluitur in cineres corpus, soluitque tributum
Carnis, and antiquae redit ad primordia matris.
Hic binas nonas voluente Nouembre, relinquens
Exilium mundi, sanctis conregnat in astris.
And upon his Tomb were graven these four verses:

Hic Terrice iaces Comes and care regia, ^stus
Mortetua populus, largus, discretus, honestus,
Et fortis bellat^r er as, victorque m^destus
Milite pro tanto fundantur cum prece quaestus.
ADA, CONTESSE OF HOLLAND and Zeeland, the fifteenth in the government of the
said Earledomes.
Ada Theodorici Septimi Filia.


This ADA did possess her predecessors wealth,
But'gainst her fathers will did matchin marriage by stealth,
With one v^worthie her (though mother was content)
But as it after did appear God seemed discontent,
And did within one year bereave her of her life:
Who dead, her husband sought to claim the inheritance of his wife:
But the Cont WILLIAM with great power did him withstand,
(As heir unto his niece deceast) and drove him out the land.
ADA, daughter to Cont Thierry the seventh, succeeded her father, and was
Thierry the father, Lewis Earl of Loos (to whom Ada had been promised in
marriage by the mother) was in the castle of Altena, where he attended news of
the fathers death. The Contesse Adella presently after the decease of her
husband, sent to Lewis to come to Dordrecht with all speed, the which she did,
and there he gave him her daughter in The Contesse of Holland married.
marriage, and in steed of a funeral pomp, there were feasts and nuptial
banquets, deferring the obsequies till after the marriage: which being
consummated, and all the feasts ended, the body of Cont Thierry was with small
pomp and ceremony carried and interred in the abbey

William Earl of East-Friseland having intelligence of the death of his
brother, came unto Zipe with an intent to assist and mour^ ^e funeral, yet
would he not pass on before he had demanded a safe conduct from the Contesse,
and those of her Council: the which was denied him, yet he stayed in that
place until the funerals were ended: which done, he returned into Friseland.
His kinsfolks and good friends in Holland, as Floris Provost Cathedral of
Vtrecht his brother, Otto Earl of Benthem, and his son Ieams, Chastelain of
Leyden, Philip of Wassenare, William of Theylinghen, John of Ryswicke, Gualter
of Egmont, and Albert Bauiart, knights, and other gentlemen well affected unto
him, showed themselves discontented, that they should be governed by a woman
and a poor Earl, to whom they held themselves William, giving him to
understand of their resolution and alliance; Cont William sent for to undertake
the government of Holland
and that without all fear he should come and join with them at the abbey of
Egmont, where they would attend him. Cont William departed out of Friseland as
covertly as he could, but for want of a good wind to carry him into Holland (or
it may be, the better to inform and assure himself of their intentions) he
put to land in Zeeland at Zirixee in the Island of Schouven: where he was
received and embraced by them of the country, and by the Lords of Borsele, of
Croningen, and others, who acknowledged him for their prince and Earl of
Zeeland. In the mean time, Gualter of Egmont, and Albert Bauiart, accompanied
Adella widow, do wager to Cont Thierry, whom they forced, with M. Ghysbrecht of
Amstell, to fly by night, and to retire themselves to Vtrecht. The young
Contesse Ada remained there a while; but in the end she retired also, being
accompanied by Roger Vander Mere, Otto van venzen, and many other knights and
gentlemen of the Earl of Loos his train: coming all amazed to the town of
Leyden, there to maintain themselves against their enemies, as in a place of
refuge and safety, the Kennemers being in arms, with Gualter of Egmont their
Commander, pursued the young Contesse and those of her train even into the
said town, where also was Philip of Wassenarewho; with his Rhynlanders (over
whom he was captain) besieged the Bourg so straightly, as the besieged were
constrained to yield for William, who was then in Zeeland, hearing that the
Earl of Loos and the Contesse Dowager had saved themselves in Vtrecht, and
that the young Contesse Ada was Cont William comes into Holland.
stayed in Leyden, he came speedily into Holland, the which by the assistance
of his friends he took wholly unto himself, disposing of their goods that had
been opposite unto his will: then he caused the young Contesse his niece to be
conducted with an honorable train and He puts the young Contesse in guard, and
becomes master of the country.
good entreaty into the Isle of Texel, under his jurisdiction of Friseland.
The Earl of Loos being thus chased away, meditating of the means to be
revenged, he invited to his succor the bishop of Liege his brother, John duke
of Lembourg, and the Earl of Flanders his kinsmen, relying much upon the
bishop of Vtrecht, whom he won with 2000. marks of silver, and a promise,
that (if he remained victor and in quiet possession) he would hold the
Earldom

Cont William having notice of the forces which the Earl of Loos prepared to
recover Holland, he appointed Gualter of Egmont and Albert Bauiart to be chief
of the Kennemers, and Philip of Wassenare, and the Seignior of Theylinghen to
command the Rhynlanders, Cont William conquereth Zeeland.
and Theylinghen provided carefully for all things, causing two block-houses or
forts to be made, the one within the town of Leyden (the defense whereof was
committed to Floris of Holland, Provost Cathedral of Vtrecht) and the other at
Zuvamerdam, which Cont Otto of Benthem had in charge. The Lords of ^gmont and
Bauiart came with their ships to Amstel, where they cut through the ditch, and
drowned all the country of Amsterlandt: the Kennemers boording the
Amsterlanders barks, drew out all the spoil, and then fired them.

The bishop of Vtrecht on the other side to be revenged, went himself into
Holland, and passing by Mydrecht, he chased the earl of Benthem out of his
fort of Zuvamerdam, and burnt many villages in Holland: the which having
succeeded happily, marching on, he commanded Floris was, whom he forced with
small loss, for that they within protested, that they would not defend it
against the said bishop: the Provost was taken prisoner, and led to the castle
of Horst. The next day the bishop entered into Leyden, whether the earl of Loos
came also, with such men as he had brought out of South-Holland (which is the
country about Dordrecht) they of Leyden did him homage, and did acknowledge
him for earl of Holland in the right of the contesse Ada his wife. Among the
chief of the nobility of North-Holland there joined with him the Lord John of
Persin, John and Isbrand of Harlem, Arnold and Henry of Ryswick, and Vuouter
van Rymen. These sent unto the Earl of Loos to come boldly upon their faith to
Harlem, whether he went, and reduced all the villages therabouts under his
obedience. The Kennemer^ pacified.
500 pounds great, for the damages which they had done in cutting the ditch,
and burning in Amsterlandt: and so every one returned to his own home. This
done, the bishop and earl feared not any other enemies, but taking their way
toward Egmont, in passing, they burnt the village of S. Agathe, the which at
this present is the town of Beuerswike and the castle of Brederode. And thus
they reduced all Holland, before divided into South and North; South-Holland
William: but this sudden change continued not long.

Soon after the earl of Namur entered the Isle of Walchren in Zeeland,
pretending to subject it under the earl of Flanders, but seeing his attempts
to prove unfortunate, he returned as he came. Hugh of Voorn was then in Zeeland,
who reduced all those Islands under the earl of Loos, and chased away Cont
William, who with great difficulty retired himself, for having lien long
hidden, in the end he saved himself in a small boat, causing himself to be
covered with fishers nets. The earl of Loos had made the said Hugh Van Voorn
governor with great authority and power: who carried himself so insupportably
in all his actions, that in the end the Zeelanders would no more endure, nor
obey him, but against the will of the earl of Loos William of Holland, and
entreating him to return The Zeelanders call back Cont William
unto them, who willingly embraced this occasion, giving notice thereof first
to Gualter of Egmont, Albert Bauiart, William van Theylinghen, and Philip of
Wassenare, entreating them to come unto him with all the forces they could
levy, in the town of Leyden, and that they should do no act of hostility
against the earl of Loos, until that he himself were present: and then he
went into Zeeland. The earl of Loos hearing of the Zeelanders revolt, and that
the Kennemers were in arms to fight with him, he entered with all his forces
into the town of Leyden, to make head against them, for that they made all the
have they could to seize thereon, marching without order, or any warlike
discipline. Having prevented them in the said town, he attended them, and then
went to charge them, so as they were much disordered: Philip of Wassenare,
Gualter of Egmont and Albert Bauiart escaped, but William of They linghen was
taken prisoner. The Earl of Loos having had this good success, went and
camped with all his army at Voorschoten, William, lest he should surprise him.
In the mean time Cont William arrived with his forces of Zeeland: being come
into Holland, he planted his camp in the ditch of Ryswicke: from thence he
went to lodge near the Wood of la Hay, meaning to give the Earl of Loos
battle the next day: who knowing him to be so near, and that he had a desire
to fight, he sent John duke of Lembourg speedily unto him, to entreat him to
enter into some accord with him; but cont William would give no ear unto it,
finding himself (by the death of the Contesse Ada) the true and only heir of
Holland and Zeeland. The said duke having made his report, took up his tents
and pauilions, being loath to attend the danger of a doubtful battle. The
Earl of Loos much amazed, seeing himself abandoned by the duke, who was his
chief support, forsaking Ada, Cont William remained absolute Prince of
Holland, Zeeland,

WILLIAM THE FIRST OF THAT name, the sixteenth Earl of Holland and Zeeland,
Lord of Friseland.
16 Guilielmus Primus.


This WILLIAM by great policy did break the chain,
Which cross the Haven of Damiet, the Sarasins had layne:
Whereby the Harlemers great honor did obtain,
Record whereof within their Town as yet does still remain.
Two wives he had, whereof one out of Geldre came,
The second MARY called was a princely English dame:
Full nineteen years he ruled, and peaceably possessed
His countries, and in Rhynsburgh died, whereas his bones do rest.
WILLIAM the sixteenth Earl of Holland and Zeeland, Lord of Friseland Ada
expelled the earl of Loos, remained in quiet possession of the said provinces.
He had by his wife Alix, daughter to the earl of Gueldre, Floris who succeeded
him in Co^t Williams children.
the said Earledomes, Otto bishop of Vtrecht, and William who was lieutenant of
Holland (the which was father to the lady Alix, married to Didier lord of
Brederode) and two daughters, whereof the one was Abbess at Rhynsbourg, and
the other at Delft. This Cont William did homage to the Emperor Frederic the
second, for his Counties of Holland, Zeeland, and Friseland. Afterward, upon a
private quarrel he went and besieged the castle of Aspren, and having taken it,
he rased it to the ground. The castle of Aspren rased.
Cont Gerard vander Are, brother to Didier bishop of Vtrecht, in revenge thereof
went and besieged William and the bishop were reconciled together, and they
made an accord, by the which Cont William should pay unto the bishop a thousand
pounds, and restore unto Henry of Craen all that he had taken from him, for
that (as we have said before) he had once put him in prison by the
commandment of Cont Thierry his master, brother to the said Cont William.
Item, that all the Earls subjects being in the bishopric of Vtrecht, should
from that time forth be vassales to the bishop as well as all his vassales,
remaining in Holland. Item, that Cont William with a hundred knights, attired
only in linen cloth, and barefooted, should present themselves before the
Cathedral church of Vtrecht, and being there, the Earl should ask him
forgiveness, for that he had before laid hands upon him, and taken him
prisoner (although Henry king of Scotland, uncle by the mothers side to cont
William of Holland, leaving no children. There was a great nobleman in
Scotland, who with the help of the king of England got possession of the
realm. The Earl of Holland pretending a title to the Crown, as the nearest
kinsman, son to the deceased kings sister, employed all his friends for the
obtaining thereof: and to bring it to effect, being embarked with a goodly
army, he landed in Scotland, where at the first he took many towns and
castles. In the mean time Lewis earl of Loos knowing Cont William to be
absent, and that he William being advertised thereof, desiring rather safely
to enjoy his own inheritance, which he had gotten with much pain, than to
strive to make a doubtful conquest in a strange country, and far off, he
returned speedily into Holland. The earl of Loos hearing of his return,
proceeded no further, for he feared him much, having made so good trial of
him, who afterward governed his countries peaceably, during the remainder of
his days.

In the year 1218, the lady Alix, wife to Cont William, died, having left the
children above 1218
named, and was buried in the church of the Abbey of Rhynsbourg. Afterward the
said earl The Contesse of Holland dies.
married with Mary, daughter to Edmond of Lancaster, son to Henry the third,
king of England,

We have in the life of Cont Thier^ the seventh, and of his daughter Ada,
rela^ed briefly the deeds of this Cont William, the first of that name.

FLORIS THE FOVRTH OF THAT name, the seventeenth Earl of Holland and Zeeland,
Lord of Friseland.
Florentius Quartus.


My daughter in one day as many children bare,
As days within a year complete, by us accounted are:
Twelve years I lived Earl, Mars durst me not defy,
But jealous love was cause that I was murdered cruelly.
My wife grieved at my death, and her so hard fortune,
At her own charge for women built, the cloister of Losdune:
Without the town of Delft my sister edified
Another, which le champ royal she named, wherein she died.
FLORIS the fourth of that name, by the death of Cont William, was the Otto was
made Earl of Friseland in his fathers life, and William the youngest was
hereditarie governor of Kennemerlandt: this William had one daughter called
Alix, the which was married to Didier lord of Brederode, who had by His wife
and children.
her Alfart, father to William of Brederode, who was General of the Horse to
the king of the Romans, the eighteenth Earl of Holland. Cont Floris had to
wife Mathilda, daughter to Henry duke of Lothier and Brabant, by whom he had
the said king William his successor, and Floris, who was governor of Holland,
then Alix which was Contesse of Henault, and Marguerite wife to Herman earl of
Henneberg, who had that great number of children, whereof we shall speak by
and by.

In the time of this Earl Floris, there was near unto the town of Arckel a
little castle, upon The beginning of the town of Gorrichom in Holland.
the place of Wolfard, belonging to John lord of Arckel, about the which there
lived some poor fishermen, at which place the river of Meruve began to ebb
and flow, for that the rivers of Meuse and Wahal (the which, before the town
of Tyel in Gelderland, was very narrow, and could not enter into that of Linge)
fell into it. These poor fishermen called themselves Gorreckens, whereof the
town of Gorrekom (now Gorrichom) took the name. This lord of Arckel caused
all the houses of the place of Wolfard to be pulled down, and to be built
again near unto this little castle, in the form of a small town: then with
stone and other materials of the church of Wolfard, he caused the parish church
of Gorrichom to be built. The said lord of Arckel did afterward cause this
new town to be environed with

Cont Floris was a Prince which took great delight in iousts and tourneys, as
well within Cont Floris a lover of iousts and tourneys.
as without his own countries, from whence he usually returned with hononr
and praise, through the knightly prowess he showed in his person. The Contesse
of Clermont had a great desire to see this Earl of Holland, of whom she had
heard so much good spoken: once, among the rest she entreated her husband to
keep open court, and to appoint a tourney for all comers, Princes, Barons,
Lords and Knights, causing it to be proclaimed in the courts Floris having
notice thereof would not fail to make one; and taking with him the earl of
Cleues for his companion in arms, they went well accompanied with a rich and
goodly equipage. Cont Floris was in this tourney made captain of the Germane
Knights, and the earl of Neele captain of the French Knights. The kings at
arms having caused all the Knights on either part to enter within the lists,
and placed them in their ranks, they fell to the tourny, every one doing his
best deuoyr, where there was many a lance broken, and many a brave blow given.
Cont Floris carrying himself most valiantly of all others, the Contesse of
Clermont being at a window near unto her husband, hearing them cry often for
joy, Holland, Holland, Holland, she entreated her husband to show her which of
all those knights was that Earl of Holland: The earl of Floris of all sides,
charging him in good earnest. Cont Floris (who at the first doubted not this
treason) defended himself as courageously as he could, and repulsed them that
had Cont Floris slain.
rushed furiously with all his Germane knights into the midst of the French
troop, whereas he overthrew the earl of Clermont, and slew him, and made the
earl of Neele to The earl of Clermo^t slain.
fly, forcing the rest to leave the tourney. Thus this feast of pleasure was
turned into a mortal Floris into Holland, where he was interred in the abbey
of Rhy^sbourg, after that he had governed his countries honorably and
virtuously twelve years. He was esteemed in his time the most valiant and
worthy prince of all Germany: he left one son but six years old, called
William, whom Otto bishop of Vtrecht his uncle took into his guard and
protection, governing the countries of Holland, The bishop of Vtrecht guardian
to the young Earl of Holland.
Zeeland and Friseland wisely and faithfully, during the minority of his
nephew, reducing them of Drent and Couoerden unto reason. The Lady Mathilde,
widow to Cont Floris, continued

We have formerly said, that this Cont Floris had among his other children, one
daughter called Mathilde (some say Marguerite) married to Cont Herman of
Henneberg; William king of the Romans and Earl of Holland was her brother,
Otto bishop of Vtrecht her uncle by the father, and Henry duke of Brabant her
uncle by the mothers side, Alix Contesse of Henault her aunt Otto earl of
Geldres, and Henry bishop of Liege, her cousins. To describe the monstrous
childbirth or delivery of this Lady, you must understand, that on a time this
Contesse of Henneberg did see a poor widow woman begging her bread for Gods
sake, having in either A wonderful del (...) of 365 children.
Guidon, Suffragan to the bishop of Vtrecht, who named the sons John and the
daughters Elizabeth. As soon as they had been baptized, they died all, and
their mother with them. The two basins are yet to be seen in the said church
of Losdunen, with their Epitaph both in Latin and Dutch: the Latin was as
follows:

Margareta Comitis Henneberg ae vxor and Florentij Comitis Hollandiae and
Zeelandiae filia; cuius matter fuit Mathilda, filia Henrici Du^s Brabantiae,
fratrem quoque habuit Allemaniae regem. Haec praefata An Epltaph of the
Contesse of Henneberg, mother to so many children
domina Margareta, Anno salutis 1276. ipso die Parasceue* hora nonae ^nte
meridiem, peperit infantes viuos promiscui sexus numero trecentos sexaginta
q^inque: qui past quam per venerabilem Dom. Guidonem, Suffragan. Episcopi
Traiectensis, praesentibus nonnull^s. proceribus and magnatibus in peluibus
duabus ex aere, baptismum percepissent, and masculis Johannes, foemellis vero
Elizabeth nomina imposita fuissent, simul omnes cum matre vno eodemque die
fatis concesserunt, in hoc Lodunensi temploiacent. Quod quidem accidit ob
pauperculam quandam foeminam, quae ex vno partu gemellos in vlnis gestabat
pueros: quam rem admirans ipsa Comitissa dicebat, id per vni^m virum fieri non
posse, ipsamque contumeliose reiecit: vnde haec paupercula animo turhata and
perculsa, prolium tantum numerum ac multitudinem ex vno part^ ei imprecabatur,
quod veltotius anni dies numerentur. Quod quidem praeter naturae cursum,
obstupenda quadam rationeita factum est, si^ in hac tabula in perpetuam rei
memoriam, ex vetustis, tum manuscriptis, quam typis excusis Chronicis, breuiter
positu^ and narratum est. Deus ille ter maximus hac de re suspiciendus,
honorandus, and laudibus extollendus in sempiterna saecula. Amen.

And underneath it were these two verses:

En tibt monstrosum and memorabile factum,
Quale nec a mundi condition datum.
At that time there were in Holland and Zeeland five hundred knights, whereof
those that The chief Nobility of Holland.
Otto brother to Cont Floris, William Lieutenant of Holland, their brother,
Didier Lord of Brederode, Baylife of Holland, Albert his son, who was
afterward Lord of Brederode, William Lord of Theylingen and of Leck (These two
houses are descended from the ancient Earls of Holland) then John Lord of
Heusden, John de Veen his son, John Lord of Arckel, Herbert Lord of Botersloot,
Hugh his son, the Lord of Altena, the Lord of Lederdam, the Lord of Aspren, the
Lord of Putten and of Streymen, Henry Lord of Vorn, Ieams Vicont of Leyden,
Didier Lord of Wassenare, Ghysbrecht Lord of Amstel, Henry Lord of Woerden,
William and Didier of Theylingen, brethren, Simon of Harlem, Isbrand of Harlem,
Nicholas Persin, Gualter of Egmond, Gerard of Egmond his son, Wouter of
Egmond, Gualter of Egmond, Arnould of Egmond, and Nicholas of Egmond, all
brethren William of Heeckhuysen, Korstant of Raphorst, Ieams van ^uoud, Hugh
of Craelingen, Didier of Good, Roger Bockel, Hugh of Ackersloot, all renowned
knights, Goeselin of Ryswicke, Albert Vuitten Haghe, Didier van Velson, Paul
of Brigdam, Bouven or Bauldwin van Ziburch, Floris van VVoert, and many other
Squires.

WILLIAM, THE SECOND OF THAT name, eighteenth Earl of Holland and Zeeland,
Lord of Friseland, and afterward king of Romans.
18. Guilielmus Secundus.


Leyden first brought thee forth, thy race did make thee great,
Within the Country Holland, thou did hold thy sovereign seat:
Thy wife ELIZA was, Rome did thee king elect:
The Hage thou made chief place for laws, thy people to protect:
In Harlem at thy charge, a Cloister thou did make:
In Friseland fighting in thine arms, death life from thee did take.
Twice ten years thou wast Earl, and seven years a King:
Death neither spares Potentate, nor any living thing.
WILLIAM the second of that name, after the decease of Cont Floris his Otto,
bishop of Vtrecht. He was borne in the Chamber of Holland, for at that time the
town of Leyden was so called. Being come to man's age, he married Eliza, or
Elizabeth, daughter to the duke of Brunswike, The wife and children of Cont
William
by whom he had one son, named Floris the 5, who was the 19 Earl of Holland,
etc. He loved arms and virtue more, than to gather riches.

The popes, who had been always in grateful to emperors and kings, their
benefactors, having degraded Frederic the 2, and Conrard his son, from the
empire, and made Henry Landtgraue of Turinge to be chosen, who died soon
after: the princes electors seeing the popes How Cont William was chosen king
of Romans.
Frederic the emperor increased daily, and that there would never be an end:
they gave the government of the empire, in the year 1247, to William Earl of
Holland, etc. who at the instance of Henry 2, duke of Brabant, by the
recommendation of his father in law, Otto duke of Brunswike, and by the
promotion of pope Innocent, was chosen king of Romans; for that there was no
prince in Germany, that, for fear of the emperor Frederic, and Conrard his
son, durst accept of the empire. Being chosen, he was solemnly received, and
crowned at Aix-la-chapelle, the 1. day of Noue^ber: having first forced the
said town (the which until that day, had always held Frederics part) to yield
unto him, and to administer unto him the first imperial crown: and after the
death of the emperor Frederic, he was by the same pope Innocent proclaimed
emperor in the city of Lion, four years after his election. The said Cont
William, king of Romans, after that he had been crowned at Aix, by Conrard
bishop of Cologne, Otto earl of Gueldres, brother to the said bishop of Liege,
the imperial town and castle of Nymeghen, with all the rights, revenues, and
jurisdictions belonging and depending thereon, to hold it in fee for ever of
the empire, paying therefore one and twenty thousand marks of pure silver:
upon condition, That it should be always lawful for the emperor, or king of
Romans, to redeem it again, paying the said sum of 21000 marks of silver: and
that if afterward they would engage it again, the earls of Gueldres should
be always preferred, and have the choice to take or leave it: The which was
afterward confirmed by the successors of the said king William.

From Liege king William would go to visit all his chasteleines, or castles,
along the river of Rhin, the which were all open unto him, with offer of
service, except Keyser Weert, where the captain denied him the entry: the
king besieged it, and held his camp before it above a year; in the end,
victuals and other provision failing, he sued for mercy. The king having
received the captain into grace, seeing his generositie and valor, after he
had taken ^n oath of fealty, he gave him in marriage Catherine his cousin,
daughter to Alsard of Brederode, and for her dowry the chasteleine of Keyser
Weert, with the town and castle, for him and castle for ever, to hold of the
empire. This done, he marched toward Holland, passing by the town of Vtrecht,
where, at the request of the bishop Otto his uncle, he ratified the
privileges, given by The king comes to Vtrecht, and ratifies their privileges.
former emperors to the said town and bishopric of Vtrecht; yea he augmented
them much, and gave them letters patents. Being returned into his country of
Holland, and making some la Hay, commonly called the Hague, whereas it is at
this day, the great hall whereof is built of Irish wood, which is of such a
property, as there are never any copwebs, or spiders, to be seen. There he
also built the chapel of the court. Then he did transport the provincial
counsel, which was wont to be at Grauesande, to the said palace of la Hay,
where it yet remains; and there are held the general estates of the united
provinces, where as prince Maurice their governor, general, and admiral,
makes his ordinary residence, when he is not in the army, or otherwise
employed. He also caused the castle of Heemskerke to be built, whereas he made
one Gerard of Heemskerke chastelaine, giving him charge to keep the Frisons in
awe and subjection, inhabitants of that quarter, whom he should have always at
commandment, if they were Otto bishop of Vtrecht, made his complaint to king
William, of the wrong which the Earl of Ghoer did him, keeping from him some
part of his jurisdiction. The king being in the city of Vtrecht, caused the
earl to be adiorned to appear personally before him, to purge himself, or
maintain his right. But this earl contemning this adiournement, went another
way at his pleasure. The king displeased at his contempt, went to assail him,
took him prisoner, and spoiled all his country, and taking from him the title
of an earl, he delivered him into the bishops hands, and reduced him to the
estate of a mean and simple gentleman.

In the year 1253, Marguerite countess of Flanders, pretending a quarrel to
the country of Walchren (as many earls had done before in vain) as depending
of the county of Flanders, 1253
John, and Guy of Dampierre, The contesse of Flanders pretends to conquer the
isle of Walchren by arms
into France, Bourgoigne, Picardie, and Brabant, to levy men for pay, with
the which she might conquer the isle of Walchren. And asking the advice of her
chief noble men and barons, upon this business, she was first advised to
write to William king of Romans, and Earl of Holland, sommoning him to do
that, whereunto she said he was bound; which was, to yield unto her, or at the
least to hold the fees of Zeeland of her by homage. The king answered her
modestly, That it was not fit the lord should be subject to his vassal:
meaning, that this countess held her seigniories and counties of Henault,
Alost, and the land of Waas, of the empire. She who was a proud woman, and of a
turbulent spirit, took this answer very disdainfully, sending for all her
commanders and captains to come unto William, who knew nothing of this
practice, was in Antuerpe, at an assembly with the countesses counsel,
touching their controversies, from the which assembly he could not free
himself so soon as he desired: yet in the mean time he did write unto
Floris his brother, That he was well advertised of the countesses intentions,
and that she intended to invade the isle of Walchren: and therefore he should
with all speed gather together what men he could, and go presently into
Walchren, whither he would come with all his troops; that they two jointly
together, might make head, and abate her pride. The duke of Brabant being sorry
for this quarrel, labored to reconcile them, so as he stayed the countesses
departure, for the space of three days. To whom those of her counsel, that
were at the assembly in Antuerpe, did write, That she Guy her son presently,
into the isle of Walchren, with a hundred and fifty thousand men: charging him
expressly, not to return into Flanders, until he had reduced the whole island
under his obedience; the which he promised his mother to do, or to die in the
attempt: with which resolution he departed with his army, the which he led as
well by land as by water (for the isle of Walchren was, at that time so near
unto Flanders, as they had but a small passage to make by water) and came to
Westcapell, where he expected no resistance. But Floris the kings brother,
being arrived there with his troops of Holland and Zeeland before him, had put
himself into ambush until that Guy was landed with part of his army: who
taking his opportunity, A great deseat of the Flemings.
spilt, as the Hollanders marched up to the ancles. This battle happened on
Saint Martines day in Summer.

The king of Romans being in Antuerpe, advertised by post that the countesses
army was at sea, to pass into the isle of Walchren, departed presently,
caused his horse to be embarked, and landing in the island, came even as the
Flemings fled, and were put to rout, whereof some recovered their ships before
they were discovered. Cont Guy, and other noble men Guy was wounded, of the
which he could never be cured. There were slain above fifty thousand men upon
the place, and few less drowned, besides a great number of prisoners, whom
they chased before them like a troop of sheep, who seeing the king, cried
unto him for mercy. The king thinking of the (...) which God had showed him by
this Guy, and John his brother, with him into Holland, with the earls of Guise
and Beaumont, and a great number of knights and gentlemen, whom he caused to
be safely kept in the castle of Waternighe. The common soldiers which were
sent back all naked, being in the territories of Flanders, gathered green
grass, pease leaves, and other green things, to cover their privy parts,
until they came in place where they might find better, and that some took
pity of them.

The contesse being much troubled for the imprisonment of her two sons, of so
many barons The contesse goes ^o succors into France.
Blanch, mother to S. Lewis king of France, and to Charles duke of Aniou, his
brother, whom she solicited to come to succor her with an army, and to write
unto king William, That his intent was to revenge the ou^rage she had received
of him: and that he had a desire to fight with him, if he would attend him
only three days upon the plains of Ashen: in regard whereof, she promised
the county of Henault unto the said duke of Aniou, whereof she would
disinherit John d' Auesnes, her eldest son, and all the children which he had
had of the lady Alix sister to king William; to the end this county of
Henault might never fall (as it did soon after) into the house of Holland; or
Holland, Zeeland, and Friseland, into that of Henault: upon these goodly
promies; the The duke of Aiou comes to succor the contesse.
duke of Aniou entered Henault with a goodly army, whereas the contesse
Marguerite made Lewis his brother, being returned from prison, out of Siria;
giving him to understand of all that he had treated with the contesse
Marguerite of Flanders, and that by provision he was in possession of the
county of Henault, requiring his aid and favor therein. I have not yet
understood The wise answer of the king S. Lewis to the duke his brother.
William king of Romans has attempted any thing against us, and therefore we
will not attempt any thing against him, so long as he shall contain himself
within those terms and limits, and that he shall do nothing that may be
prejudicial to our subjects: neither will I undertake a quarrel for the
pleasure of a proud passionate woman, transported with the desire of revenge
against him. The duke having received this answer, from the king his brother,
returned to the contesse Marguerite, and acquainted her therewith, persuading
her with pertinent and forcible reasons, not to make a new attempt against king
William, but to content her self with her first losses. She persisting in the
haughtiness of het courage, with a resolution and eloquent words, would needs
persuade him, That if he lay camped seven years upon the playnes of Ashen,
king William would never show himself: John d' Auesnes my son, nor any of
his children, or of the blood of Holland (from whence this irrepairable loss
has come unto me) shall ever inherit the earldom of Henault: whereupon she
disinherited the said John d' Auesnes her son, to the end, that those which
were issued from the house of Holland, should never inherit any thing that was
hers.

The lady Alix, sister to king William, and wife to John d' Auesnes, being
discontented with her mother in laws courses, went to Aix, to the king her
brother, to impart unto him her griefs and to let him understand, that the
contesse pretended to deprive her husband, and all his children, of their
inheritance, to advance the duke of Aniou, being a stranger, to whom she had
already transported his inheritance of Henault, to frustrate the house of
Holland William hearing the complaints and reasons of his sister, was soon
resolved to succor and assist her; writing unto the said duke of Aniou, that
he should leave the county of Henault, whereunto he had no right, the which
he would take in good part: Whereunto the duke answered proudly, That neither
for love, nor any fear of him, he would forsake it: and if he had so much
courage, as to attend him on the plains of John d' Auesnes. King William writ
again unto the duke, That if he were so valiant as he vaunted himself to be,
he would go and attend him three whole days upon the playnes of Asshen, as
he desired. The duke returned him an answer, That he would not fail him:
whereof he advertised the contesse Marguerite, who assured him confidently,
that the king would never come to fight with him at land; and therefore he
should not fear any thing, but go and camp boldly two or three days there.
The duke smiling, answered her, That he would do so, sending word unto the
king,

The duke was all this time in camp before the town of Aath, who hearing that
the king The duke of Aniou retires.
was come thither, raised his siege suddenly, and retires himself into
Valenciennes, to avoid the fury of the Hollanders, whom he had so much braued
and threatened before. The king followed him, and went to besiege him in the
said town: but the duke slipping secretly out at a posterne gate, passed over
the river of Escault, and retired into France. The inhabitants John d' Auesnes
their lord. During the treaty of their accord, news came unto the king, That
the Queen his wife was brought in bed of a son, The birth of Cont Floris 5.
whereof he was wonderfully joyful, the which was Earl of Holland after him,
called Floris the fifth.

The chronicles of Flanders report this great defeat of the Flemings, in the
isle of Walchren otherwise, as also the calling in of duke Charles of Aniou, by
the contesse Marguerite; where it is said, That king William had given the
islands of Zeeland, to Cont John of Auesnes, his brother in law, to the which
the said contesse pretended a right, sending an army to conquer it: the
William, Earl of Holland and Zeeland (the which are two goodly earledomes,
neighbors, and necessary one unto the other, as well for navigations, as
commerce) would so dismember his estate, to gratify his sister, wife to the
said Auesnes. And if he had had any disposition to dismember it from Holland,
it had been more reasonable to give it to his brother Floris, to hold it in
fee of his county of Holland, as his portion, than to give it in dowry to his
sister: And therefore we will hold the opinion of the chronicle of Holland,
more true in that point, than that of Flanders.

The contesse Marguerite seeing that the duke of Aniou fled before king
William, and that The contesse labors to be reconciled.
all her men were defeated and disbanded, she was much perplexed, and knew not
how to resolve: in the end she found no better course, than to employ many
princes, and great noble men, yea S. Lewis king of France, to reconcile her to
the king of Romans favor, upon such conditions as she could with reason
bear. Although the said king William had been too much wronged and incensed
by her, as well by contempt and injuries, as otherwise, yet presuming that his
courage would never oppose it self against a silly weak woman, nor seek
revenge of her; using his clemency, he received her into grace, upon certain
conditions specified: namely, That she should absolutely quit her county of
Henault, the country of Alost, and the four chasteleines of the country of
Waes, whereof she should give full possession to John d' Auesnes, her eldest
son, and pass it by authentike letters under her great seal: the which was
done. And so the said John d' Auesnes, and Baldwin his brother, were reconciled
to the contesse Marguerite of Flanders, their mother: the which being well
finished and ended, king William returned into Holland.

Pope Innocent hearing of the death of Conrard, king of Germany, son to the
emperor Frederic, and that William Earl of Holland had been long before
chosen king of Romans; he sent for him by letters to come to Rome, to receive
the Crown, the ornaments, and all the marks of the Empire. King William
having no trust in many princes of Germany and Italy, The pope sends for the
king of Romans, to come to Rome.
through whose territories he must pass, went disguised in a pilgrims weed,
being accompanied with twelve of his most trusty and confident servants, and
so past into Italy, finding the Pope at Genoa or Genes, by whom he was
honorably received. And as he came in a strange and disguised habit, only to
confer with the Pope, he returned in the same manner through Lombardie and
Germany: where having been well received in some places whereas he made
himself known, and there treated of the affairs of the empire; he was
advertised, That the West-Frisons were revolted, and according to their ancient
manner invaded the frontiers The king being in Vtrecht is traitorously wounded
with a stone.
he was sore wounded, and yet no man could perceive whence the blow came: the
which did much perplexe and trouble the prelates, for that they had invited him
to this feast. The king having the stone in his hand, said: See what an affront
and despite, those of Vtrecht do la Hay, to see if they could any way pacify
his choler and displeasure against them. The king answered them in few words,
That he had sworn, the which he would never call back again, but would
utterly destroy the town, if they delivered not into his hands, him that had
cast the

The king being gone with his army into West-Friseland, at his entrance he
subdued some of the first, that would have opposed themselves, and stopped his
passage: causing a castle to be built near Alcmar, the which he called
Tornenburg, which is to say, the castle of Wrath. And marching on in the month
of February, he went to Alcmar, from whence passing upon the The king
miserably slain, being sunk into the ice.
and oziers, seeing a horsman thus mired, ran thither, and beat him down with
clubs and staves, not knowing that it was the king: but when they had seen his
target, they imagined it should be some great noble man. There were in that
quarter some Hollanders, that were fugitives, William, Earl of Holland, there
was not any one, man nor woman, young nor old, that was not very They bury him
secretly in a country house.
bury him secretly in a house in the said village of Hoochtwonde, to the end,
that in time the memory and the revenge thereof might be forgotten. It was a
strange thing, that never a man, neither on foot nor horseback, of the whole
army came thither to succor him, and that the Hollanders did not pursue their
first victory, although they knew their king to be dead: For without doubt,
they had that day conquered all that quarter, by the defeat of these
West-Frisons, if they had proceeded: but they were so stricken and amazed, for
the death of the king their prince, as they lost al judgment and courage, so
as the commanders retired with their army into Holland. Behold how king
William died miserably, after that he had governed his inheritance of Holland
and Zeeland one and twenty years, and the empire seven. His body being The
kings body found, and interred at Middlebourg in Zeeland.
in the isle of Walchren, in the year 1255: then was accomplished the
prophecy, which said, That one William king of Romans, shouldbe slain by the
Frisons. The same day there died in a battle, which they fought in their
retreat, all the inhabitants of Dordrecht, except three hundred, and their
standard was taken; and most part of those of Delft, after they had slain many
of these Frisons. The lady Elizabeth his wife died in the year 1265, and lies
buried by her husband. This king of Romans, Earl of Holland and Zeeland, gave
unto the said town of Middlebourg, their principal privileges: and among
others, he granted that in all the Beweterscheldt, none should have high
justice, and judge of life and death, but the said town; and that all the
criminal causes of the country, should be decided there, and that offenders

FLORIS THE FIFTH OF THAT name, the nineteenth Earl of Holland and Zeeland,
Lord of Friseland.
19 Florentius Quintus.


In just revenge of fathers death thou splid'st the blood
Of Frisons, that had him destroid, and thee withstood:
And having taken his body from the place where't lay,
Intombedst it in Middleburgh, from whence thou took'st thy way
To Flanders, to abate their pride, that quietly
Gave thee their princess for thy spouse, and for her dower
Whole Flanders: but when thou to hunt in woods wast gone,
Thy foes thee slew, when thou had ruled full forty years and one.
AFter the lamentable death of William king of Romans, Earl of Holland Floris
being but six months old, succeeded him, and was the to Earl. Floris his
uncle, brother to the king, governor of Holland, was his tutor who discharged
it faithfully for the space of four years. It was he which made laws and
customs in Zeeland, the which they observe at this day. Floris being one day at
a tourney in the city of Antuerpe, was very sore hurt, whereof he died, and was
buried by the king his brother, in the abbey of Middlebourg, in the year 1258.
Then Henry duke of Brabant, son to this infants great uncle, took upon him
the guardianship, the which he did administer for a time; till in the end,
through the dissolutions, exactions, and concussions of his officers, he was
chased out of Holland. He being displaced, the barons, lords, nobles, with the
Otto earl of Gueldre, to undertake the government: against whom those of
Holland did choose the lady Alix contesse of Henault, aunt Factions for the
government of the Earls person and of the country.
to young Cont Floris, to be his gouernesse, and viceregent: Which partiality
was afterward the cause of a great battle at Voerwoetzee, whereas many were
slain on either part: but the Hollandser won the battle, and the earl of
Gueldres remained sole governor and guardian to the young Earl.

In the year 1268 there were strange apparitions seen in the air; as armed
men fighting, and other strange and prodigious things, after which there
followed great calamities: for the commons of Holland did rise against the
nobles; and Cont Floris being yet very young, those Great trouble an Holland.
of Kennemerlandt did rise and bandie themselves against the nobles of the
country, destroying Ghysbrecht seignior of Amstel, seeing that he could not
make head against so great a multitude of madmen, resolved to join with them,
promising them all fidelity and assistance. Having therefore made choice of
him for their leader, he with his people joined with this mutinous troop.
Being made their captain general, he thought to revenge himself of all his
enemies about Vtrecht, and to ruin

John of Nassau, bishop of Vtrecht, did on the other side allie himself with
Otto earl of Gueldres, and they two together having made a good army, came to
Zyest, to restore the nobles, and the magistrates that were chased away. The
Kennemers having notice of their coming, Ghysbrecht lord of Amstel, seeing
himself a great commander, and captain of this great confused troop, did beat
down the castles of Ghysbrecht of Abconde, of William of Risenburch, and of
Hebert of Vyanen, his enemies: which done, he spoke unto the Kennemers in this
manner; Companions and valiant soldiers, you have seen, how that this year
we have reduced all the country of Vtrecht under our obedience, chased away
the nobles, and burnt their castles, ruined their forts, and spoiled them of
their goods and possessions: the next year we John of Persin, a brave knight,
made a fally by night, and fell upon a number of carts, laden with victuals and
munition, then passing into Kennemerlandt, he burnt some of their chief
villages. The Kennemers seeing fire in Asuerus of Bosichom, a knight, came with
all the banished men before the town of Vtrecht, and having secretly made a
scaladoe, entered it. At the first he was hotly incountred; but in the end
Asuerus became master, chased away the magistrate, and many of the bourgesses of
the town, and restored the bourgmasters and aldermen, which had been
displaced. Soon after all the banished men returned, and there was great
fighting betwixt the inhabitants one against another, and much blood spilt.
During these hurly burlies, Nicholas de Cats, a knight of Zeeland (having the
young Cont Floris then in his guard and keeping) brake the gates of the said
town with axes and hammers, and entered it with five hundred horse: then
sitting in the seat of justice in the midst of the town, he banished a
thousand and forty of the bourgesses, and restored all things to a good
estate, and

Floris Earl of Holland, being seuenteen years old, levied a good army, to
make war upon Cont Floris takes arms against the Frisons.
the West Frisons, and to reduce them under his obedience, and to bring away
his fathers bones, who had been slain there, to bury them in Zeeland. The
Frisons hearing of his approach went to arms, and came to encounter him at
Verone, upon the Gheest, near unto Alomar, where there was a battle, in the
which there died ^00 Hollanders, among the which were some men of mark. The
Hollanders having received this first disgrace, retired themselves to
Heyligerlee, where they camped in the open field, and received a new supply of
men. The Frisons grown proud with their first victory, went to charge them:
but the Hollanders, who attended them, had now their revenge, for they put the
Frisons to flight, and slew above 800 upon the place. Floris having caused the
strong castle of Wideness to be built against the Frisons he marched with his
army into Friseland, to fight with them, and to subject them to their duties
and obedience: a battle was fought, and he defeated them in a village, called
The Frisons defened.
Schellinckhout: then passing to Hoochtwonde, there was another battle, in
the which he was also victorious; there were 600 Frisons slain, and many
other taken prisoners, among the Floris the place where king William his father
was buried, the which he caused to be opened, and his bones to be taken up,
causing them to be put in a hearse, and to be transported to Middlebourg in
Zeeland, whereas he built a royal tomb, worthy of his greatness.

In the year 1285, there was such a tempest of wind and storms, as many dikes
and causeies in Friseland, Holland and Zeeland, were broken and carried away,
so as much of the ^untrey was overflowed, and many men, and much cattle
drowned. Didier lord of Brederode, called the Gentle, had charge from Cont
Floris, to go with an army both by sea and land, to make war against the
Frisons; the which he did: and for that (by reason of these inundations) those
of the champian country of Friseland, could not succor one another, he
entered into Four e^es ^lt by the Earl to subdue the Frisons.
strong castles to be built in Friseland; that of Medemblyck, of Enigemburch,
Middelburch, and Nieuburch, to restrain the Frisons, and keep them in their
obedience. The Frisons seeing themselves thus subdued, and that of necessity
they must yield unto the yoke, came unto him, those of the bailywike of
Hoochtwonde, of Nieudorp, Winckel, Bersingenshorn, Costinauroe, Vrolen,
Kuytdorp, Brock, Zuydsterwoude, Noortsterwoude, Oudherspel, Waermenhuysen,
Nyeulandt, Duringhersorn, Emgebroerk, Oeterleeck, Veenhuysin, and Medemblyck:
All which above named having made their peace with Cont Floris, took William
his father. This reconciliation and accord, was made upon Saint Agnes eve, in
the year 1288. The Earl being still jealous of the loyalty of the
West-Frisons; notwithstanding all their oaths and homages, not trusting them
but upon good assurance, caused the castle of Medemblyck to be finished, and
to that end camped with his army at Meloorde, until it was ended. He caused
also the fortneere to Ve^a, upon the Gheest, on the frontiers of Friseland, to
be new built again, to the end they might pass fr^ly from Floris having
bridled the West-Frisons, went to Staueren: those of that quarter, knowing how
he had subdued them of West-Friseland, by the means of so many castles, being
loath Friseland wholly subdued.
to make trial of the like rigor, submitted themselves willingly unto him,
with an oath of obedience, as to their lord and prince, as well to himself, as
to his successors hereafter, Earls of Holland; who seeing their readiness and
willingness, gave them many thanks, and granted

Cont Floris having made al Friseland quiet, Guy of Dompierre, earl of
Flanders, entered again with an army into Zeeland, pretending to conquer the
isle of Walchren: Cont Floris posted presently thither with all his forces, to
chase him away, or to give him battle. John dukel of Brabant, desirous to
prevent this mischief, came into Zeeland, by whose good (...) peace was
concluded betwixt these two princes of Flanders and Holland, upon condition,
The Earls of Flanders and Holland reconciled.
Floris should take to wife the lady Beatrix, daughter to Cont Guy, by means
of which marriage they continued good friends, and every one retired to his own
home. Cont Floris had by this lady his wife many children; John, Thierry,
Floris, William, Otto, William and Floris, Beatrix, Mathilda, Elizabeth, and
Marguerite, the which died all young, except John the eldest, who succeeded his
father in the counties of Holland and Zeeland, etc. He had also Witten the
chief lord of Hamstede in Zeeland, and William, both of them brave knights. He
caused many goodly buildings to be made, as the castle of Vogelsanck in the
wood of Harlem, where he often held his court, by reason of hunting and
hawking, and other pleasures of iusts and tourneyes: he did also greatly
enlarge his court at la Hay.

The bishop of the clergy of Vtrecht, complained to Cont Floris, of the wrongs
the lords The Earl makes war against the lord of Amstel and Woerden.
of Amstel and Woerden (being cousin germains) did unto them, demanding his
help against them: The Earl went and besieged the castle of Vredelandt,
planting his rams and other engines of battery, whither he sent the seignior
Costin of Renesse knight, with a supply of soldiers out of Zeeland. The lord of
Amstel having knowledge of his coming, sallied forth, Arnould of Amstel, who
remained in the castle, hearing of his brothers imprisonment, fearing the
Earls power, yielded himself and the place unto his mercy, who having
received it, caused it to be manned with a strong garrison. And for that Herman
of Woerden had assisted the lord of Amstel, against the bishop, the Earl went
likewise against him, to spoil all his lands. Herman knowing well that he was
unable to resist so powerful a prince, having fortified his castle of
Montfort, and manned it with a good garrison, and all things else requisite for
a long siege, leaving a good captain therein, whom he trusted, absented
himself out of the country. The Earl unwilling to desist, notwithstanding
his absence, besieged the castle a whole year together, giving many assaults,
so as in the end he forced it, causing all their heads Herman, in the end there
was a peace concluded betwixt them, by the which these two noblemen of Amstel
and Woerden, did swear fealty and obedience unto the Earl of Holland, and
the bishop of Vtrecht, upon pain of confiscation of all their goods, and never
to rise nor rebel against him, restoring to the bishop of Vtrehct his castles:
by means whereof all quarrels were ended. The Earl having pardoned what was
past, held them for his most familiar counselors, which proved hurtful unto
him, as we shall presently show.

In the year 1290, Cont Floris, and Thierry of Cleues met at la Hay in
Holland, there to recreate themselves together, Cont Floris keeping open court:
during which time the earl 1290
John of Heusden received of Floris Earl of Holland, by right of relief, his
fees and seigniories of Heusden, Altena, and Vandrichom, which from that time
were of the jurisdiction of the county of Holland, and so continue unto this
day. Cont Floris seeing himself at rest, having thus augmented his seigniories
and revenues, he prepared a goodly fleet of ships, and accompanied with a great
number of barons, knights, and gentlemen, went into England, to Edward the
first of that name, to demand advice and succors to get the possession of the
Cont Floris his voyage into England, and why.
realm of Scotland, which was fallen unto him by the decease of his great
great grandmother Ada, daughter to the king of Scotland (who died without
heirs male) wife to Floris the third of that name, and thirteenth Earl of
Holland, which Cont William the first, by the death of Henry king of Scotland,
his uncle by the mothers side, did not prosecute, by reason of the rebellion of
some noblemen of his country, which hindered him, besides the Frisons were
revolted, and the earl of Loos (during his absence) thought to reconquer
Holland, as we have said before. Cont Floris being then with king Edward (who
dissuaded him from this war of Scotland, for the great difficulties he should
find there) they concluded an alliance together, John son to Cont Floris
(being then but young) shall marie Elizabeth the A marriage betwixt Cont Floris
eldest son, and the king of Englands daughter
kings daughter: by which marriage they should remain for ever good friends and
allies, as since England has always been, and is at this present well
affected to Holland and Zeeland, and to the other united provinces of the
Netherlands.

Guy of Dompierre, earl of Flanders, repining at this friendship and alliance
betwixt the The earl of Flanders pretends to assail Zeeland.
the isle of Walchren, during the absence of Cont Floris: but Didier lord of
Brederode, and John of Renesse knights, the one in Holland, the other in
Zeeland, made have to levy men, to oppose against him. Cont Floris having
hewes thereof, embarked without any delay, and came to land at Flessingue. Cont
Guy staying too long upon his passage, the seignior of Renesse by commandment
from Cont Floris, past into Flanders, burnt the town of Scluce, and spoiled
the whole country about. This done, the lords of Brederode and Renesse, enter
jointly with their troops into the isle of Catsand, which they destroyed also.
The Flemings (who were not fair from them) being about 4000 men, thought to
compass in the Hollanders but the seignior of Renesse, who had but 300
Zeelanders, choice men, and he a brave and hardy knight, Simon and Iudes day,
in the year 1296. The Flemings being retired after this defeat, Cont Floris
fortified his country of Zeeland with good garrisons, against their invasions
and spoils, then he returned into Holland to his court at la Hay. One day
among the rest he bethought himself, that in the great wars which he had had
against the Frisons Flemings, and others, he had lost a good number of his
knights, and of his best noblemen; besides many were dead of the plague, the
which had been very violent in his countries, so as (to his great grief) he
was then very destitute: whereupon he resolved to send for, one day in
Christmas, to his court at la Hay, forty of the chiefest and most
substantial

The chief knights and gentlemen issued from ancient nobiline and knighthood,
in the time The chief nobility.
Floris, were these that follow: John of Holland his son, Herman earl of
Heneberg, husband to Marguerite his aunt, who had so many children; Didier the
Gentle, lord of Brederode, William lord of Theylinghen, John lord of Heusden,
John lord of Heesben, Arnoult lord of Escluse, brother to the lord of Heusden,
John lord of Arckel, Hugh Butterman lord of Buttersloot, John lord of Heucklom,
Otto seignior of Aspren and of Abkoy, Peregrin seignior of Lederdam his
brother, Ieams lord of Wassenare, Didier of Theylinghen, Nicholas Persin
seignior of Waterlandt, Simon of Harlem, Ghysbrecht lord of Amstel, Arnould of
Amstel, his brother, Herman of Woerden, John of Leck, lord of Polnen, Hugh of
Vianen, Ghysbrecht of Yselsteyn, Wolfard lord of Vere, John of Renesse, Witten,
bastard to Cont Floris, the first lord of Hamstede, and William his brother,
Nicholas lord of Putten and of Stryen, William of Egmond, Gerard of Egmond, his
son, Baldwin of Nueldwick, Ieams Vander Vuoude, Arnould of Heemskerke, Henry
of Heemskerke, his brother, Didier vander Goude, Gerard van Velson, Gerard of
Heemskerke, Didier of Raephorst, Gerard of Raephorst, his brother, Hugh of
Craelinghen, Werembault Witten Hage, Albert his son, Gerard of Harlem, John
Dortoghe and Floris of Duynen, all knights. And in Zeeland the chief noblemen,
were the lords of Borssele, of Brigdam, of Zandtwick, of la Vere, of Cats, of
Cortgoen, of Mourmont, of Renesse, and of Ornyninghe, all which carried the
Earls order, which was a collar of gold, interlaced with cockle shells, and the
image of S. James hanging at it.

There was in the Earls court a valiant knight (put in the rank of these
nobles) named Gerard van Velson, whom the Earl held a whole year in prison,
after that he had caused his brothers A history of the death of Cont Floris
the 5.
Gerard at liberty, he sought by all means to repair the wrongs that had
been done him, and to honor and advance him among all the rest: and to make
him the more affectionat to his service (the Earl thinking therein to do him
honor and savor) would have given him Gerard disdaining her like a generous
man, would none of her. The Earl insisting still to have him m^ie her, in the
end Gerard, angry at his importunities, answered him plainly, That he was not
so abject not base minded (using a common Dutch phrase) as to put his feet in
his old shoes, which is as much to say, as to marie his leauings, or strumpet.
The Earl displeased at this answer, said unto him; And truly thou shall have
my leauings. Gerard, who regarded not the Ea^ls words, goes from court, and a
while after mary's the daughter of Herman, seignior of Woerden, niece to
Ghysbrecht of Amstel. Cont Floris hearing afterward that Gerard was married,
and that he came no more to court, by the persuasion of his minion he sent for
him: being come, he sent him in commission out of the country, for some
business of importance, wherein Gerard held himself Gerard made his ordinary
residence) as if he would refresh himself there. The lady, Gerards wife,
received him honorably, and courteously, as her lord and prince. The Earl
making show, that he had some private matter to treat with her in secret, he
willed her to lead him into some private chamber, where there might not be any
present, but they two that he might the more freely deliver what he had to say
unto her. The good lady doubting no harm led him into her own bed chamber.
The Earl having made the door fast, forced her to his will, and then
presently departed. She being exceeding sorrowful for this violence, which had
been offered unto her by her own prince, who above all things should have
maintained the honor of ladies, especially of his vassals of her quality,
she cast off her Gerard being returned from his commission, and having made
his report unto the Earl, took his leave, and returned to his house; where
coming, he found his wife all desolate and having understood the occasion, he
did comfort her, seeming to the world, as if he knew nothing, and commanded
his wife to go unto the house of the seignior of Woerden, her father, and to
let him understand the whole fact: the which she did, craving pardon for that
which had happened forcibly unto her, under a color of hospitality. Gerard of
Velson demanded of the seignior of Woerden, his father in law, how he should
best govern himself in this foul fact, and withal swear by his knighthood,
never to suffer it to pass unrevenged: after which time he never came to
court, but did meditate day and night upon revenge. On the Herman of Woerden
could not forget the wrong and dishonor which had been done unto his
daughter, for the which he became a mortal enemy unto the Earl. These two
knights being thus discontented with the Earl, drew unto their party
Ghysbrecht of Amstel, their kinsman, to conspire against the Earl: And by the
counsel of the said seignior of Amstel and Woerden, Gerard did secretly call
unto the town of Cambraye, the bishop of Duras for the king of England, the
earl of Cuyck, in the name of the duke of Brabant, and two counselors for the
earl of Flanders: before all which being assembled, Gerard made his complaints
of the base treachery of Cont Floris, with an aggrauation of the fowlenesse of
the fact, proceeding from a heart full of bitterness, despite, and choler,
desirous of revenge: where it was concluded among them, to attempt all means
to seize upon the Earls person, and to send him John of Holland, son to Cont
Floris, his son in law, husband to his daughter Elizabeth (who kept then in
England) to take possession of the earldoms of Holland and Zeeland, by the
civil death of his father, the which he had worthily deserved, for an
expiation of so foul and villainous a fact.

In the same year 1296. Cont Floris being ignorant of this conspiracy and
resolution, taken against him at Cambraie, by the deputies of the king of
England, the duke of Brabant, the earl of Flanders, and the lords of Amstel and
Woerden, at the instance and suit of Gerard van Velson, went to Vtrecht, to end
a certain difference, grown betwixt the lord of Zuylen, and some of his
counselors, whereof the said seignior of Amstel and Woerden were. The Earl
going to the

My dearest friend whom I did trust,
With me did use deceit:
Who at my Table eat my bread,
The same for me laid wait.
My lord (said she) remember it well, and mark this prophecy of David. The
earl contemning this advertisement, went to make good cheer with the noblemen
and prelates of Vtrecht: after dinner being laid down to rest a little,
thinking to spend the remainder of the day in sport and pleasure, the lord of
Amstel went to wake him, inuiting him to ride abroad with his hawks, saying,
that they had found a goodly flight of Herons and other wild-fowle (but they
were such foul as no hawke could take, and were lodged there to take the Earl
himself) who loving hawking exceedingly, went to horse with a Merlyn on his
fist, being very slenderly accompanied of his followers: riding about half a
mile out of Vtrecht, he was led into the midst of the ambush of these
conspirators, when as suddenly the Seigniors of Woerden, of Amstel, Gerard van
Velsen (who held himself much wronged) was the first that offered to lay hold
upon him: but like a courageous Prince (casting away his Merlyn which he
carried) he laid hold on his sword, to defend himself, desiring rather to die
than to yield: but not able to make resistance, he was taken, meaning to carry
him secretly that night to the castle of Muyden, and from thence send him into
England by the river of Fly.

The bruit of this prize was suddenly dispersed over all, the which moved the
hearts of many: The Kennemers and Waterlanders, with the West-Frisons, took
arms presently in their barks and shaloupes to deliver their lord: but the
conspirators being advertised of their coming, Gerard van Velsen full of fury
and rage, seeking nothing but revenge, seeing that they must of necessity
abandon their prey, not able to carry him any further (his other companions
being already fled) and not knowing how to vanquish his courage; rather than to
leave him without revenge of the wrong which he had done him, he played the
part of a desperate man, giving him one and twenty The violent death of Cont
Floris the fifth
John his son were returned out of England. Cont Floris had two greyhounds,
the which had always followed him, going in and coming out of the castle The
wonderful love of (...). gray hounds
of Muyden, and which were found lying by him in the ditch where he was slain:
carrying him into the boat, they followed, and leaped into it, and would never
eat nor drink, although it were offered them; yea, they would have starued
themselves, if they had not been drawn away from the Earls dead body.
Amongst those that had assisted at this murder, many fled out of the Country,
and among the rest, the Seignior of Woerden went up and down like a vagabond,
and died poorly and miserably in a strange country. The The end of the
conspirators
by his friends in a far country. All Holland, Zeeland, Friseland, and the
neighbor countries were troubled for this fact, the which was taken so
grievously, as the Hollanders, to begin the revenge by him that had bin the
author of this conspiracy, and actor of the murder, went to Floris friends
and allies, but especially to John d'Auesnes, earl of Henault, and to Cont
John his son, who came before the castle of Croonenbruch, whereas they
planted their engines of battery. The The revenge of Cont Floris death.
earl of Cuycke hearing that the Seignior of Velson was straightly besieged in
his castle (as the said earl had bin present at the resolution of the taking
of Cont Floris, in the name of the duke of Brabant) did write unto the earl of
Cleues, being at that siege, entreating him to be a means that the besieged
might depart at the least with their lives saved, the which he promised him to
do: whereupon he sent for his men about him, that he might at need preserve
them, as he might well have done. But the Hollanders having some notice thereof,
were much discontented, Hugh of Baerlandt, the Kennemers had William of They
lingen, and two others: those of Harlem had William van Zaenden: those of Delft
had Arnold van Bienschop: the earl of Cleues had Gerard of Craenhorst, and
four others: al which were beheaded and laid upon wheels: those of Leyden had
Gerard van Velson, the author of this conspiracy, and the murderer of Cont
Floris, whom they tormented more than any other: Too cruel a revenge
for they put him stark naked into a pipe full of sharp nails, and so was
rolled up and down throughout all the streets of Leyden; then after all these
torments, they cut off his head and laid him upon a wheel: all his kindred unto
the ninth degree that could be taken, were put Christierne the third king of
Denmark, planted themselves in a little Island right against Coppenhaghen,
called Amack, the which they do labor and dress after the manner of Holland:
so as this little Island (which is not above two French leagues in circuit) is
called the garden of Didier of Harlem, who took it into his charge on the
countries behalf, and is at this day a good Chasteleine. After which time, the
Nobility, Towns, and Commons of Holland, made an agreement jointly together,
confirming it by a solemn oath, whereof public letters were drawn, never to
receive into grace those of the houses of Amstel, Woerden, and Welsen, nor any
of their kindred nor allies, whom they sought to root out by all means, or to
chase them out of the country, by which means

The Emperor Rodulphus, the first of that name, had in the year 1290 given
East-Friseland Charlemaigne and other precedent Emperors; knowing also, that
the Earl of Holland pretended an interest thereunto, he durst not adventure
to take possession thereof by force. Besides, Cont Floris having (as we have
said before) subdued West-Friseland, and taken the town of Staueren, did much
annoy the East-Frisons (and withal the bishops of Vtrecht would never quit
their part) who to free themselves from so many lords, sent their ambassadors
to the king of Denmark, desiring him, that he would take them The Frisons
send to the king of Denmark to be their protector
and their country into his protection. The king being loath to let slip this
goodly occasion, received them, and sent one of his noblemen to govern the
country in his name, and to be his

JOHN THE FIRST OF THAT name, the twentieth Earl of Holland and Zeeland, Lord
of Friseland.
20 Joannes Hollandiae.


This JOHN the King of Englands daughter had to wife,
In whose short time, the town of Delft hap'ning to fall in strife
With him, attempted for to kill two of his counselors:
Accompanied with WOLPHAR, he did enter into wars
Against the Frisons, and subdued them in short space:
But death when he had ruled four years, his conquest did deface,
And without heirs it was his chance to die,
Whose bones entombed with his valiant ancestors do lie.
COnt Floris the fifth being thus murdered, as we have said by Gerard van
Velsen, John of Holland his only son succeeded him, and was the twentieth
Earl: He being absent in England with the king his father in law, Didier earl
of Cleues took upon him the government of the quarter of North-Holland. On the
other side, Guy brother to the earl of Henault, Treasurer Cathedral of the
bishopric of Liege, came and took upon him the government of South-Holland,
and made his residence at Gheertruyden-bergh. The government of Holland divided
during the absence of Cont John.
By the divisions and factions of these two noblemen, there happened great
troubles in Holland, the subjects being divided, during the absence of their
prince. Cont John of Henault and Guy his brother were sons to the deceased
cont John d' Auesnes, and the lady Alix sister to William king of Romans, and
Earl of Holland, who was father unto the last Floris, and so were cousin
germans to Cont John of Holland, his nearest kinsmen, and more apparent heirs
than the earl of Cleues: and therefore Guy maintained, that the government was
due to him, rather than to the earl of Cleues; but Cont John's return from
England ended all these quarrels.

William Bertold, subrogated in the place of John Zirich (chosen bishop of Toul
in Lorraine) to the bishopric of Vtrecht, having an active and stirring
spirit, revived the ancient quarrels of them of Vtrecht against the Hollanders,
and went to besiege the castle of Muyden, the which he maintained to be part of
his revenues; the which in the end he forced, and constrained Didier of Harlem
to yield it up to have their lives saved, he remaining his prisoner. The bishop
puffed up with this happy success, went into West-Friseland, after that he
had caused his Baldwin of Naeldwyke, for want of victuals and munition of war
was forced to yield it up by composition, to depart with bag and baggage, and
to return freely into Holland; which done, they rased it: the like they did
also to the castle of Euigenburch: then passing on, they besieged the castle of
Medemblycke, having burnt the base town. Floris of Egmont, and other gentlemen
that were within it, defended themselves valiantly, making many brave sallies
and skirmishes upon their enemies: they were so long besieged in this manner,
as for want of victuals they were John of Henault having news thereof, and
that the Frisons, with the said bishop of Vtrecht, did what they pleased,
without any or very small resistance, took upon him (during the absence of his
cousin) the government of Holland, and with an Army of Hannuyers, Hollanders
and Zeelanders, went into Friseland, where he defeated the Frisons, raised the
siege from before Medemblycke, and relieved it with all things necessary. The
Seignior John of Arckel, and Nicholas of Putten knights of Holland, took the
town of Enchuysen, whence they carried away a great spoil, and in their
retreat burnt it.

During the divisions and partialities betwixt the earl of Cleues and Guy of
Henault, the which increased more and more in Holland, the lords Didier of
Brederode, Floris Regal Abbot of Egmond, Henry Vicont of Leyden, and William of
Egmond, accompanied with some John out of England, and for a strange and new
thing they led with them Claes van Keyten; where they were graciously received
by king Edward, who having rigged forth a goodly Fleet of ships, sent away
the Earl his son in law with his daughter Elizabeth, recommending unto the
lord of Brederode the government of the said Earl his prince, being then very
young. Being at sea, the wind turned contrary, so as they were forced to land
in Zeeland, whereas Wolfart of Borssele, lord of la Vere, rejecting and
contemning the Noblemen of Holland, did cunningly seize upon the guard and
government of the young Earl, chasing from him all the Nobility of Holland,
to whom the king of England had so much recommended him. The Earl being one
day at Romerswael, by the persuasion of the said lord of Vere, sent the lord of
Brederode (who was

John Earl of Henault hearing, that Cont John of Holland his cousin was
returned out of

In the year 1297 Cont John of Holland levied a mighty army, with the which
he went into Friseland, to reduce them to their obedience by force, and first
he came to Alcmar. The Frisons were also in arms, and ready to encounter him.
The two armies being well ordered, either of them in two battailons, they
charged one another resolutely: the fight was sharp and furious, but in the
end the Frisons were put to rout, and there were slain about four The Frisons
defeared.
thousand upon the place, the rest saving themselves here and there through the
marshes and ditches. Among the Hollanders there died John lord of Arckel, a
brave knight, John of (...), John for the first fruits of this happy success,
returning into Holland after this goodly victory, he took up the body of Cont
Floris his father, the which did lie in the Quier of the church at Alcmar, the
which with a stately funeral pomp he caused to be interred in the abbey of
Rhynsbourg by the lady Beatrix of Flanders his wife mother to the said Cont
John.

The bishop of Vtrecht hearing of this great defeat, went into East-Friseland,
whereas he caused pardons to be preached again against the Hollanders. The
Frisons promised all possible assistance unto the bishop, and with a great
number of ships came to the town of Monickendam in Waterlandt. The
inhabitants of Harlem and the Waterlanders being gathered The Frisons joined to
the bishop of Vtrecht, are defeated.
Ghisbrecht of Iselstein, to have him open his castle of Iselstein freely and
of his own accord, into the which he would put a garrison, to bridle the
bishop on that side. But Ghisbrecht being liege man and vassale to the bishop,
and made his lieutenant on that part of Bartract, wife to Ghisbrecht, defended
it valiantly with her men almost a whole year, but in the end for want of
victuals and munitions, she was forced to yield it, upon condition, that half
her men should have their lives saved, and that the Earl should dispose of the
other moitie at his pleasure, the which (upon whom the chance fell) were all
beheaded. Cont John having taken this place of Iselstein, gave it with all the
jurisdiction and dependances unto Wolphard Seignior of la Vere, to hold of him
as Earl of Holland in fee, and doing him homage, that by this means he might
always keep the bishop in awe on that part.

In the year 1299, the West-Frisons noting the prosperity and happy success
of this young Earl against the bishop of Vtrecht (who was their firebrand) and
that he knew well how to defend himself, and to maintain his subjects, they
began to think of their affairs, and made suite that he would receive them
into grace, offering to make reparation for their faults. The Earl desiring
rather to win them by mildness and love, than by arms, went to Alcmar,
whither he sent for the chief of the country, who swear fealty and obedience
unto him, whereof an instrument was drawn under their hands and seals.

We the Consuls, Bourgmasters, Sherifes, and Commons of West-Friseland, make
The te^or of the letters of reparation and submission made by the Frisons.
known to whom it shall appertain, That for the offenses committed by us
against the high and mighty prince John Earl of Holland and Zeeland, Lord of
Friseland, our liege Lord and John Earl of Henault, both for corporal and
pecuniarie punishments, servitude, duties, and obedience in all sorts: The
which we Frisons do promise for our selves and our successors to

A while after the Earl of Holland having some affairs to treat of with the
duke of Brabant, went to Romerswael in Zeeland, and the duke to Berghen upon
Soom, being distant about two leagues one from another. John de Renesse a wise
and discret knight was sent from the Earl unto the duke. At his return, as
he was going to make report of his embassage unto the Earl, and to give an
account of his actions; the Earl was maliciously advised by Renesse, to look
unto himself, for that (as they made him believe) it had been resolved
betwixt the duke and the said Renesse, That if he went into Brabant, they would
retain him prisoner, and that Renesse had conspired to deliver him unto the
Brabancons. The Earl being retired from thence to the castle of Lodycke, sent
for his garrisons of Holland to set upon Renesse, who seeing himself thus
wrongfully standered, and that the course of justice was denied him, unless he
would yield himself prisoner, being loath to be at the mercy of his enemies,
he retired himself to his castle of Mourmont, the which he did man with a good
garrison, and victual. The Earl sent for him to come to la Vere, to justify
himself: but being denied a safe conduct, he durst not appear, and therefore
he was banished for contumacie out of the Countries of Holland and Zeeland,
Mourmont taken and rased.
ground.

There happened afterward another garboile in South-Holland, which was, that
Allant bayliffe of Dordrecht, meaning to make some secret informations of some
crimes committed Troubles at Dordrecht.
in the town, he required the Sherifes to assist, and to sit with him in
judgment. Whereunto it was answered him, That it was against the laws and
privileges of the town, if in any thing great or small, they should appear
in justice without their Escoutette, yet without prejudice to their authority
and rights, that in favor of justice they would assist, not as Judges, but as
Commissaries and Informers. The information being begun, Cont John arrived with
Wolphard of la Vere, who demanded the names of the offenders, to do justice
as he A foolish answer of the magistrate of Dord^echr.
Witten of Hamstede, bastard of Holland, was in the castle of Putten, and
Nicholas de Cats at Ablasserdam, Allant baylife of Dordrecht went to Slydrecht
with many men, and built a fort upon the ditch, that nothing might pass. They
of Dordrecht made choice of four men among them, that were valiant, wise, and
temperat, whom they made their captains, to whom they committed all the charge
and conduct

Whilst that Wolphard of la Vere, a violent and severe man, would have
surcharged the John, and went to S^dam, there to imbarkt, and to pass by the
river of Meuse into Zeeland: but the Hollanders pe^ it, pursued him and forced
him to return, the respect of the Princes presence rest^g them (...) offering
him any further violence: then they led their Earl and the said (...) (...)
Delft, o^ here fearing that they would (...) ^ther him, he fled into a high
house, built of free stone, at the corner of a st^ect called Choorstroet*
before the which there presently gathered together a multitude of people,
crying confusedly, that they should deliver Wolphard, else they would burn the
house, and all that were within it. They that were within the house with him,
fearing their lives, took Wolphard (who was not armed) and cast him out from
the highest windows into the street, where he was presently murdered and cut
in pieces, the which afterward bred great quarrels betwixt the Nobility of
Holland and Zeeland.

At the same time the bayliffe Allant having fear of them of Dordrecht, had
fled into the

In the year 1300 Cont John of Holland being at Harlem, fell sick, whereof
he died the The death of the Earl of Holland.
fourth of the Calends of November, after that he had governed his Countries of
Holland, Zeeland, and West-Friseland about four years. He was the first of
all the Earls of Holland that died without children, and had not received the
order of Knighthood: in whom failed the line of Earls, issued from the
masculine line of the dukes of Acquitaine, the which from Thierry the first
Earl had continued 437 years. He was interred in the abbey of Rhinsburg, and
by his death those Countries fell to the Earls of Henault, issued by the
mothers side from the Earls of Holland. The Lady Elizabeth his widow was
carried back into England, and afterward married to the Earl of Oxford. After
the death of Cont John, Ghisbrecht of Amstel returned into Holland, and did
again possess the village of Amsterdam, which he began to fortify, and to
build many bridges and towers about the walls: those of Harlem and the
Waterlanders went thither with an army, chased away Ghisbrecht, set fire on the
town, burnt all the bridges and towers of wood, and then ruined the rest.

We have said before, that when as the lord of Brederode and the noblemen of
Holland went to fetch Cont John out of England, they led with them the giant
Klaes van Knyten, as a Who the giant Claes van Knyten was.
Sparenwonde, near to Harlem: his father and mother were of an ordinary
stature, yet no man might be compared unto him, for the tallest men of all
Holland might stand under his arm, and not touch him (and yet there are
commonly seen even at this day very tal men in that country) he would cover
four ordinary soles of shoes with his foot. He tertified little children to
behold him, and yet there was not any roughnes nor malice in him, but was
gentle and mild as a lamb: for if he had been fierce and cruel, answerable
to his greatness and proportion, he might have chased a whole army before him.

In those days there sprung up in the country of Friseland the factions of
Schyerlingers and Vetcoopers, the which from a small beginning, unworthy to be
written (the which notwithstanding The beginning of two wicked factions in
Friseland.
and those of Guelphes and Gibilins in Italy: the diversity of colored hoods
in Flanders, Maximilian the first sent Albert duke of Saxony thither to
suppress them (for that the Commissioners which he had formerly sent to
pacify and reconcile them, had prevailed nothing) making him his lieutenant
and governor hereditarie, yet with small profit, for he was slain there; and
his two sons the dukes, Henry and George (as we shall show hereafter) did not
avail much, so as they left all: so great lovers have the Frisons always
been of their franchises and liberties. But under the government of the said
princes of Saxony, these factions ceased to oppose themselves with their joint
forces against the rule of strangers, as they had done

JOHN EARL OF HENAVLT, THE second of that name, one and twentieth Earl of
Holland and Zeeland, Lord of West-Friseland.
21 Joannes Hannon^


Five years I lived Earl of Holland, by descent
Of blood, and for my comfort God three noble sons me sent:
Whose valors did enfranchise me from all my fear,
Whilst Brabant and the Emperor against me great malice bare:
By them I overcame GVIDO DOMPIERRE in fight,
And freed the town of Zirickxee from all their enemies might:
The Flemings I subdued, that were my enemies,
And in Valencia deep entombed my bones and ashes lies.
THE SECOND BOOK.
The Argument.
John Earl of Henault, son to John of Auesnes, and the Lady Alix sister to
king William Earl of Holland, was the second of that name, and one and
twentieth Earl of Holland. War betwixt them of Vtrecht and their Bishop.
John de Renesse prouokes the Earl of Flanders against the Earl of Holland,
which was the cause of great wars. William called the Good, the third of that
name, the two and twentieth Earl of Holland. Guy of Holland his brother,
bishop of Vtrecht, had great wars against the Frisons. Cont William subdued
the East-Frisons. Justice done upon a baylife of South-Holland, for a cow, whom
the Earl caused to be executed, lying on his death bed. William the fourth,
son to the good Earl William, the three and twentieth Earl of Holland: He
makes war against the Russians, them Marguerite wife to the Emperor Lewis of
Bauiere, daughter to the good Earl William, the four and twentieth Commander
in Holland and Zeeland, where she appointed duke William of Bauiere, her eldest
son, Governor in her absence. He had war against them of Vtrecht. The
faction of the Cabillaux rise in Vtrecht, which bandie duke William against his
mother, after the death of the Emperor Lewis, whereof followed two cruel
battles: in the first the Empress was victor, in the second duke William,
and after much blood spilt, they agreed, William remaining the five and
twentieth Earl of Holland. Vtrecht had war against their bishop, and the
bishop against the Earl of Holland, who was distract of his wits, and the
government put into the hands of duke Albert of Bauiere, his brother,
notwithstanding the factions which grew betwixt the Hoocks and the Cabillaux.
William, called the Frantic, being dead, Albert of Bauiere was the six and
twentieth Earl of Holland. Delft rebelled against the Earl: he besieged it,
and forces them to obedience. The bishop of Vtrecht in war against the Earl
of Holland. Anne of Poelgeest, minion to Cont Albert, murdered in the night,
which bred a great quarrel betwixt the Earl of Ostrenant and Cont Albert his
father. An affront done to the Earl of Ostreuant at the French kings table,
which caused war against the Frisons, who were often subdued, and rebelled as
often, War betwixt the Earl of Holland and the Lord of Arckel. The history
of a sea-woman taken in Holland. William the sixth of that name, the seven and
twentieth Earl of Holland, succeeded his father Albert, he had great wars
against the bishop of Vtrecht and the Lord of Arckel. The Liegeois make war
against their bishop, brother to the Earl of Holland: the Earl goes to succor
him, and defeats the Liegeois. War betwixt the Earl of Holland and the duke
of Gueldres. Cont William leaving one only heir, Iacoba or Iaquelina, the
eight and twentieth commanding in Holland etc. she married first with the
Daulphin of France, son to Charles the sixth, who died at one and twenty
years of age, without children: then she married with John duke of Brabant.
John of Bauiere, bishop of Vtrecht, troubles her estate, to make himself
Earl. The Lady Iaqueline separated from the duke her husband, by reason of
neerenesse of blood: she espouseth the duke of Gloucester, who after leaves her.
She had great wars and troubles against the duke of Brabant, against her
uncle, and against the duke of Bourgoigne: she marries Franc of Borsele
secretly: the duke Philip of Bourgoigne puts him in prison, and for his
liberty, she resignes all her Countries unto the duke.

JOHN Earl of Holland, son to Cont Floris the fifth, being dead without
heirs, the Earledomes of Holland and Zeeland, with the Seigniorie of
Friseland, came by succession to John Earl of Henault, son to Cont John of
Auesnes, and the Lady Alix, sister to William king of Romans, and Earl of
Holland, and so son to Cont John's great aunt. John of Henault was the one and
twentieth Earl of Holland, for which he quartered his Botzard bishop of Metz,
John bishop of Cambray, Guy chanon of Cambray, and Floris, who was prince of
Morienne. At his coming to The Earl of Henaults brethren.
this succession of Holland and Zeeland, he gave unto his brother Guy the
Seigniories of Amsterdam and Woerden, to hold them in fee of the county of
Holland, with all their rights and dependances, the homage and right of heronie
only excepted, the which he reserved for himself: Guy past a covenant in
writing, to the Earl his brother. This Guy gave unto Amsterdam, many freedoms,
rights, liberties, statutes and ordinances, for the government of the town, and
administration of justice. Afterward he was bishop of Vtrecht, and after his
death these two seigniories returned to the Earl of Holland, John's wife and
children.
as we shall show hereafter. This Earl John of Henault, had to wife Philip,
daughter to the earl of Luxenbourg by whom he had his eldest son, called John
without mercy, earl of Ostreuant, who was slain at the battle of
Groeninghen, near unto Courtray, William, who was Earl John of Beaumont,
earl of Blois, Henry, chanon of Cambray, Marguerite contesse of Arthois,
Adella contesse of Clermont, Marie contesse of Bourbonois, and Mathilda lady of
Neele.

In the year 1301 Cont John of Henault, levied great forces, with the which
he came into 1301 The Earl seeks to ruin John de Renesse.
Zeeland, with an intent to reduce the seignior John de Renesse unto reason, by
arms, who being banished his country, went to the emperor Albert for
succor; showing that the earledomes of Holland and Zeeland, by the decease of
the last Earl John of Holland without hei^s, should return unto the empire:
whereupon the said emperor did write to all the countries of Holland, Zeeland,
and West-Friseland, what right he pretended unto them, and that his intention
was, to annexe them unto the empire, as Charles the Bald, emperor of Romans,
had Thierry of Acquitaine, the first Earl of Holland. So the emperor came
down the same year as far as Nymegen, to receive possession thereof, being
accompanied by the archbishops, and princes electors, of Mentz, Treues, and
Cologne, and with many other princes and barons of Germany. Cont John of
Henault prepared a goodly army for to encounter him, and to stop his passage
and entry into his countries, planting his camp at Bonswaerd, upon the mouth
of the river of Wahal, searching a foord to pass unto the other side, to
charge the emperors army: who having caused the Earls forces to be viewed,
and hearing that he was resolved to charge him, he then thought that John de
Renesse had abused him, he therefore retired his army unto Cranenbourg, with
an intent to depart the next day, and to return into Austria. But the bishop
of Cologne (jealous of the emperors honor) John, the which was concluded, upon
condition, That the Earl shall take an oath, and do homage unto the emperor,
and should hold his earldomes of Holland, Zeeland, and West-Friseland, of the
empire, he and his successors for ever. This done, they returned good friends
every one to his home. Some Zeelanders being come down with John de Renesse to
the emperors service, came too late, and leaving their ships at Heusden, went
into Brabant: Cont John followed them at the heels, and burnt all their ships:
which done, he banished the seignior of Renesse, and confisked all his goods,
the which he gave unto some gentlemen, that had served him faithfully in that
voyage: yet would not the said Renesse with his small troop, forbear to make
war against the Hollanders, entering upon the lands of Berghen upon Soom,
whereas the lord of Berghen went to fight with him, and John was then in the
town of Dordrecht, sending his eldest son, John without mercy, earl of
Ostreuant, to besiege him in this castle: Renesse having intelligence of his
coming, and being well acquainted with his cruelty, fearing least he should
be entreated like unto them of the castle of Berendorp, where he put all that he
found within it to the sword, without any respect or mercy (for the which he
was since called John without mercy) he resolved with his men to retire
himself into Flanders, and to abandon the place. Being come into Flanders, he
made a league with the Flemings, against the Hollanders and Zeelanders, and
with a small army of their soldiers, entered into the island of Zuytbeuelandt,
presuming to surprise the town and castle Ter-Goes. Those of Romerswael took
arms against him, and having

The same year William Bertold, bishop of Vtrecht a busy man, seeking to
bring in many The bishop of Vtrecht taken prisoner by his own people.
innouations upon his subjects, was taken prisoner by M. Asuerus of Montfort,
Hubert of Vianen, John of Linschoten, and John of Lichtenbourg, Bourgmasters of
the town, and was detained

Hereupon at his return from Rome he levied men in the country of Oueryssel
(being the upper part of the dioces of Vtrecht) to seek to recover his town.
Some noblemen and The bishop goes to arms.
Henry Vicont of Leyden, Didier of Wassenare, Philip of Montfort, Simon of
Benthem, Floris of Dunen, and Ieams vanden Vouden, all knights, enemies to the
bishop, and friends to Ieams of Lichtenbourg, with a good number of soldiers,
being called by the citizens of Vtrecht, and with the consent of the Earl of
Holland their prince, went to succor the said Lichtenbourg, and to chase away
the bishop. Being come into a goodly champion country, near unto Hooch-woord,
the bishop was twice as strong in men as they, and went to charge them first,
he defeated some countrymen that were out of their camp, and fought valiantly
against the Hollanders. During the fight, Asuerus of Montfort arrived with some
troops, to succor these noblemen of Holland, and then the skirmish was more
violent then before. The bishop being well mounted, passed and repassed through
The bishop slain in battle, being ouer-bold.
from his horse, and slain by some soldiers that knew him not. This happened
in the year 1301. on S. Martins day in Summer. In this defeat there were a
great number slain, especially of the bishops men, whose body was taken up by
the knights of the Hospital of Saint John, 1301
and buried afterward in the Cathedral church of Vtrecht, after he had
governed his bishopric in continual troubles, five years only: and this
was his Epitaph:

Huic dedit agnomen celebris Meeklinia, victo:
Occiduam foelix perdomuit Frisiam. The Epitaph of this bishop.

Omnia mors mutat, caesus cum certat iniquo
Mart, suis subtus turribus occubuit.
Bishop William having bin thus slain, John of Henault Earl of Holland, came
to Vtrecht, and required the Chapter to choose Guy of Henault his brother, being
treasurer of the church at Liege, and chanon at Cambray, who was chosen by one
part of the said Chapter, and Rodolphus or Ralfe their Cathedral provost by
the other: notwithstanding, Guy of Henault with the assistance of his brother,
the Earl got possession of the town, and of the lower diocese of Vtrecht,
and Rodulphus retired into the country of Ouerissel, and so Guy remained
peaceable bishop. This done, Cont John returned into his country of Henault,
leaving his son John without mercy, earl of Ostreuant, goueruor of Zeeland,
by reason of the wars against the Flemings, and William his second son,
lieutenant in Holland, and West-Friseland, having resolved to lay aside all
cares, and to spend the remainder of his days in rest, in his natural
country of Henault. Afterward the said John without mercy, being in the
service of Philip the fair, king of France, was with many princes and
noblemen, slain at the great battle which the Flemings won against the
French, in the year 1302, at Groeninghen, near unto Courtray in Flanders:
John without mercy slame.
so his brother William was earl of Ostreuant, with the consont of Cont John
of Henault, his father. 1302


In the year 1303, John earl of Namur, and his brother, being come to succor
the Flemings, having joined with some troops, with the forces of John of
Renesse, did run over all the frontiers 1303


In the year 1304, Guy son to the earl of Flanders, grown insolent by
reason of his former John de Renesse, levied a new army, which he led 1304 The
Earl of Flanders pretends to land in Walchren.
into the country of Catsandt, attending a prosperous wind there, to sail
into the isle of Walchren. William earl of Ostreuant, son to the Earl of
Holland and Henault, by the commandment of his father, levied also a goodly
army of Hannuyers, Hollanders, Zeelanders, and Frisons, with the which he
landed suddenly in Catsandt, and defeated the Flemings. Guy having levied new
forces entered into Zeeland: Cont William of Ostreuant went to encounter him,
but through treason and secret intelligences, which the seignior of Renesse had
there, he was twice put to rout, once before Arnemuyden, and the other near
unto la Vere, saving himself at Ziricxee, in the isle of Schowen, there to
gather together new forces. Guy pursued him, and in passing took the town of
Middlebourg; from thence he went to besiege Ziricxee. Cont William being within
it, went forth secretly in the night, by one of the gates, and made a brave
sallie upon the Flemings, so as there were 1500 slain, drowned, and prisoners.
Afterward they made a truce for a month, upon condition, That they should not
fortify the said town otherwise than it was; during the which, Cont William
went into Holland, to levy new supplies. The truce being ended, those of
Ziricxee recovered the town of Middlebourg by force, and chased away the
Flemings, returning with honor and triumph unto their town, although it were
besieged. Having advertised Cont William thereof, he returned unto them, and in
passing, defeated the troops which John of ^enesse had in those parts, and
chased them quite out of Zeeland. During this war, and siege of Ziricxee,
Cont William was made knight, and eight and forty gentlemen with him. We may
well say, that in those times they made not knights John of Holland) were never
knighted.

After that the said Cont William returned into Holland, where with the help of
Guy bishop of Vtrecht his uncle, he raised a goodly army of Hannuyers,
Hollanders, Zeelanders, and of other countries under their obedience, to
encounter the Flemings, that were entered into the isle of Duyuelandt: where
being landed, some young gentlemen, being disimbarked first, went to skirmish
with the banished men of Zeeland, that were there. The Hollanders and
Traiectins, seeing that it was late, pitched their tents and pauilions upon the
causey, but the Frisons began to spoil the inhabitants of Duyuelandt, from
whence they brought good booty into their quarter. The Flemings and
Duyuelanders pursued them, and at one instant assailed the Hollanders The
Hollanders army defeated.
the obscurity and darkness of the night, so disordered, as the greatest
part thereof was defeated, and many of their best men died there: among the
rest William of Horn, provost cathedral of Vtrecht, Nicholas of Persin,
Didier of Harlem, Didier of Zuylen, Asuerus of Benewaert, all brave knights,
with many citisens and vassals of the country of Vtrecht: but the greatest Guy
of Henault their bishop, was taken prisoner, with many brave knights, all which
were sent into Flanders, under good guard. Cont William of Ostreuant fled into
a ship, and with great difficulty came to Ziricxee. This unfortunate defeat
happened about mid-lent, in the year 1304.

After this victory, Guy of Flanders fortified his army, and returned to
besiege Ziricxee, on The earl^ of Flanders wins a good part of Holland.
Palm Sunday until the Wednesday after Easter: but seeing he prevailed
nothing, he raised his camp, passed the river of Meuse with John de Renesse,
and conquers all North-Holland, unto Harlem: he took some burgesses of Delft
and Leyden prisoners, the which he carried to the town of Goude, and made M.
Nicholas de Cats Chasteleine or Governor of Shoonhouen. On the other side,
John duke of Brabant (who was embarked in this quarrel with the Nicholas of
Putten, their leader, upon the Brabancons, whom they chased with their duke out
of their quarters, pursuing them at the heels, and spoiling Guy of Flanders
near unto Isselmond, whereas there were slain above two thousand Flemings, so
as Guy saved himself with great difficulty.

During the time that Guy of Henault, bishop of Vtrecht, was prisoner in
Flanders, there were two contrary factions in the town, the which had been
enemies one to another a long time: but hearing that their prince and bishop
was taken prisoner, they reconciled themselves each to other, both parties
swearing faithfully to preserve and maintain the city in good estate, Gerard
of Brucken a knight was slain, standing before his door, the murderers going
on, seized upon the persons of Ieams of Lichtenbourg, and of the seignior of
Weruher, Great alteration in Vtrecht.
whom they shut up in the castle of Vreeseburch, and soon after brought them
to S. Katherins place, at midnight, and there put them to death; which was the
cause afterward of great murders, calamities, and miseries, in the said town
of Vtrecht. Guy of Flanders hearing of these alterations in Vtrecht, entered
with his forces, displaceth the magistrates by his own authority, and chooses
others in their places; persuading the chapter to depose their bishop Guy, who
was in prison, and to receive in his place William of Iuilliers: the which
happily he had obtained, if VVitten, bastard of Holland, lord of Hamstede, had
not come speedily from Ziricxee The lord of Hamstede defeats the Flemings.
his army, the which they quite defeated. The Frisons stripped them that were
slain, and laid them on a heap one upon another, and so left them like unto a
mount of joy, for a mark or remembrance unto the Flemings, when they should
have any desire to return, how they had been entreated there; which place is
at this day remarkable, by the name of Outdt-manne-pat. The Ockenburch, who
hearing of this victory, took a banner with the arms of Holland in his hand,
and went crying through the streets, Holland, Holland, etc. At which cry all
the commons did rise in arms, chasing the Flemings out of their town, and
spoiled a good number of them: this done, the Delfois went to Leyden, where
they did the like, and with them of Leyden went to la Goude, which they
surprised, chased away the Flemings, and rescued their bourgesses that were
prisoners there. In the mean time the lord of Hamstede arrived with his
troops, who chased away the rest of the Flemings, that were about Leyden, who
thinking to save themselves in Delft, were poorly received, and miserably cut
in pieces; so as in one street there were (...) Fleming found dead upon the
pauement: The lord of Hamstede chaseth ^he Flemings out of Holland.
to the Flemings, from whom both he and his soldiers took a great and rich
spoil. At the same time Nicholas de Cats, who as we have said, had been
appointed by Guy of Flanders, governor of Schoonhouen, came from the castle to
see and hear what was done or said in the town: but the inhabitants laid
presently hold upon him, and sent him to the lord of Hamstede, entreating him
to come unto them, the which he did presently, with some troops, and besieged
the castle, the which in the end he forced to yield, and the Flemings were in
like sort chased from thence.

Guy of Flanders being advertised of the good success of the lord of Hamstede,
and of the loss of his men in so many places, aised a great and mighty army,
with the which he marched toward Vtrecht, and from thence came the third time
to besiege the town of Ziricxee, the which he straightly begirt with many
trenches, blockhouses, and mounts, and battered it with his rams,
crossebowes, and other engines, the which did cast stones of an exceeding
greatness. Guy of Flanders resolved to carry the town by assault, commanding
his soldiers to bring as much straw, reeds, and bauins, as they could carry
on their backs, to fill up the ditch: which being done, he caused his men to
approach near the walls; but the besieged presented themselves courageously,
repulsing them as well with handie blows, as with stones. The youngest and most
able defended the assault at the breach; the elder were in the towers, casting
stones incessantly, and shooting arrows as Guy was forced to leave the
assault, with loss of his men, very many being hurt, who of a long time were
not able to fight: and finding that by this assault he had prevailed nothing;
he caused an high caualier or mount, to be made on the North side, from the
which they might discover and see any thing that was done in the town, and
whereby the Flemings did much annoy the besieged: through the favor whereof
Guy gave another assault, which continued from morning until night, where the
Flemings were so valiantly repulst, as having lost almost 2000 men, they were
forced to retire. The inhabitants finding William earl of Ostreuant prepared
an army of Hollanders and Frisons, to raise the Flemings from thence. He had
before written to Philip the Fair, king of France, and craved succors from
him against the Flemings, the which he granted, sending him 350 ships rigged at
Calais, with men and al other Lawrence day, and joined with Cont Williams
ships, being resolved to go and fight with the Flemings, and to dislodge them
from Ziricxee.

The Flemings (to trouble these two armies at sea, being joined together)
filled a great hulke full of fagots, mixed with pitch, rozine, saltpeter,
brimstone, and oil, the which having set on fire, they let it float with the
tide, that it might fall among the French and Hollanders, that by the means of
this unquenchable fire, it might burn them, or at the least disorder and
disperse them: but the wind turning contrary, it was carried by the tide into
the midst of the Flemish ships. The French and Hollanders seeing this, went
to charge them, and this furious combat continued both at sea and at land, a
whole day and a night, with such obstinacy and violence, Guy of Flanders was
taken there, and sent by the admiral into France, to keep Guy of Dompierre,
earl of Flanders, and his other brethren, that were prisoners, company. There
died in this battle, of them that were slain and drowned, a hundred thousand
Flemings, A great defeat of the Flemings.
besides the prisoners. The earl of Ostreuant sent eleven hundred of their
ships, and ninety very rich tents and pauilions into Holland. Then, after an
absolute and assured victory he entered into Ziricxee, where having
intelligence, that there were yet six thousand Flemings remaining in the
downs, he sent the inhabitants of the town, which had not been at the great by
this exchange they were sent back into Flanders. They were wont to make an
annual* John de Renesse, within the town of Vtrecht, whom The Hollanders
besiege John de Renesse in Vtrecht.
they provoked all they could, burning certain mills in the suburbs, thinking
that Renesse would make some sally forth upon them: but he fearing in the end
to be betrayed, went secretly out of the town, to pass the river of Lecke;
and fearing to be pursued, having for his The death of John de Renesse.
of Renesse being valiant of his person, wise and judicious, did much harm
unto his prince, for that he had refused him a passeport, with the which he
might have gone and justified himself of the accusations that were falsely
suggested against him, he which Cont John of Holland, by the instigation of his
enemies refused him: wherein he was very ill advised, for the which both
himself his successors, and all their countries have smarted. It is a question
which has even at this day been debated, Whether an absolute prince, without
diminution of his greatness and honor, may give a safe conduct to his vassal,
to come unto him, to justify himself, which otherwise he durst not do, by
reason of the malice of his enemies. In my opinion Lewis the 11 of France, and
Charles duke of Bourgoigne, did unto the earl of S. Pol, nor the emperor
Sigismond to John Hus, and Ierosme of Prague, whose safe-conducts were but to
entrap them: neither Charles of Bourgoigne, would have heard Cyffron a
gentleman of Prouence, who was condemned to be hanged, being privy to the earl
Campobachios treacherous practices, and not caused him to be suddenly executed,
at the instance of this traitor, he might have prevented his own death, and
the ruin of his estate, which the said Campobachio had plotted with the duke
of Lorraine, to the great content of Lewis the 11. And it is frivolous to say,
that in

To pacify these great quarrels, betwixt Philip the Fair, king of France,
John of Henault, earl of Holland, Guy bishop of Vtrecht, and Guy of Dompierre,
earl of Flanders, and his three sons; the duke of Bourgoigne, and some other
princes, were intercessors and mediators on Guy bishop of Vtrecht should be set
at liberty, and should be restored to the possession of his bishopric, the
which was done. That the earl of Flanders, with his threesons, some princes
and noblemen, with forty Flemish gentlemen, should be set at liberty, by the
king, the which returned joyfully into Flanders, every one to his own home.
But the earl after his enlargement, 1305 Death of the earl of Flanders.
contesse Marguerite, his mother. Some chronicles of Flanders say, that he died
at Campeigne in France, being yet a prisoner.

John of Henault, Earl of Holland and Zeeland, Lord of West-Friseland, having
advertisement of the victory which God had given unto William earl of
Ostreuant, his son, was very joyful, and soon after, the second day of the
ides of September 1305, departed this world The death of the Earl of Holland.
in peace and rest, after that he had governed Henault 30 years, and Holland
and Zeeland etc. 5 years, and was interred at Valenciennes. The lady Philip of
Luxembourg, his wife, died soon after, and was buried by her husband. At the
time of the death of the said Cont John there were many noblemen, barons,
knights, and squiers, that were renowned in the countries Guy of Henault, lord
of The chief nobility.
Amstel and of Woerden, afterward bishop of Vtrecht, brother to the said Cont
John, John without mercy, earl of Ostreuant, who was slain before the death
of his father, at the battle of Courtray, William who succeeded him in the
said earldome of Ostreuant, his second son, afterward Earl of Henault,
Holland, Zeeland, etc. John of Beaumont, earl of Blois and of Soissons, all
three brethren, sons to the said Cont John of Henault, Didier the Gentle,
lord of Brederode, William and Thierry his brethren, Didier lord of
Theylinghen, John of Heusden, John lord of Arckel, Hugh Butterman lord of
Buttersloot, Albert lord of Voorne, Nicholas lord of Putten and of Stryen, John
lord of Leck and Polanen, John lord of Hencklom, Otto lord of of Aspren and
Abkoy, Ghysbrecht of Yselsteyn, Henry vicont of Leyden, Didier lord of
Wassenare, Henry lord of Vianen, Nicholas of Persin, Didier of Harlem, Witten
bastard of Holland, lord of Hamstede in Zeeland, Nicholas of Cats, Peregrin
lord of Lederdam and of Haestrecht, William of Egmond, John lord of Elshaut
John seignior of Drongelon, Didier seignior of Lyenburch, Ieams vander Wuoude,
Gerard of Heemskerke, Gerard of Polgeest, seignior of Almade, Simon of Benthem,
Wolwin of Sasse, Adam^ Escosse, Baldwin of Naeldwick, Floris van Duynen, Floris
van Tol, all knights: Among the squiers William of Harlem, William of
Assendelf, John van Zil, Nicholas of Adrichom, Wouter of Wyck, were the most
markable, with an infinite number of gentlemen of name and arms.

The year before the death of Cont John of Henault, there were so great
tempests, and such tides on a S. Katherines day, as many banks and dikes were
broken, and carried away, in Zeeland; William Earl of Ostreuant (who made his
usual residence in Zeeland) and the lord of Borssele, had not prevented it at
their own charge, this island had been lost.

WILLIAM THE THIRD OF THAT name, the two and twentieth Earl of Holland,
Zeeland, and Henault, Lord of Friseland.
22 Guil ielmus 3 Hanoniae Cogn. Bonus.


IOANE daughter to king CHARLES de Valois was thy spouse,
That brought thee children worthy thy degree and noble house;
Whereof one did his valor great and virtue show,
By mounting thee again, when as thy foes did overthrow
Thee from thy horse, whereby at last God did thee send
The victory, to honor of the French as then thy friend.
Thou punishedst a bailife, that a poor man's Cow did take,
And ruling thirty years and one, this life thou did forsake.
WILLIAM the third of that name, before Earl of Ostreuant, after the decease
John of Henault, his father, succeeded, and was the 22 Earl of Holland and
Zeeland, Lord of Friseland, united to his county of Henault, for his mildness,
gentleness, equity, and good life, he was called The good Earl William. He
was generally beloved of all knights, princes, and noblemen, and greatly
honored of all men: for his valor he was surnamed, The Master of Knights, and
Lord of Princes. He had to wife Ioane the daughter of Charles of Valois, brother
to Philip the Fair, king of France, by whom he The wife and children of Cont
William
had John his eldest son, who died young, William earl of Ostreuant, who was
his successor, and Lewis, who died also young; Marguerite wife to Lewis duke of
Bauiere, and emperor, who after the decease of her brother William, was
contesse of Henault, Holland and Zeeland, and lady of Ioane who was married to
the earl of Iuilliers, and another Ioane, who was queen of England, and the
fourth Elizabeth. At his coming to these earldoms and seigniories, he kept
open court, whither came 20 earls, 100 barons, 1000 knights, and an infinite
number of gentlemen, ladies, and gentlewomen, coming from all parts. This
feast continued eight days in all kind of sports and pastimes: afterward the
princes of Germany did choose him vicar of the empire. He was much renowned
throughout al Germany, in respect of two strong castles which he did win near
unto Cologne, that is Bruile and Wolmestein. He was founder of the chanory of
Middlebourg in Zeeland, and walled in the town, and fortified it. This Cont
William had one brother, as we have said, called John of Beaumont, who married
the daughter of the earl of Blois and of Soissons, and who by the death of his
father in law, was in the right of his wife earl of John which succeeded him,
father to the earls John and Guy of Blois. This earl John of Beaumont,
obtained of the Earl of Holland, his brother, the town of la Goude and
Schoonhouen, with all rights, duties, and appurtenances, the which he repaired,
and fortified the castles, to make them his residence.

In the year 1311, Guy of Henault, bishop of Vtrecht, uncle to Cont William
the Good, intending to make a fort at Schellinkwerff, to bridle the Frisons;
for the effecting whereof he 1311
sought some firm foundation, but being sent for to assist the counsel of
Vienna, he was interrupted in this work. Being at this counsel, pope Clement
the fifth, at the request of Philip the Fair, king of France, would have made
him cardinal, but he refused it, desiring rather to live quietly in his
bishopric of Vtrecht, than to be a courtier at Rome. After this counsel the
Guy was in France, it was bruted abroad, that he was dead: and therefore the
Frisons of Schellinkwerff, having taken arms, for that the said bishop had
pretended to build a fort upon their limits, they went to besiege his castle of
Vollenhouen, in the country of Oueryssel, and did press it all they could,
with diverse kinds of batteries. The besieged (who wanted neither men nor
munition) defended themselves valiantly with arrows and slings, so as they
chased the Frisons out of their suburbs; who made a high tower of wood, of
three stages, Herman provost collegiall of Deuenter, hearing in what danger his
brother the chastelaine of Vollenhouen was, went speedily into France, to
advertise the bishop, into what necessity the besieged were brought by the
Frisons.

The bishop having taken his leave of the king, made no delay, until he were
returned rosin, brimston, and saltpeter, al together, the which being kindled,
they cast into the tower, upon Floris provost cathedral of Vtrecht, John of
Arckel, first counselor to the bishop, Didier lord of Brederode, and Nicholas
Putten, barons, and of the chief of the Earl of Hollands counsel, having
prepared their

In the year 1316 there was so great a famine in Holland, that the poor
people died for hunger, as they went in the streets; and going to seek herbs
and roots in the woods and fields, 1316 An extreme famine in Holland.
they remained statke dead in the ways: they were grown so weak and feeble,
as they were not able to stand upon their legs: little children were found
dead sucking of their mothers breasts; neither could there be a greater pity,
if the mothers had not devoured their children. During this famine, there was a
woman in the town of Leyden, who being greatly pressed with hunger, desired her
own sister, to lend her some bread, who answered her, That she had none in her
house; the other insisting that she had* and entreating her to lend her some:
If I have any Peter's church, in the said town of Leyden. After the death of Guy
bishop of Vtrecht, who died suddenly, not without suspicion of poison, Cont
William the Good united the seigniories of Amstel and Woerden, to the revenues
of Holland, where he placed bailifes, and other officers, for the government
of Justice: Saying, That what the Amstel and W^* erden united to Holland.
bishop had inioyed, was only by tolleration for his life, in recompense of
his patrimoniall portion: and that the said seigniories were fallen before to
the earldom of Holland, for the fellonies and contempt of Ghysbrecht of
Amstel, and Herman of Woerden, having not satisfied Floris.

In the year 1323, Charles the Fair, king of France, married the daughter of
the emperor Henry the seventh, inuiting many princes, both in France, and other
neighbor countries, to the 1323
solemnity of his marriage: whither also Cont William of Holland went, with the
lady Ioane of Valois, his wife, and many barons, knights, gentlemen, ladies and
gentlewomen, of Henault, Holland, Zeeland, and West-Friseland. The feast was
stately, and honored with many plays, tilts, tourneyes, and all kind of
sports: but in all that, there was nothing found more admirable, nor more
pleasing to the sight* than a giantesse, which the contesse of Holland had
brought with her, borne in Zeeland, the which was so great and mighty, as the
tallest men seemed but children in respect of her: and so strong of her body
and members, as she did lift up in either

In the year 1327 the emperor Lewis of Bauiere, being at Rome to be crowned,
he sent for William of Holland, as vicar of the empire, to be there, and to
assist at his coronation: 1327
whereupon the Earl presented himself, with the earls of Gueldres, Cleues,
Iuilliers, and Monts, and eight hundred choice knights, making have to pass
the alps into Lombardy, to aid the emperor against the Guelphes, who opposed
themselves against him. These noble men being upon the way, the good Earl
resolved to go himself in person to pope John, who lay then at Auignon, and to
labor (if it were possible) to reconcile the emperor unto him: but the pope
hearing of his coming, caused all the bridges upon the river of Rhosne to be
broken, to hinder his passage, commanding him upon pain of an eternal curse,
to return into his country, and not to go with Lewis to Rome, nor into
Italy. So the Earl diuerted of his way, and of the good will he bare unto the
emperor, returned through France, where he stayed

In the year 1328 Charles the Fair, king of France, entered into Flanders with
an army: the good Cont William was there also with his troops, and did lodge,
joining unto the king, near 1328
unto the mount of Cassell; the said Earl hoping well (as it was his usual
custom) to mediat a good peace, betwixt the king and the earl of Flanders.
But the Flemings being within the town, and upon the said mount, came down,
thinking to surprise the king suddenly. The Earl William perceiving it, went to
encounter them, charging them with such fury, that falling from a skirmish to
a battle, both armies joining, the Earl was overthrown from his horse, and
in danger of his life, or to be taken prisoner, had he not been succored by
the earl of Ostreuant, The Earl overthrown from his horse
Didier of Brederode, John of Arckel, the vicont of Leyden, the lord of
Wassenare, John of Beaumont, Walter his son, Arnould of Cruyninghen, John of
Polanen, John of Hamstede, and John of Duyuenworde, all brave knights, by whose
valor and prowess Cont William was remounted again, and the Flemings quite
defeated. There died in this battle about eight thousand men, the which
happened the 14 of August 1328. Before this battle the earl of Ostreuant
received the order of knighthood, whereof he afterward made a good and
glorious proof. Cont William his father, knowing him to be a wise and valiant
knight (the better to make trial of his arms) sent him with an honorable
company of knights of Holland, Henault, Zeeland, and Friseland, into the
country of Prussia, to make wars against the Russians, and other Infidels,
with the Teuton knights, where he carried himself so valiantly,

In the year 1332, Henry chastelaine, or governor of Hagensteyn, did often
pass the river of Lecke, taking all he could find, and robbing and spoiling
the country of Vtrecht. John of Die, 1332
bishop of Vtrecht, entreated the good Cont William, to assist him to take
revenge of him, for that of himself he had not forces sufficient to constrain
him to make reparation of the wrongs which his men had done in his countries.
The Earl sent Kusen, bailife of Rhinlandt thither, who with a troop of
Waterlanders, and of Amsterdam, joined with the bishops men, and having past
the river of Leck together, they fell upon the lands of the said Hagensteyn,
spoiling and burning the houses of his subjects, and of his other companions of
his thefts and robberies, of whom being revenged, they returned home laden with
spoil.

In the year 1336, there was a country man in South-Holland, who had an
exceeding fair and good cow, with the which he maintained his wife and
children (as there are some found 1336 A history of a bailife of South
Holland, for a cow
in that country, which give twenty pottles of milk and more, in one day)
the bailife of that quarter desiring this cow, would gladly have bought it of
the good man: but as it was all his substance and means to live by, he would
never be drawn to sell it. The bailife seeing himself refused, caused the cow
to be taken out of the pasture, and another to be put in the place* the which
was nothing comparable unto it. Wherewith the country man being discontented,
and seeing that he could not have his own, by the advice of his friends, he
went to complain to the good Cont William, of this violence, being then at
Valenciennes, grievously sick. The Earl having heard him, took pity of him,
and presently caused letters to be written with a country man. But making no
account thereof, they went together to Valenciennes. A memorable example of
justice.
the Earl caused him to come before his bed, and he himself drawing out the
sword, gave it to the executioner, who cut off the bailifes head in the Earls
presence, being thus sick in bed; who having called the escoutette, said unto
him, Take your cousin with you, and beware of such facts, least the like happen
unto you. The escoutette returning to Dordrecht, carried back the bailife in
two parts, and paid the country man his hundred crowns.

Soon after this good Earl William, worn with years, and with sickness,
called for the earl of Ostreuant, his eldest son, to whom he gave many godly
and fatherly admonitions; first of the love and fear of God, then of the
administering justice equally to all men, to entertain The death of good Cont
William.
after that he had governed the provinces of Henault, Holland, Zeeland, and
Friseland, 32 years. He was a very virtuous prince, victorious in war, a good
man at arms, well spoken, judicious, a great lover of peace, gracious to all
men, and well beloved in all courts of princes. He was interred with great
pomp, in his town of Valenciennes. After his death, the contesse his widow
went and lived among the religious women at Fontenelles, where she died five
years after her husband.

We have before made mention, how that the Frisons slew the governor whom the
king of and he would do the like on land with them. They doubting nothing, went
aboard: the young Vel odio seruitutis, vel amore libertatis, and expelled their
governor out of their country.

In the life of good Cont William, the chief noblemen in Holland and Zeeland
were William The chief nobility in Holland and Zeeland.
earl of Ostreuant, eldest son to good Cont William, John of Beaumont earl
of Blois his brother, Henry and Didier of Brederode, brethren, Simon and Didier
of They lingen, brethren also, John lord of Heusden, John lord of Drongelen his
uncle, John lord of Arckel, Didier Seignior of Valkenburch, Monioye brother to
the wife of the lord of Brederode, lady of Voorne, Nicholas Philip vicont of
Leyden, lord of Wassenare, John Seignior of Leck and Polanen, John Seignior of
Henckelom, Otto Seignior of Aspren, John Seignior of Egmont, Walter his son,
Ghisbrecht Seignior of Iselstein, Henry Seignior of Vianen, John of Persin,
Seignior of Waterlandt, Guy of Holland Seignior of Hamstede, Arnold Seignior of
Cruyningen, William Seignior of Naeldwick, Floris of Spyck, Ieams vanden Voude,
Floris Merwen, Didier and Herman Zwieten, brethren, Gerard of Hemskerke, Gerard
of Raphorst, Gerard of Polgeest, Floris vanden Tol, Ogier van Spanghen,
William Kuser baylife of Rhinlandt, Didier of Sassenhem, Daniel of Matenesse,
and Didier his brother, Mathieu vanderburcht, William Osthorne, Adam van
Schotlandt, Didier of Assendelf, Nicholas Oom, and Floris of Adrichom, all
knights: Frederic of Seuenter, William of Assendelf, Gerard Schoten, Ieams of
Bakenesse, and Floris of Bockhorst, all

Among the chief families of Friseland were these of Laminga, Helbada, Roopta
Ockinga, Eysinga, The chief families of Friseland in those days.
Decama, Tyebinga, Martena, Beyma, Offinga-huysen, Aylewa, Hiddama, Hittinga,
Botnia, Roorda, Hottinga, Mamiga, Herema, Hannia, Wiarda, Hanniama, Oustema,
Ripperda, Ioppama, Simada, Gerbranda, Grattinga, Reynalda, Wybalda, Gronstins,
Douwa, Harweysma, Calama, Hiddama, Ieppama. Their Podestat or Governor at that
time, which made head against the Normanes and Danes, was Regnerus Hayo a
Camminga.

WILLIAM THE FOVRTH OF THAT name, the three and twentieth Earl of Holland and
Zeeland, Lord of Friseland, and Earl of Henault.
^3. Guilielmus Hanonia.


I am the selfsame man that with a courage bold
Within Numidia ventured my ensigns to unfold,
And did besiege and take the strong and mighty town
Of Vtrecht, by the which I wan great honor and renown:
For which good fortune I ordained once in every year
Procession to be made, the same in memory to bear:
In Friseland I was slain in face of the enemy,
And by Bolsweert in Fleurchamp my corpse entombed does lie.
WILLIAM Earl of Ostreuant and of Henault, after the death of the good William
his father, was the three and twentieth Earl of Holland and Zeeland, and Lord
of Friseland. He had to wife in his fathers life, The wife of this Cont
William.
the lady Ioane, eldest daughter to the duke of Lothier, Brabant, and Lembourg,
by whom he had not any children. He was a hardy and warlike man, much given to
arms, making his high chivalry famous at his first coming to these
Earledomes and Seigniories. This Earl hearing that the Spaniards had great
wanes against the Saracens and Moors in the Realm of Grenado, caused a great
number of ships to be rigged in the year 1338. and went into Spain, where
having made an alliance with the king, they went with their united 1338
William having taken leave of the king of Spain (of whom he received by way
of courtesy many rich presents) bent his course toward Jerusalem; where,
having visited the holy Sepulcher of our Lord, he returned into his country.

Afterward, he went with the Emperor Lewis of Bauiere, his brother in law,
being accompanied with the Earls of Gueldres, of Zutphen, of Cleues, of
Iuilliers, of Blois his brother, of Monts, of Marcke, and of many other Princes
and Barons, with a goodly Army, Edward the third, king of England, his other
brother in law, and to make war against the king of France, the which the
said Edward pretended to belong unto him: but both Armies being ready, and
prepared to fight, an agreement was made betwixt the two kings, by the
mediation of some, and every one retired to his own home.

In the year 1342 Cont William held open Court at la Hay in Holland, whither
he invited 1342
all Princes, Noblemen, Barons, Knights, Ladies and Gentlewomen that would
come. The feast being spent in many goodly exercises of Chivalry, in Iousts,
Tourneys, and other sports: which done and ended, the Earl went with a goodly
train of his Nobility, to a Tourney that was proclaimed in the town of
Beauuois, in Beauuoisin, whereas he purchased Lewis duke of Bauiere, his
brother in law, was possessed thereof (but it was by reason of the thundering
excommunications of Pope Clement) the which he flatly refused, saying, That
he was not capable of such a charge, neither would he do that wrong unto
Lewis.

In the year 1345 Cont William prepared a mighty Army to subdue the
East-Frisons. 1345
Whilst that they made this preparation for war, there past some bitter
speeches betwixt them of Holland and Vtrecht, for the which the Earl defied
them. They seeing themselves thus defied, a^ed and went to field, daring to
attend the Earl in battle, where he defeated them twice: the last was at
Marendyck, betwixt Vtrecht and Montfort, where there died many of the
Traiectins, the rest fled confusedly into their town of Vtrecht. The Earl
being victor and master of the field, went presently with a hundred and fifty
thousand men to besiege the town of Vtrecht, with an intent to ruin and
destroy it. There were in his army Asuerus of Aibconde, and Ghisbrecht his
son, Arnold Seignior of Iselstein, John Vicont of Henry Seignior of Vianen,
Ghisbrecht Seignior of Starkenburch, Arnold Seignior of Woluen, and Frederic of
Hamme. The Earl began to inuest the town on S. Odolphes day, and did batter
it continually with great fury six weeks together: but seeing that such
Vtrecht besieged by the Hollanders.
a town with such strong and high walls, was not easily won by assault,
meaning one night to sound the depth of the town ditch, he was shot with an
arrow in the muscle of the thombe, and was carried back into his Tent, whereof
notwithstanding he was soon cured.

Robert of Arckel, Governor of the Town, Country, and Diocese of Vtrecht,
in the absence of the bishop his brother, being out of the country for the
causes before mentioned, writ unto the said bishop, in what sort he was
besieged by the Earl of Holland in the John of Beaumont, earl of Blois, uncle
to Cont William, he obtained a peace, by the which it was said: That five
hundred of the chief bourgesses of Vtrecht should come bare headed and bare
Those of Vtrecht reconciled to the Earl^.
footed before the Earl of Hollands Tent, and cry him mercy for the injuries
and infamous speeches which they had used against him and against his honor:
and when it should please him to call them of Vtrecht to his service, they
should be bound to send him five hundred soldiers at their own charge: That
there should be a breach made in the wall of twenty foot, by the which he
should enter into the town as a Conqueror; and that he should have one street
in the said town at his commandment; the which is at this day called
Martins: during which time, the above recited conditions of peace were set
down: but they were not effected; for that Cont William, during the said
truce, went to make war in East-Friseland; where, being entered without order,
and not knowing the passages of the country, John of Henault son to the
Earl of Blois, came to the Cloister of Saint Odolphe, where he planted his
camp in a fair plain, called Zuytbeuer, on the sea side: a part of his
Hollanders not staying until the rest of the army were landed* went to
skirmish with the Frisons, chasing part of them into Staueren, and the rest
into Saint Odolphes; where, going to set upon them in their trenches, the
Frisons defended themselves so courageously, that many of the Hollanders lost
their lives there. Cont William knowing nothing of this skirmish, landed on
William was slame unknown, before Cont William slain, and leaves no lawful
heirs.
the rest of the army could advance; who marching in disorder, were likewise
charged. The Frisons encouraged the more by the defeat of the first five
hundred Hollanders, and of the Earl their General, did fight with such great
fury and courage, as they did put the Army to rout, with such confusion, that
many were slain before they could recover 1346
September, in the same place whereas the Earls of Holland were usually
accustomed to hold their seat of Justice, when they came into East-Friseland.
It was the eight year of the reign of the said Earl. Renauld the black,
earl of Gueldres, had foretold his death, as he held him at the Font to be
christened, by uttering these words: This child shall be one day slain by the
Frisons. There were slain in this defeat of the Hollanders about eighteen
thousand men, and almost as many drowned, with some five hundred knights, the
most apparent whereof were these: The Lords of Horn, Lygny, Walcourt, Manin,
Antoin the Seignior of la Vere, Floris of Borssele, the Seigniors of Cruningen,
Romerswael, Gerard with the great beard, William of Naeldwyck, Simon and
Didier of Meylingen, Guido of Aspren, John Regnier, William of Montfort, Didier
of Sandtfort, Herman of Zwieten, Floris of Merwe, Oger of Spangen, Gerard Ever,
Alfert of Bergerhorst, Nicholas Oom, William of Drongen, Didier of Valewort,
and Gerard Florinuille, all choice Martin Commander of the knights of Saint
John in Harlem, went into Friseland, and sought for the Earls body: the which
being known by some marks, he caused it with eight other dead bodies of
Noblemen, to be brought to the cloister of Fleurchamp, near unto Boswaert. The
Contesse Joan of Brabant his widow went to her father, and was married to
Wenselin duke of Luxembourg, second son to John king of Bohemia, of whom we
have formerly spoken.

Cont William the fourth left one bastard called Daniel vanden Poel, the which
he had of a Gentlewoman called Alix vander Merwe of Ghertruydenbergh, leaving
no other lawful child that might succeed him, the Empress his sister
remaining his sole heir.

MARGVERITE EMPRESS, THE 24. commanding in Holland, Zeeland, and Friseland,
Contesse of Henault.
24 Margarita Imperatrix.


Earl WILLIAMS sister, MARGVERIT^, the Emperors wife,
In Holland caused contencion, and much debate and strife:
For though unto her son her right she had assigned,
With him she still contended for it, nothing could please her mind.
Her state was great, her honor much, n^ need her drove,
With him in Holland such continual strife to have:
Which in five years she was constrained for to leave
To him, for that death (end of all) did her of life bereave.
MARGVERITE EMPRESS, THE
LEWIS of Bauaria Emperor of Romans, hearing of the death of Cont William of
Holland, slain in war by the Frisons, whose eldest sister he had married,
and had left no children, caused the Princes of the Empire to assemble, to whom
he declared, that the Earledomes of Holland and Zeeland, and the siegneorie of
Friseland, for want William, were fallen unto the Empire. Whereupon the Emperor
interposing his authority, (for that the Empress his wife pretended an
interest, as sole heir to her Brother, saying, that those fees were as well
Feminine as Masculine, as it did appear by The Earledomes of Holland, and
Zeeland, ad^dged to the Empresle, sister to cont William.
the succession which John Earl of Henault had after the death (...) John
Earl of Holland, son to Cont Floris the 5.) adjudged the said Earledomes an^
siegneories to the Lady Marguerite his wife. This being done, the same year
1346. the said Empress being well accompanied with Princes, Earls, Barons,
Knights, Ladies, and Gentlewomen, went down by the Rhine into Holland, where
she was honorably received in all places She takes possessio of those
countries.
of Vtrecht. She did make forfeit all the goods which the Frisons might have in
her Countries of Holland, Zeeland, and West-Friseland (whereof the Earls had
been long in quiet possession) as well Ecclesiastical as Temporal; the which
she sold to diverse persons, without any future hope of recovery or
restitution, by reason of the death of Cont William her Brother. Among other
Clergy goods, there was sold the Village and siegneorie Confiscation of
^cclesiasticall good^.
of Marcke, belonging to the Abbay of Marien-garde, of the order of
Premonstrez, situated in Friseland, which the Abbot and Covent had bought of
Nicholas of Pers^

This Empress Marguerite had by the Emperor Lewis of Bauraia her husband, one
son called William which was the eldest; Albert the second, and Lewis the
youngest, called The empero^ children by the empress (...).
the Roman, for that he was borne at Rome, during the time of her husbands
coronation: which three sons were all entitled Dukes of Bauaria; not that
they were proprietaries in possession, but for that they were issued from the
right stock of a Duke of Bauaria: for the Emperor Lewis was but second son
to Lewis Duke of Bauaria, Palatin ofRhine. The Duchy of Bauaria has always
had that privilege, that all those which were descended of the blood of Dukes,
might also entitle themselves Dukes, although they had not a foot of land. The
which is at this day used in all the families of the Princes William the
Emperors eldest son, was at the beginning made Earl of Oesteruant; and
Albert was siegneor of Nubingen. William of B^uaria the empress son governor
of Holland.
The said Lady Empress having taken possession of all these Countrie^, before
her return into Germany to the Emperor her husband; she appointed the said
Cont William her Son and successor in the said Countries, Regent of Holland,
Zeeland and Friseland, upon condition that he should pay unto her yearly ten
thousand French Crowns, or for want of payment, that she might resume and take
unto her again all the profit of the said siegneories as before, of which
resignation letters Pattent; were drawn, and promises made in the presence of
many Princes and Prelates. Yet a while after through ill council the Earl
would not hold nor perform any thing, touching the pension, carrying

The Bishop of Vtrecht, after the death of Robert of Arckel, his Brother and
Lieutenant The bishop of Vtrecht goes to live privately in France.
temporal being siaine in Battle near unto Liege, finding himself greatly
indebted, to spare and to pay his debts, he retired himself to Tours in
France, meaning to live there as a man unknown with a small train, during the
truce which he had with the Marguerites day, the Bishop went out of Vtrecht
with a great number of his Bourgesses in arms, and camped in the open The
bishop of Vtrecht goes to field.
plain near unto the great Village of Emenesse. The Hollanders being not
far of, went to fight with them, so as this skirmish turned into a battle,
in the which those of Vtrecht had the better, the Hollanders were put to route,
and many of the inhabitants of Emenesse He defeate^ the Hollande^s.
slain upon the place. Melis of Muyden commander of the Hollanders troop, The
Empress resume^ again the government of Holland.


After the death of the Emperor Lewis of Bauaria, the Empress Marguerite his
widow came into Holland, to Dordrecht, whither she sent for Duke William her
son: who being come, resigned unto the said Lady his Mother, the government
and possession of her Counties of Holland, Zeeland and Friseland, the which
before she had delivered into his hands for an annual pension of ten thousand
Crowns, of the which he had not The Earl her son retires into Holland.
William retired into Henault, his mother remaining sole Lady and regent of her
countries, the which she governed but loosely.

In the year 1349. the Bishop of Vtrecht gathered together a great number of
soldiers, 1349. The bishop of Vtrecht makes war in Holland.
with the which he entered into Holland, and besieged the town of Oude-water,
the which he took by force, burnt a part of it, and carried away many
prisoners, besides other spoil: at which siege there dyed of the Bishops men,
John of Rysenburch, two brothers of Lichtenburch, Ieames, Ihon and Euerard of
Dryel, three brethren all Knights, with many Gentlemen and good Bourgesses of
Vtrecht. The Hollanders moved with the loss of this town, levied an Army to
enter into the Bishops country. He on the other side gathered together all
the soldiers and Bourgesses he could, with the which he went and The
Hollanders de^eated A truce betwixt the Hollanders and Vtrecht.
of the field. There were prisoners among others Ghysbrecht of Langerack.
Herpert of Lyesuelt and Conrade of Oosterwyke knights, with many squiers and
soldiers, who were put to ransom, the which yielded a good sum of money unto
the Bishop. Soon after by the means of some Noblemen, a truce was made unto
Saint Martin in the year 1350. 1350.


In that year there sprung up two most dangerous factions in the country of
Holland, whereby they were long afflicted with great miseries and calamities,
almost to their total (...) in Holland of Cabill^ux and Hoe^ks.
ruin. Those of the one party were called Cabillaux or Merlus, the which is a
devouring fish in the Sea: by which term they meant, that those of this party
should swallow up Hoecks, with the which they catch fish; as if they would say.
If you think to swallow us up we will first take you with a hook. The chief
of the Cabillautin faction were John Lord of Arckel, father to the Bishop of
Vtrecht; John Lord of Egmond, Gerard Seigneor of Hemskerke, with many other
Noblemen and Knights of the Hoecketins party. Didier Lord of Brederode, Philip
Vicont of Leyden Lord of Wassenarie, John Lord of Leck and of Polarien, Ieames
Lord of Binckhorst, and many other both Knights and Gentlemen. It was a cursed
plague which Satan had powered into the hearts of the Hollanders: the which
brought forth nothing but hatred, quarrels, rancor, hostillities, rapines,
violence, detraction, false reports, deadly foods, ruin, and desolation over
all the country. In which two factions, the chief Every Realm divided in it
self shall be desolate. And Salust in his History of the Iugurthin war:
Small things increase by concord, but by discord great things come to ruin.
Cicero in his Book of Friendship says; What house is so strongly builded,
what City so surely seated, the which by hatred and discord may not perish? As
we may see by the destruction of Rome at diverse times: of Bologne, of Genoa,
and of many others, the which have been ruined by division, from the which God
by his grace preserve all estates and commonweals that flourish at this day.

The factions increasing more and more in Holland, and the consuming fire of
this intestine discord kindling more daily, not only in the hearts of
Noblemen, but also in the commons, was the cause of great murders, spoils,
robberies and burnings of either side. These heart-burnings increasing, the
Cabillautins sent their deputies to duke William The fruits (...) factions, to
stir the sonn^ against the mother.
of Bauaria Earl of Osteruant, the Empress eldest son, being then resident
in Henault; entreating him to come into Holland, to undertake the government
of the country; having decreed among them, no longer to endure the Mothers
rule. At the Cont William received in Holland.
Empress their natural Princess his Mother. The Hoeketins seeing themselves
thus ill entreated by the Cabillautins, had their recourse and refuge unto the
Empress, whose party they held, and began to furnish their towns, Castles,
and Forts, with men, victuals William landed with his troops in the same
Island, whereas both armies of the Mother and the Son being entered into A
battle betwixt the mother and the son.
1351.


William of Bauaria being safely returned into Holland, made have to levy new
forces, and to raise a greater army then the first: the which consisted of
Hollanders, Kennemers The son raises a (...) army.
and Frisons, with the succors of many Lords and Knights; of John Lord of
Arckel, John Lord of Calenbourg, John Lord of Egmont, the Lady Mathilda van
Voorne, widow to the Lord of Walckenbourg; Gerard of Heemskerke, Gerard of
Harler, and many other Knights, Gentlemen, and good soldiers, which came unto
him out of the The son d^ fines his moth^ to battle.
Knights and Gentlemen. She like a courageous and noble minded Princess,
making no doubt of a second victory, marched against her son, and caused her
men to begin the charge. The two armies at the first encounter, charged one
another with such animositie and fury, as there was nothing to be seen but
glaiues, broken lances, a thick A second battle.
shower of Arrows in the air, breaking of harness, cutting in sunder of
targets, and bucklers, and heads, arms and legs falling to the ground; there
was nothing to be and tired with the great numbers of the Hollanders army, to
save themselves ran into The mother defeated.
Costin of Renesse, Floris of Hamstede, and many other Noblemen, Knights, and
Gentlemen were also slain there, with an infinite number of good soldiers.
There was in this battle (which was in the same year 1351) so much blood
spilt, as for three days after, the old river of Meuse at a full sea was all
read in 1351.
that place. Finally after that so many valiant men had lost their lives there,
and whereas the Lord Didier of Brederode, and many Knights on the Empress part
were taken prisoners: there was an accord made betwixt the mother and the
son. By the which it was An accord betwixt the mother and the son.
Duke William should have the quiet possession of Holland, Zeeland and
Friseland. After this battle the Empress lived yet five years, and dyed at
Valenciennes in her country of Henault, where she was interred.

Notwithstanding this accord made betwixt the Mother and the Son (yea after
her death, when as Duke William was sole and absolute Lord of the Counties of
Henault, Holland, Zeeland, and Friseland) the factions of the Cabillaux and the
Hoecks were The factions cease not.
not mortified, but did continue their hatred above a hundred and fifty years
after, until that time of Maximillian the first, as we shall show in its place.

WILLIAM OF BAVARIA, THE 5. OF that name, the 25* Earl of Holland, and
Zeeland, Lord of Friseland, and Earl of Henault, called the mad.
25. Guilielmus Quintus.


This William did obtain in nuptial state,
Mathilda of the house of Lancaster.
A husband Childlesse, and unfortunate,
Attempted Vtrecht, and did factions stir,
Under the names of Hamocons and Merlus,
Distracted in his flower of youth he grew,
Since in his age he was vndutious
To his grave Mother, whom ^e did pursue
With many troubles; though she had defects,
Yet children to their parents, still must owe
Remission of their faults; and (...) respects;
But death does on his life, his rest bestow.
AFter this cruel and bloody battle fought upon the banks of William Duke
of Bauaria Palatin of Rhine, Earl of Holland and Zeeland, and Lord of
Friseland (according to the accord whereof we have made mention) was absolute
Prince of the said Provinces: Then after the decease of the Empress his
Mother, did also inherit the county of Henault. He had to wife the Lady
Mathilda daughter to Cont Williams wife had no (...).
Henry Duke of Lancaster in England, by whom he had not any children.

In the year 1355. this Earl by the bad advise of some of his council,
thrust on by 135^. The Earl de* fies the bishop of Vtrecht.
Martins time in winter, to defy the Bishop of Vtrecht, being seconded by many
Noblemen, Knights and Gentlemen of the country of Vtrecht it self, who joining
with the Earl for some discontent, did also defy him: among the which were
Arnold of Yselstein, John of Culenbourg, Ghysbrecht of Vianen, John of
Culenbourg, son to John lord of Woudenbourg, John of Haerlaer: John seigneor
of Langerack, Ghysbrecht of Nyeuwenrood Knights, then the siegneors John of
Blomstein, Zouthin Vanden Rhin, Hubert van Schoonhoue^, Zuveer va^ Nesse,
Gerard van Vlyet and the siegniors of Sleydon, and of Dyckelen strangers, came
to succor the Earl, which 2. strangers being entered into the territories of
Vtrecht, thinking to go to Oudwater, being unskillful in the passages and
ways, they approached too near the town Assuerus Vicont of the said town was
not there, being then at Two strange knights taken p^oners.
Vtrecht) went out in Arms, and fell upon these two Knights and their train,
whom they defeated and took prisoners. Cont William having a goodly army
ready, accompanied with a good number of Princes, great Noblemen, Barons and
Knights of Holland, Zeeland, Friseland and Henault, entered with ensigns
displaied into the territories of Vtrecht to forage and destroy it. Approaching
near unto the Town of The Ea^le enters the country o^ Vtrecht with ^n army.
Wiickter-duyrstede, he went and lodged joining to the village of Motten, where
he camped eight days, to see if the Bishop (who was a soldier) would come
forth to William. And withal, those of the great Bourg of Emenesse, were
again revolted from the Bishop, and joined to the Hollanders, causing (...)
from the bishop.
themselves to be written among the members of Holland. During the Earls stay
in this village of Motten, John of Egmond marched with a troop of Hollanders
toward Bunschoten, those of the town sallyed forth upon them, coming to
skirmish with them, but they were so well entertained, as they had no better
leisure then to The bishop taken W^p by assault and then Muyden.
could to be revenged of the Hollanders: And the year following 1356. having
levied a small army, went and campt before the Town of Wesep, the which he
battered in such sort, as having made a great breach, the fourth day of the
siege he took it by assault, the inhabitants leaping over the walls into the
ditches to save themselves: then he took the town and castle of Muyden, a
quarter of a league from Wesep, and then returned to Vtrecht half revenged,
carrying with him great spoils and many good prisoners. The same year
Assuerus Vicont of Montfort (then Marshall of the camp The (...) of Mont^ort
(...) from the bishop.
Arnold of Yselstein, treated an accord with the Earl of Holland: and
reuolting from the Bishop to gratify the said Earl, he freed out of prison
the siegneors of Sleyden and of Dyckelen, with their squires and all their
train, sending them free unto the earl, the which the bishop took very
impatiently, for that he maintained the said prisoners to be his, the said
Vicont being his marshall, whereof

A while after Ghysbrecht of Nyenroode, a Knight and a brave Captain, by the
commandment of the Earl of Holland, gathered together a good troop of men,
both of foot and horseback, of the country it self, (to take revenge for
Wesep and Muyden) having drawn them to Naerden, he marched directl to the town
of Zoest, the which he spoiled and burnt: Otto of Lare then Marshall to the
Bishop, went forth with all his forces to Emelandt, meaning to fight with
Ghysbrecht and his Hollanders. These two Captains having joined in fight
together, the siegneor of Nyenroode, was wounded A comb^te betwixt two
commander^.
almost to the death, and carried speedily out of the press. Those of the
town of Amersfort, who were with the Marshall Otto, were so roughly charged by
the Hollanders,

In the year 1357. Cont William rejoicing at the victory which his men had
gotten against them of Amersfort, entered himself in person with his army into
the country 1357. Cont Willi^ himself enters into the country of Vtrecht.
of Vtrecht, he camped at Hooghewoert, destroying all that was there-abouts,
sending John of Egmond with some troops, to besiege the Castle of Stephen of
Nyeuelt, the which he battered for the space of six weeks with great and
mighty Engines, wherewith

After all these petty wars and spoiling one of another, in the end by the
mediation of some good Noblemen, there was a peace concluded betwixt the Earl
and the bishop A final accord betwixt the Earl and bishop.
of Vtrecht, by the which it was ordered, that either of them should return to
his own home, laying aside arms. That those of the Bourg of Emenesse should
return (as they had been accustomed) under the Bishops obedience. That the
Lord of Vianen with the assistance of the town of Vtrecht, should build again
his Castle of Ghoreel. Gunterlins banished out of the town of Vtrecht, should
re-enter freely, that was Henry Vanden-Rhine Provost of the collegiate church
of Saint Ihon in Vtrecht: Pelerin his brother, John of Woerden: Ghysbrecht
Gunter Hoogue-land; Gerard and Didier Bolle brethren: John Witten son to
Rodolphe, and Peter Kanmaker, all which had been to succor the Lord of Vianen
at the siege of Ghoreel, with many others. After this John of Arckel bishop of
Vtrecht lived two years in rest, without any wars, the which he had not done
during all the time that he had governed his bishopric.

In the year 1358. on Saint Georges day, Edward the third King of England kept
a 1358.
sollemne feast and open Court for all comers, Princes, Barons, Knights,
Ladies and William of Bauaria Earl of Holland was also invited, both by the
King and the Queen his Ante, of whom he was honorably received with great
shows of love. At his return from this voyage into Holland, this poor Prince
(I know not by what unknown accident) was distempered of his senses and
understanding, so as (being very big and strong of all his members) he slew
Gerard of Wateringhen The Ea^le of Holland becomes mad.
a Knight with one blow with his fist, so as they were forced to shut him up,
and to set good guard upon him, where he was ke^t for the space of nineteen
years, until he dyed. Having before his distemperature governed his countries
of Holland, Zeeland and Friseland seven years, and Henault two. Four years
after him dyed also the Lady Mathilda his wife, who lies interred in the Abbay
of Rhynsbourg by Leyden.

ALBERT OF BAVARIA 26. EARL of Holland and Zeeland, Lord of Friseland, and
Palatin of Henault.
Adelbertus Bauariae.


I had two wives, both which one name did bear,
The one a Polonois, the other was
Marguerite of Cleues; the Frisons stood in fear
Of my strong hand, that did their strength surpass,
And often subdued their proud rebellions;
Delfe taken by me, I demantled it,
At t'Hage i^ Holland I appointed Chanons,
Good men I choosd, and for their places sit.
Hage Castle in the Chapel now contains
My body freed from all his e^thly pains.
DVke William of Bauaria, Earl of Holland, Zeeland and Henault, Mathilda wife
to the Division betwixt the two factions for the government.
said Cont William to be gouernesse of the said Countries; but for that the
said lady had no children, the Hoeketins did choose Albert of Bauaria, Palatin
of Rhine, siegneor of Nubingen, brother to the said Cont William. The Nobles of
the Contie of Henault, consented for their parts to this election, and sent a
notable Embassage unto him into Bauaria, Albert duke of Bauaria called by the
Hoeketins.
beseeching him that he would take upon him in his brothers place (who was
distempered in his brain) the government of the said countries. Albert
understanding the just He is received for governor.
Knights and Gentlemen, going down by the river of Rhine into Holland, where
he was honorably received of both parties, as well Cabellaux as Hoekes, and
acknowledged as Tutor to the Earl his brother, and governor of his countries
and siegneories. Then it was agreed that he should pay yearly unto the
Countess Mathilda his sister in law, the sum of twelve thousand French
crowns, and no more: by means of which accord He agrees with his sister in
law.
both parties were content, and continued good friends, but not long.

This Prince Albert of Bauaria, had received the order of Knighthood before,
making war in the country of Granado against the Moors and Sarazens. At the
first he was married unto Marguerit daughter to the Duke of Briga in Polonia,
by whom he had William Earl of Osteruant, who Alberts wives and children.
was borne in the year 1365. the second named Albert siegnior of Nubingen who
dyed young: the third was John chosen bishop of Liege, borne in the year 1374.
The eldest daughter Katherine was first married to Edward Duke of Gelders, and
Earl of Zutphen: after whose decease being yet a virgin, she married with Duke
William of Iuilliers and of Geldres, but she had not any children. The other
daughter named Ioane, had to husband Venceslaus King of Romans, and of
Bohemia, son to the Emperor Charles the 4. who also had not any children;
Marguerite the 3. daughter, married with John Duke of Bourgongne, By this
Marguerite, the earldome of Holland, Zeeland and Henault, came to the house of
Bourgongne.
Earl of Flanders and Arthois, son to Duke Phillip the hardy, by whom she
had Phillip Duke of Bourgongne, called the good (and afterward Duke of
Brabant, Lembourg Iolente Countess of Poitiers: the second Anne Countess of
Bedford: the third Agnes Duchess of Bourbon, and the fourth Ioane, wife to
Duke Albert of Austria, by whom she had one son called Albert, who married
the daughter of Sigismond King of Hongarie, who afterward was Emperor of the
Romans: after whose decease this Duke Albert did inherit all these realms in
the right of his wife, and was afterward chosen Emperor, but he reigned not
long, for he died in the flower of his age: his wife was brought in bed soon
after his death of a son named Lancelot, who dyed at two and twenty years of
age, leaving no children. This Albert had one cousin german, son to his
fathers brother, named Frederick, Maximilian Archduke of Austria, who was also
Emperor, the first of that name, who had to wife Mary, the daughter and sole
heir of Charles the Warlick, Duke of Bourgongne, who was slain before Nancie,
by whom he had one son named Philip, and a daughter named Marguerite* Philip
married with Ioane daughter to Ferdinand King of Arragon, and to Elizabeth
Queen of Castille. Marguerite was married to John Prince of Castille and of
Arragon, who dyed young, and after married again to the Duke of Sauoy. Philip
had by the said Lady Ioane his wife two sons, Charles the ^ift, and
Ferdinand, both Emperors; and four daughters, Elenor, Ioane, Mary and
Elizabeth. The Emperor Charles the sift had one only son, Philip king of
Spain, Lord of the Low Countries, father to King Phillip the third, now
reigning. Behold in brief the genealogy of the Kings of Spain, and of four
or five Emperors issued from the houses of Holland, Bourgongne and Austria. As
for the second wife of Duke Albert of Bauaria Earl of Holland, of whom we now
entreat, we will speak of her hereafter. The said Cont Albert displaced John
of Blauwestein from the Renald the eldest son to the Lord of Brederode in his
place: the which those of the faction of the Cabillautins took in very ill
part, and The Cabillautins seek to kill the young lord of Brederode.
laid ambushes near unto the village of Castrichom to kill him when he
should pass that way. One day this young Nobleman doubting no harm, riding
toward Castrichom, he incountred them that lay in ambush for him, but having
discovered them a good way of, he saved himself by flight; they pursued him,
and slew three of his servants. Those of the village of Castrichom seeing it,
went to arms to defend their new Bayliffe, so as they were forced to retire.
Some of them saved themselves in the Castle of Walter of Hemskerke, the rest
fled to Delf, where they were received, for that the said town was of the
Cabillautins faction.

Cont Albert hearing of these news, did presently levy some troops, and
marched toward Kermerlandt, where he besieged the Castle of Hemskerke, for
that Walter who The castle of Hemskerke besieged for Cont Albert.
was Lord thereof, had received those way-layers; at which siege he left for
chief commander the Lord of Polauen, who was afterward also Lord of Asprene,
and from thence he went into Zeeland, for some affairs of importance. The
siegneor of Hemskerke a valiant and resolute Knight, having furnished his
castle with all things necessary to maintain a siege, was resolved to defend
himself, wherein he carried himself valiantly for a long time: but the Lord
of Polauen, besieged it so straightly, and battered it so furiously for the
space of eleven weeks, that he was forced to yield his Castle, himself, and
all his men prisoners unto the Earl, to attend how he would dispose of him,
for reparation

Those of Delfe, friends to Walter of Hemskerke and the besieged, seeing into
what extremity they were reduced, did rise against Cont Albert (to whom they
had sworn fealty) The Delfoi; revolt.
and levied men under the command of John Nyen^de. John siegneor of Keruene
bastard of Arckil knights, with Henry of Woerden and Gerard Wys Squiers, and a
number of bourgesses, went out of the town to besiege the castle of Polauen
and Binkhorst, the which they took and fiered. This done, they went to the
Hage and brake open the prisons, and drew out all the prisoners of the castle
of Hemskerke, whom they led with them Cont Albert besieges Delf.
be battered and assaulted in diverse places. The siegneors of Nyenroede, of
Keruene, Van Woerden and Wys, maintained themselves valiantly a long time. But
this resistance did avail them little, for the Earl caused four great Engines
of battery to be approached, with the which he did continually beat the
walls of the town, the which did so The inhabitants speak of a composition.
prejudicial. The Captains hearing that the inhabitants began to speak of a
treaty, being assembled in the old church, they let them understand, that they
held it the best course to try their fortunes, and the next night to attempt
som-thing upon the enemies camp, The captains oppose.
whereby happily they might put them in disorder, the which succeeding well
they should be freed; if otherwise, they should have means to make a fair
retreat, and then parle of a composition. The inhabitants being loath to hazard
any thing, answered; that they had no assurance of victory, and if they were
vanquished, they were in danger to be at the to depart with our men, to
provide for our safeties. The inhabitants not able to contradict The captains
retire in the night. The town of Delf yielded.
of the town secretly in the night: then by the intercession of Walrauen of
Born knight, those of Delfe yielded, to have their lives and goods saved, upon
certain conditions. First that they should ask mercy of the Earl for their
offense, and for a time should pay him 40000. French crowns; and for an
honorable reparation should demantell the greatest part of the town walls. In
this accord the soldiers and strangers which remained were not comprehended.
Hereupon Cont Albert entered into Delfe, whereas he presently caused the gates
to be taken off, and the walls to be beaten down. Henry of Woerden one of the
Captains, had saved himself upon the tower of the church, but he was drawn
from thence, and had his head cut off. As for the Siegneors of Nyenroede Otto
Lord of Arckel, they were taken to mercy, and reconciled to the Earl, upon
condition that they should yield him the place, and that within two years they
should go to Jerusalem to visit the holy Sepulcher. Upon these conditions these
two brave Knights were received into favor by Cont Albert, and so the wars
ceased. A while after they not only went to Jerusalem, but even unto Saint
Katherins Mount, which they call Synay.

Edward Duke of Geldres, having put his brother Renould in prison, chased away
those that had held and followed his brothers party: ruining their Castles and
country Albert of Bauaria Earl of Holland, who took them into his
protection, and entertained them in his train. Duke Edward being discontented
The duke of Gelders defies the Earl of Holland.
that he supported them, sent to defy him; appointing a day and the place of
battle upon Heymansberch. Albert seeing himself defied without any just
occasion, sent for all his Barons, Knights, Gentlemen, Captains and Soldiers,
and with Enseignes displaied, went and planted his camp upon the mount of
Heymansberch, there to attend the Duke of Geldres, as he had sent him word. The
Hollanders seeing that he came not, went and made a road into his country,
burning many villages, from whence they brought all the cattle and other
booty, and so returned to their Princes army, The war ended by marriage.
by which treaty Duke Edward should marry Katherine Cont Alberts eldest
daughter, being come to a competent age, the which happened in the year 1362.

In the year 1365. Cont Albert went with a noble and stately train into
France, to 1365.
King Charles the Wise, where he had an honorable reception made him in Paris,
and having finished the business for the which he went, he returned to
Valenciennes in his country of Henault. In the year 1367. the said Earl upon
some false reports and 1367. The Baron of Enghien beheaded in Henault, which
caused great troubles.
bad persuasions, had caused the Baron of Enghien in Henault to be put in
prison, (which baronie does at this day belong unto the Dukes of Vendosine) and
his head to be cut off: for that he had been informed that this baron had many
engines in his Castle, Albert levied men, and went to besiege the said town of
Enghien. During which siege he created many knights: among the which were
Didier of Lecke, and Bartholomew of Raphorst, Hollanders. In the end this war
was pacified by the means of Lewis de Male Earl of Flanders. These six
brethren were reconciled unto the Earl, and they did pardon him their brothers
death: for expiation whereof he founded the Chanoinry

In the year 1373. the town of Vtrecht caused a river or channel to be cut
or dig'd, 1373.
from their gate unto the river of Lecke, which is a long French league, and at
the end thereof two great Sluses to hold the water, at a village which is
called at this day Nyeuvaert, (that is to say, new river) and upon the banks
of Lecke they caused a great The castle of Ghildenburch (...) to def^d the
sluses.
Brotherhood,) for that the sworn companies of the said town of Vtrecht, had
built it at their own charge, and had the guard thereof by turns. Ghysbrecht
lord of Vianen was nothing well contented therewith, fearing that in succession
of time, by means of this fort and the sluses, they would attempt something
against his town and jurisdiction of Vianen, which is opposite unto Nyeuvaert,
and therefore he went unto Duke Albert Earl of Holland, and gave him to
understand, that this fort of Ghildenburch had been built to the prejudice of
the Hollanders, and the rather, for that it The lord of Vianen and those of
Dordre^ht discontented for the sluses.
Cont ^ert spoils the Fr^sons.
William of Naeldwicke marshall of Holland, by the commandment of Cont Albert,
went into Friseland with a great number of ships, and landed on Saint Lawrence
day in the Island of Snellinck, the which he spoiled and burnt, carrying away a
great booty and many prisoners, by reason of their rebellion, and then
returned into Holland.

In the year 1374. the deputies of Vtrecht came to Cont Albert to the Hage,
for the 1374.
They of Vtrecht (...) Woerden ^n v^e.
marched forth of their town, and went to besiege Woerden, thinking to carry
it at the first, but finding great resistance, and not able to take it; they
burnt the suburbs, and some barricadoes there-abouts, carrying away some poor
prisoners, and from thence they went to besiege the castle of Croonenburch.
The besieged despairing of all means to defend it, gave it over by
composition, the which they presently razed to the ground. This done, they went
to Wesep, Muyden, Wtermeer and Loosdrecht, Asuerus of Gaesbeke with the
Hollanders of his garrison, went to skirmish with them as they past that way,
to spoil Bodegraue, Ameyden, Lexmonde and Iaersuelt, which they ransomed.

Cont Albert hearing these news, levied men with all speed, to make war
against them, and being accompanied by John Earl of Blois his cousin, Adolph
Earl of Cleues Cont Albert (...) the (...) Ghyldenburch.
and a great number of barons and knights, Hollanders, Henyuers, Zelanders,
Geldrois and Cleuois, he went up the river of Leck, and besieged the castle of
Ghyldenburch, where he planted two great and mighty engines of battery, the one
upon the East, and the other upon the South. The besieged were furnished of all
things necessary for defense, Ghysbrecht of Vianen, Henry of Ameyden, and
Ghysbrecht of Nieuenroode knights, with certain troops, presented themselves
before the castle, to see if they could draw out the besieged to skirmish. The
captains of the castle, namely Peter Doel and Arnold Preaux, seeing a good
occasion offered, opened their gates, and lodged themselves in certain houses
near adjoining, from whence they did assail the Hollanders: the skirmish
continued a good space, but in the end the lord of Nyenroede, the lord of
Naeldwycke marshall of Holland; William of Cheervlyet, a certain knight of
Henault, and eight and twenty soldiers were taken prisoners, and lead into the
Castle. Cont Albert to hasten the siege, caused two engines the first day of
June 1374. with a safe conduit to retire into the town of Vtrecht, carrying
Ghyld^burch yielded by composition.
Timothies eve in the night, with a great number of men, to attempt it by
scalado, and with their shot, spending a whole day and a night, whereof in
the end they set fire, which they within being not able to quench, (being The
for^ taken again by them of Vtrecht.
but three and twenty soldiers, and most of them wounded, and two dead,) they
were forced to yield it.

Fifteen days after, Cont Albert advancing up the river of Leck, went again
to besiege it, with an intent to raze it. Those of Vtrecht foreseeing his
coming, did furnish William Leets, and Goswin of Wandric. The Earl seeing
Cont Albert makes sharp wars against the Traiectins.
that through the good order that was in it, he should profit little, retired
from thence, and went to besiege the castle of Wlenhorst, the which he
forced: then he marched before Hollenstein, the which yielded by composition,
to have their goods and lives saved: from thence he drew toward Heermalen, the
which he burnt. In the end after all these petty wars, a peace was concluded
betwixt the Hollanders and Traiectins, by the which they of Vtrecht should pay
unto the Earl 4000. crowns An accord betwixt the Hollanders and Vtrecht.
for his charges in the war. And as for the siegneurie of Vreeswike, it was
said, That if the bishop and seven of the chief of the town of Vtrecht did
affirm by oath, that Martins in Vtrecht, that then the Earl nor any of his
successors should for ever pretend any interest thereunto. As the bishop and
the seven personages did lift up their hands to take the said oath, Cont
Albert not suffering them to swear, but contenting himself with their bare
affirmation, delivered them up the siegneurie of Vreeswik, and made them
letters under his seal, and so all quarrels were ended.

In the year 1377. Duke William of Bauaria the mad Earl of Holland, dyed at
1377. The death of Cont Willi^ the mad.
Que sn^y in Henault; his body was carried and interred at Valenciennes: he
left not any children. His funerals being finished, the lords, barons, knights,
and all the nobility, with the towns of Holland, Zeeland, Henault, and
Friseland, received Duke Albert William his brother, Cont Albert received for
Earl of Holland.
and did acknowledge him for their Lord and Sovereign Prince, and so was the
26. Earl of Holland, etc.

In the year 1386. about Shrouetide dyed the lady Marguerite of Briga, wife to
Cont Albert of Bauaria, and was buried in the chapel of the court at the
Hage, at the 1386.
great altar toward the North. After her death the Earl continued five years
unmarried, entertaining a Gentlewoman called Anne of Poelgheest, for his
mignion, of whom shall be hereafter spoken, who being dead, the Earl married
with Marguerite the daughter of Adolph Earl of Cleues, by whom he had no
children.

In the year 1389. died Arnold of Horn bishop of Liege, his body was
transported 1389. John of Bauaria, son to Cont Albert made bishop of Liege.
Thierry of the Mark, who refused it; and therefore John of Bauaria, son to
Cont Albert of Holland, being but sixteen years old, and at that time
Chanoine of Cambray, was chosen in his place, and in the year 1390. he was
conducted to Liege by his father, and William Earl of Osteruant his elder
brother, with many Princes and Noblemen, accompanied with about 1200. horse,
where he was honorably received by the Deane and Chapter.

In the year 1392. on Saint Maurice eve, Anne of Poelgeest, daughter to the
siegnior 1392. The murder of Cont Alberts concubine and of his Steward.
John of Poelgeest a squire, mignion to Cont Albert, was slain at the Hage.
William Kuyser Steward to the Earl (seeking to defend and preserve her,) was
also slain with Conrard Kuyser father to the said William, made great instance
and pursuit unto the Earl, demanding justice of the^ that had murdered his
son, or caused him to be murdered or slain trecherously, in the night, with
an intended purpose, without striking stroke, in Noblemen (...) for the ^ther.
chief the lord Philip Vicont of Leyden, Didier lord of Aspren and his son.
Two young ge^leme^ brethren of Leck. Henry Vicont of Montfort, John sieignior of
Heemsted, John of Vlyet, Philip of Pola^en, the siegneor of Duyuenwoord, the
siegnior of Warmount and many other Noblemen and Gentlemen, to the number of
54. The Earl sitting in justice with them of his privy council, granted a
personal adiournment against all the said lord; and for not appearing they
should be banished out of the county of Holland. And for their contumacie, not
daring appear, they were condemned to have forfeited body and good, and for
this occasion they retired to Cont William of Osteruant, The (...) ^men (...)
the (...) of (...).
eldest son to Cont Albert, who loved them, and held them in great esteem,
Altena in South-Holland, which castle Cont Albert had before of the lord of
Horn, and had given it unto the Earl of Osteruant his son. The other
noblemen which remained at the Hage with the Earl, instead of moderating
things, and pacifying his wrath, did incense him more and more, by bad reports
and false sug^estions, animating the father all they could against the son,
among the which, one of the principal was, John of Arckell lieutena^t and
treasurer general of Holland. The Earl being resolute Conrad Kuyser, to ruin
all the caste's and country-houses of the banished noblemen, Conrad thrust on
with a re^enging spirit, did willingly undertake this charge, and first of all
he destroyed The mu^her revenged.
Heemstede, Warmont and Paddenpoel by Leyden; all belonging to the said vicont
of ^e den, (who afterward, was called Nonnenpoel.) The Earl marched with the
rest of his forces up the river of Merwede, and arrived on Saint Peter's day the
same year 1^93 at Gortichom, where he was honorably received by the lord ^co
of Arckel: the next day he passed by Wandichom, and so went to Altena, the
which he (...) Co^ ^bert (...) Alte^.
The Earl his son (...).
John of Bauaria, chosen bishop of Liege, son to the Earl, with those of his
council, and some noblemen, and counselors of the country of Henault, came to
the camp before Altena where the said bishop did mediate an accord betwixt his
father and his The bishop of L^ge (...) the father and the son.
brother, comprehending the noblemen that were besieged; by the which it was
said, Albert having this castle, caused it to be ruined all, but the two
great towers: and Cont William giving place to his fathers indignation, retired
himself into The Earl of (...) re^s into (...).
France to king Charles the sixth: where being in the year 1395. set at the
kings table with many Princes and Barons, there came a Herald or King at Arms,
who cut the cloth before him, saying, that it did not belong to any one,
(how great a prince soever) to sit at the Kings table, if he had not arms and
a scutchion. The Earl answered An affront done to the (...) of Oste^t the
Kings (...).
that he had them as well as any other. Then there was an old Herald by which
said; pardon me sir, for Cont William your great uncle, was not only
vanquished by he writ secretly unto him of the affront that had been done him
in France, beseeching Albert hearing these news, said; This dishonor shall
never be more reproched to me, nor to my children: for I will (if it please
God) go my self in person the next year into Friseland, and demand the body
of Cont William The son and all the noblemen reconciled to Cont Albert.
mine uncle, bring back his arms, and revenge his death. Soon after the son
was reconciled to the father, and all the Noblemen that were with him, who went
all together to the court of Holland at the Hage.

The year following 1396. Cont Albert having resolved to make war against
the 1396.
Frisons, levied a mighty army, as well out of his own provinces, as out of
France, England, and Germany, in the which there were many Princes, Earls,
and Barons, and a William Earl of Osteruant, his eldest son, John bishop of
Liege his youngest son, and Albert The chief of the Earls ar^e.
lord of Nubingen his middle son: the chief of the French troops were the
Earl of Saint Pol, the Earl of Namur, and the Admiral of France: of the
English, the lord Scales, and of the Germans the Earl of Solms. The Noblemen
of Holland, Zeeland, and West-friseland, were Guy Earl of Blois, John Lord of
Arckell, lieutenant of Holland, John of Brederode, Philip vicont of Leyden,
Lord of Wassenare, the siegniors of Aspren, Seuenberghe, Drongelon, Henckelom,
Leydenburch and Waerdenburch, with many other Knights and Gentlemen. Their
Rendez-vous was at the Hage, where all these nobles attending the preparation
of the army, spent the time in iousts, torneys, and other goodly

On Sunday after the feast of the Ascension, Cont Albert arrived with all his
forces at Cont Albert enters into Friseland with a mighty army.
Enchuysen, where 3000. ships, and 4000. barks did attend him to pass into
Friseland, where there is but four or five leagues to cross. In this voyage
the Earl made many knights, among others Floris of Alcmada, and Gerard of
Voort, Hollanders. He had 180000. men well armed, with the which he entered by
Cuindert into Friseland. The Frisons of Stellingwerf hearing him to approache,
gathered together all the men they could out of their own villages, and from
their neighbors, and with a valiant resolution went to encounter him, the day
that Saint John Baptist was beheaded. The Earl charged them, the encounter was
furious, and the combat cruel and bloody, when they came to join: A crue^
ba^taile.
head-peeces broken, with the weight of battle-axes; with hideous and fearful
cries of men wounded and dying. In the end the Frisons not able to withstand so
great a multitude, were broken and put to flight, some here, some there, so
many men, so many ways, The Frisons defeated.
who thinking to save themselves by the marshes and quagmiers, many were
smothered and drowned there. Others flying by the ordinary highways, were
pursued and taken, whereof there were fourteen hundred prisoners.

After this first victory Cont Albert sent Peter Beets son to Didier Beets a
Knight with them of Amsterdam, of West-frisland, of Kennemer and Waterlandt, up
the river of Lanwere, to assail the Frisons on that side, and give them
another battle: The which Odolphus cloister, to advise which way he might
best assail and subdue the Frisons; who (notwithstanding that they lamented
their first losses) gathered together new troops, being resolved to hazard a
second battle against the Hollanders. The Earl A second battle, and the
Frisons defeated.
seeing his enemy ready to fight, having put his army in good order, went
first to the charge, and there was a second battle given which the Frisons
lost. The Earl remaining master of the field, caused his tents and Pauilions
to be pitched, and stayed there ten days, villages, and laded themselves with
booty, thinking to return to their quarter: the Frisons A brave skirmish
betwixt the ^nglish and the Frisons.
sides. The English men being not much amazed, put themselves in good order,
retiring gently, fighting with their arrows and slings: but the multitude of
Frisons was so great (for that their numbers increased continually) as the
English began to defend themselves, casting themselves into a near fort, which
they made good against the Frisons, The English besieged by the Frisons.
who held them there besieged all the rest of the day and the night following.
The Earl understanding the danger in which the Englishmen were, entreated the
towns of Holland to go thither, and to vngage them: some of them answered,
That if their Prince went with them, and marched before, they would follow him.
The Earl hearing this answer, said to them of Delse. Go you and vngage them.
At this commandment the Delphois My Lord although you have heretofore
destroyed us, yet for the A brave answer of the Delph^ to Cont Albert
love of you we will willingly goc and succor them, or dye all in the
enterprise: beseeching you to remember this service, when any good occasion is
offered. Hereupon they marched directly toward the Frisons. The English seeing
that succors came unto them, issued out of their fort, and came to charge them
on the one side, and those of Delfe on the other with such fury, as in a short
time there were 400. Frisons slain upon the place, the rest flying away,
fearing least the whole army should come upon them. After this route, the
Delfois The English degaged by the Delphois.
and English entered farther into the country, spoiling and burning all they
incountred, and killing all that came against them. The Earl seeing these
fires, was assured of the victory, for the which he greatly commended them of
Delfe. Then he caused a mighty The Frisons subd^ed.
them, ^s he did soon after, forcing them to sue for mercy, to submit
themselves under his obedience, and to acknowledge him for their sovereign
Lord.

After that the Frisons had promised and sworn to entertain the articles and
conditions that the Earl should impose upon them, and that they had made him
authentical letters thereof. The Earl sent one of his chief Knights, with
many Nobles and Gentlemen to the abbay of Fleurchamps (since called
Oudeclooster) to bring away the body The body of cont William fetch^ out of
Friseland, and buried at Valenciennes.
William, sometimes Earl of Holland, Zeeland and Henault, Lord of Friseland,
the which they brought with his arms and blason. This done he retired into
Holland, from whence he sent the said body to Valenciennes in Henault, where
it lies with his ancestors.

Soon after in the year 1398. the Frisons having broken the peace and accord
made 1398. (...) Frisons rebel again.
betwixt them and the Earl of Holland; having rebelled again, and chased the
garrison of Hollanders out of Staueren, and out of all places thereabouts: Cont
Albert levied an army, with the which he went to Horn and to Enchuysen, being
resolved to return into Friseland, and there to stay until he had wholly
subdued them. But he was advised not to go himself in person, but rather to
give the charge of his army to Cont William John of Arckel, John of Brederode,
Arnold of Egmond, with many other Barons for his Captains, followed The Earl
sends his son against the Frisons.
by many Knights and Gentlemen of Holland. Cont William being entered into
Friseland past by Geesterland with his troops, and as they approached to
Hindeloopen, the Frisons advanced to charge them, and the Hollanders received
them so valiantly, as at the first encounter they slew 300. upon the place, the
rest seeing their companions so ill entreated, turned their backs and fled.
After this happy encounter, the Hollanders ouer-running the country, spoiled
and burnt many villages and gentlemen's houses: then they went and camped before
Staueren, the which they besieged so by land and by water, as nothing Staueren
besieged and yielded to the Earl of Osteruant.
could go in nor pass out, and they did batter it in such sort, as in the end
they were forced his Noblemen, made a peace with them, upon condition to
acknowledge the Earl of The Frisons subdued.
Seven pence fa^thing o^ thereabo^s English money.
redeemed for ever for reparation of their rebellion. The which was sworn and
confirmed by letters. This done, he appointed Bayliffes and other officers in
his fathers name, and his successors Earls of Holland, to administer justice
unto them for ever. Then he returned a conqueror into Holland. But it was
mere folly to think that this treaty could continue long: so impatient are
the Frisons of all servitude, or to be commanded by any other then their own
nation; it was therefore soon broken: for the year following 1399. they
returned to their accustomed rebellion, refusing to entertain the said A new
revolt of the Frisons.
accord, (for they still found some pretended cause of exception) chasing away
the officers

Cont Albert of Holland hearing of this reiterated rebellion, levied men from
all parts, both out of his own countries, and from his neighbors and
strangers to make an army; of the which he made the Earl of Osteruant his
son, general, being accompanied with these lords, John of Bauaria bishop of
Liege his second son: John lord of Arckel: Arnold of Egmond, lord of
Yselstein. Philip vicont of Leyden: Walrauen lord of Brederode, and many other
Noblemen, Barons and Knights, with the which and his whole army he The
Frisons submit themselves again.
them) were much troubled, and sent to the Earl of Osteruant to sue for mercy,
promising unto him in his fathers name, all obedience, fealty and homage. The
Earl with his Noblemen past a water which they called Opt-wat, and from thence
with the ships and barks which they had at Staueren, they came the same
night to Sesbyrum, and to Bolswaert, where they lodged that night and refresht
themselves. There fell out a quarrel betwixt Floris of Alcmade, and Gerard
Boel of Heemskerke, both Knights. Floris hurt A private quarrel betwixt two
Knights of Holland.
Gerard in the forehead with his dagger, in the presence of all the Princes
and Noblemen: Gerard of Cammega, who did secretly advertise the Earl of
Osteruant, that the Frisons were resolved to come the same night and charge the
Hollanders suddenly in their quarter, as it happened about an hour before the
break of day. The Frisons coming with fearful and terrible cries to charge
them; Cont William and John of Bauaria had before put their men in good order
of battle, and marched bravely to encounter them. Day being come, both armies
A battle wherein the Frisons were defeated.
charge, and in the beginning the combat was very fierce, but in the end the
Frisons were quite defeated, with great loss of their men, the rest saved
themselves as well as

After this victory, the Earl raised his camp, and came the same day with all
his army to Dockingen, the which he did furnish with victuals, munition for
war, and a good The Earl of Esteruant proceeds against the Frisons, many s^
for mercy.
garrison, against the Frisons there-abouts. Two days after he went with his
troops to Lanen, where he lodged five weeks, to see what the Frisons would
do. During which abode, many of them came unto him and sued for mercy: who
after they had taken the oath of fealty and obedience, he received them into
grace; causing all the villages that would not do the like, to be spoiled and
burnt, whereby his soldiers got great spoil. Then came they of Groninghen, who
did promise to him and swear in the name of the Earl of Holland his father,
fealty and homage, acknowledging him for their sovereign The Groeningeois
acknowledge him for prince
William was yet in Friseland, and laid ambushes to surprise him, using all
the means they could to break and ruin his army. About that time a great
number of Frisons being in field, in a certain place, where there was but a
little water to cross betwixt their camp and the Earls, The Frisons think
to surprise the earl but in vain.
they might pass through it, and so assail the Hollanders camp: but this
work being discovered, the English with some Frisons of the Earls part, went
and charged them in another place, which disapointed their work, so as they
could not pass. There was among the English a Captain called Panthere, which
did wonders, putting the enemies to slight, with the loss of ten of his men
only. This done, Cont William of Osteruant, made Floris of Alcmada (one of his
chief Captains) his lieutenant in Friseland, and Gerard of Egmond siegnior of
Wateringhe, brother to the Lord of Egmond, Governor of Staueren, and then he
returned a conqueror into Holland.

In the year 1400. the Frisons seeing the Earl of Osteruant retired with all
his 1400. The Frisons rebel again.
Albert Earl of Holland, father to Cont William, wondering at this ordinary
rebellion They besiege the town of Staueren.
of the Frisons (enemies to all sovereign command) levied a new army of
choice men, giving the charge and command thereof to Arnold of Egmond Lord of
Yselstein, and to Walrauen Lord of Brederode, whom he sent into Friseland, to
free the town of Staueren from siege, as soon as these Noblemen had past the
seas with their They fly at the coming of the Earls army.
he could. The siege being thus raised, the Hollanders returned into their
country, except the Lord of Brederode who stayed in Friseland with his
horsemen. Soon after the garrison of Hollanders that was in Staueren, would
make an enterprise in the night upon the fort which the Frisons held at
Molckweer near unto their town, but they could not effect it, for that the
Lord of Brederode was sore hurt there and taken The Lord of Brederode hurt and
priso^r.
prisoner, whereof being half cured, and having no great guard about him, he
found means to escape without danger.

In the year 1401. Cont Albert would have John of Arckel (who had been his
lieutenant 1401.
and treasurer general of Holland) to give an account as well of the
government Albert being much displeased, referred the matter to the Earl of
Osteruant his son: who A great contention betwixt Cont Alo^ and the lord of
Arckel
presently caused all the lands and siegneuries of the said Lord of Arckel to
be forfeited, as Haestrecht, Vlyest, Stolwyk, and many other villages, causing
him to be adiourned to appear in person, and for contumacie to banish him the
country of Holland. The which did so much transport the Lord of Arckell, as
he durst presume to send a Cartell of defiance unto Cont Albert, the which he
received at the castle of Nyenbourg He defies Cont Albert.
near unto Alcmar. And soon after the said lord of Arckel entered suddenly with
an army into Holland, thinking to surprise the town of Oude-water, but his
enterprise He desies the Earl of Osteruant.
presence of Philip the Hardy Duke of Bourgongne. The Earl received this
Cartell with a cheerful countenance, made the messenger or Herald good
cheer, and gave him some crowns, commanding him expressly to say unto his
master; That it was in his power to defy him, but it would be one day in his
power to pardon him, or not. Soon after the Earl went to his father at the
Hage. The year following the Lord of Arckel past the prey. Those of Arckel
having no other passage, were charged by the Hollanders, Gerard of Lyesuelt The
Lord of Arckel braues the Hollanders.
Knight, Water Simons, Adrian Wittens, Gerard Mobbout, Hugh l' Imager,
Bourgeses of Dordrecht, Bourchard and John Robrechts, Bourgesses of
Schoonhouen, seven rich countrymen of Leckerkercke, and five of Scheruelandt,
were taken prisoners, who notwithstanding any resistance were carried into
Gorrichom.

Seven or eight days after, those of Rotterdam and Schyedam took arms, and
went into the Lord of Arckels country, spoiling and burning all where they
past, and so returned The Hollanders take ^r revenge.
home laden with spoil. Afterward the Earl of Osteruant put in arms the
citizens of Harlem with the Kennemers, those of Leyden and the Rhynlanders;
those of Amsterdam with the Waterlanders and Goylanders, the which he sent
under the Henry of Wassenare Vicont of Leyden, into the territory of Arckel,
commanding him to spoil and burn it. These troops spoilng the country thus,
came before the town of Hagenstein, the which they did batter and assail, but
they could no other thing, but ruin the suburbs, and a Mill joining unto the
town, and then returned with their prey through the jurisdiction of the Lord
of Vianen. The Lord of Arckel mad with rage to see his country so destroyed,
to have his revenge, The Lord of Arckel burns Nyeuport in Holland.
went to besiege the town of Nyeuport on the opposite bank to Schoonhouen,
the which he took by force, and burnt to the ground.

After that the Earl of Osteruant had in many places spoiled the lands and
seigniories of the Lord of Arckel, the Earl of Holland to make a final end,
resolved to go The Earl of Osteruent besieges Gorrichom.
Adolph Duke of Cleues; the Bishop and those of Vtrecht, did also defy the
lord of Arckel; who seeing so many enemies ready to assail him, he called to
his succors the Earl of Vernenburch, and the Earl of Dalhem, the siegniors of
Steenwoerde, of Rheyda and of Hoemoel, brethren to the Earl of
Catzenellebogen, the seigniors of Vrericke, of Berghen, and of Dyckelen, the
seigniors of Cryekenbeeck, of Boetselaer, of Ranst, and his brethren of
Ysendoorn, of Zeelen, and his brethren, of Schonhauwen, of Lyenden, of Vayrick,

Cont Albert pursuing his first resolution, caused his army to march into the
country of Arckel, and to besiege the town of Gorrichom, where he took his
quarter upon Cont Albert comes in person to the siege of Gorrichom.
the north dike, betwixt the village of Arckel and the town. Adolph Duke of
Cleues, with Walrauen of Brederode, and those of the towns of Holland, and
some English, camped on the East side of the town and Castle. Those of
Vtrecht planted themselves toward the North, in a place called Tuistschild:
The Hannyuers and South-Hollanders lay lodged upon the South: the Zelanders and
Frisons had their quarter A brave sally of the besieged upon the Zelanders and
Frisons.
Floris of Borssele, Floris of Aubeau, Nicholas Reytwyinck of Romerswael, the
siegniors of Lodyke, of Bauduin, and Floris of Borssele brethren, William of
Reynts, Philip of Eueringhen, and John bastard of Borssele, with ninety
soldiers, and William of Romerswael was sore wounded, whereof he dyed soon
after, and was buried Walrauen of Brederod, and Gilles Schenck Knights: Steven
of Berenbrooke, Jacob Schicker, Peter Potter, Hugh Post, and many other
Gentlemen and soldiers.

An other time there issued forth William of Ysendorne, and Arnold of
Schoonhauven Knights: Ihon Hopper, Thomas Westerdale, John Croextough, David
Carmerdin, and Thomas Herfort Captains, with many Gentlemen and soldiers, who
on Saints John's day, fell upon the Hannyuers quarter; but they were bravely
received and with-stood, so as they were forced to retire, and were pursued
into their Ports. During this siege the Earl of Osteruant John of Bauaria
bishop of Liege, son to An accord made betwixt the Earl of Holland and the
Lord of Arckel.
the Earl of Holland, Arnold of Leydenburch, and Haeke of Outheusden Knights,
came to the Earls camp, the which did mediate an accord betwixt him and the
Lord of Arckell; by the which it was said, that Albert Earl of Holland, and
Cont William of Osteruant his son, should enter into the town, and the Lord
of Arckel should kneel down before them and ask them forgiveness: besides
that the Banner of Holland should be planted a whole day upon the castle of
Gorrichom, which conditions being fulfilled, the camp did rise, and every man
went to his own home.

At that time there was a great tempest at Sea, with exceeding high tides, the
which A seawoman found in Holland.
did drown many villages in Friseland and Holland; by which tempest there came
a Seawoman swimming in the Zuyderzee betwixt the towns of Campen and Edam, the
which passing by the Putmerie entered into the straight of a broken Dike in the
Purmermer, where she remained a long time, and could not find the hoale by
which she entered, for that the breach had been stopped after that the tempest
had seized. Some countrywomen and their servants, who with Barks of Edam, did
daily pass the Pourmery to milk their Kine in the next pastures, did often
see this woman swimming upon the water, whereof at the first they were much
afraid: but in the end being accustomed to see it often, they viewed it nearer:
and at last they resolved to take it if they could. Having discovered

In the year 1404. on S. Paul's day in winter, the most famous Prince Albert
duke of Bauaria 1404. Duke Albert of Bauaria Earl of Holland dies.
Earl of Holland, Henault and Zeland, and Lord of Friseland died, after that
he had governed the said countries 46. years, that is 19. as Tutor to his
brother Cont William Marguerit his first wife, on the side of the great Altar,
under one tomb. Besides his lawful children he had two bastards, Andrew which
was borne at Papendrecht, and William siegneor of Schagen a Knight. From whom
are issued the late Lords of Schagen.

WILLIAM THE 6. OF THAT NAME, the 27 Earl of Holland and Zeeland, Lord of
Friseland, and Earl of Henault.
27 Guilielmus Bauarice.


I wasted Friseland, and despoiled Liege,
I troubled Gelders, both with camp and siege,
Helped of the Delphois, my great uncles bones,
Is rescued out of foreign Rhegions,
My first wife was the Daughter of a King,
My second from the Burgundy Throne did spring;
At Ualenciennes I dyed thirteen years reigning,
My predecessors Toombe, my bones containing.
WILLIAM of Bauaria, Earl of Osteruant, after the decease of Albert of Bauaria
his father, was the 27. Earl of Holland, etc. Being but young, he took to wife
the daughter of Charles the fifth King of France, who made him Knight before Dam
in Flanders, this wife dyed young. Afterward he married the daughter of John,
son to Philip the hardy, Duke of Bourgongne, Earl of Cont Williams wives
and children.
Flanders and Arthois, by whom he had one only daughter named Iaqueline, (whom
the Dutch call Iacoba^) who was borne in the year 1401. on Saint James his
day. This Prince was warlicke and much feared, of a tall stature, a goodly
personage, wise, discreet in war, victorious, a great iusticer, and

In the year 1404. John of Bauaria bishop of Liege, brother to William Earl
of Holland, etc. being chased out of the town of Liege, for that he would not
be a Priest: 1404. The town of Liege ^ned for their Bishops pleasure
employed the succors of John Duke of Bourgongne, who had married his sister,
against the Liegeois, which Duke came in person, and burnt the City of Liege,
with the Churches and Monasteries, and slew Priests, men, women and children,
to the number of 36000. souls, according to the Chronicles of Germany.

In the year 1405. William of Y sendorn levied men in the Lord of Arckels
name, 1405. The Lord of Arckel breaks the pe^ce.
with a part whereof (being disguised in the habit of merchants,) he went on a
Shrouetwesday to the town of Wandrichom, where making a shewto ask leave of
the Tollgatherer His me^ spoil Wandrichom.
(being distant but a quarter of a league) with a good number of prisoners of
the best of the town. The Earl of Holland being displeased that the Lord of
Arckel had thus broken the peace, which had been concluded a little before at
the instance of the Bishop of Liege his brother, thought to be revenged. He
first renewed his league with the bishop of Vtrecht; then he levied an army of
Hollanders, Zeelanders, Hannyuers, Frisons and Traiectins, with the which he
went and besieged the towns and Castles of Gaspren, Hagenstein, and Euerstein,
being one distant from another about a quarter of a league, whereof that of
Euerstein is now fallen into the river of Leck. On the other The Earl make^
^rre ^nst the lord of Arckel
John vander Hoenne, Allard Pufflyet, Lucas of Botselaer, William of Lyenden,
John of Arckel siegnior of Soelen, and John bastard of Arckel. In the Castle
of Euerstein were the siegneors of Bronkhuysten and Hoochstraeten, William
Banst, and Henry of Nyenstein bastard brother to the said Lord of Arckel, with
a good garrison of soldiers. Cont William made three Bulwarks or Blockhouses,
the one above the Castle of Euerstein, toward the river of Leck, the which he
caused to be compassed in with a Palissadoe, so as no victuals could pass
that way: and the other two were built on either side of the town of Gaspren
and Hagenstein, causing a The Earl ^esiegeth Hagenstein.
deep and large trenche to be made from the one unto the other, to keep them
off the The Bishop ioynes with the Earl and besieges Euerstein.
men besieged the castle of Euerstein, the which he annoyed with wonderful
great stones, that were shot continually from his huge Crosbowes. The Earl had
environed the town with Bauins and Reeds mingled close together, so as no man
could pass An assault given to Hagenstein.
done, and the assault well defended. But John of Arckel, siegneor of Soelen,
nephew to the Lord of Arckel, being slain with an arrow, they of the town
fearing some The town yielded and burnt to ashes.
both town and Castle, and would not depart until the last house was
consumed to ashes, which they of Euerstein seeing, who in like sort were
straightly besieged (their victuals beginning to fail them, so as they were
forced to eat their horses) they did yield the same day to the Bishops mercy,
who in like sort caused it to be ruined to the Euerstein ruinated.
ground: the which (as they say) are now in the river of Leck.

The Earl having done these exploits against the Lord of Arckel, returned to
the Hage, his men being laden with the spoils of these Towns and Castles.
Then there was a truce concluded betwixt the Earl and the bishop of the one
part, and William of Arckel of the other, by the which John Lord of Arckel his
father, was excluded. As A truce betwixt the lord of Arckels son and the
Earl of Holland.
William of Arckel his son was much troubled, to see his father oppose
himself so obstinately against so mighty a Prince, persuading him often with
lively reasons to reconcile himself with such great and mighty enemies, such
as the Earl, the bishop of Vtrecht, and the Lord of Vianen were. This young
Nobleman, seeing that he prevailed nothing, and that he could not mollify his
fathers heart, had pity of his subjects, who were so pitifully ruined without
cause, through the obstinate John Gerrits Provost of The young lord of Arckel
will make his peace with the Earl.
the town, Conrard, John, Arnold and Gerard of Haerlaer, four breth^en,
Ambrose Wouters and John van Donck, issued from a bastard of Arckel, being
joined and united to their young lord, they concluded together, to treat a
peace with the Earl, and to exclude the ^d of Arckel his father, seeing he
would so obstinately seek his own and his subjects ruin, without cause.

At the same time the lord of Arckel was gone to Renald Duke of Iuilliers and
Geldres The young lord of Arckel makes himself master of Gorrichom.
his wiue^ brother: during his absence, the young lord of Arckel his son, by
the advice The Lord of Arckel shut out of the town and ^stell of Gorrichom and
Lederdam.
this perplexi^ie the Lord of Arckel returned presently the same way he came
into the country of Gelders, without eating or drinking. But soon after he did
write secretly unto his son by men of good judgment, of his council, who
could handle this young The son reconciled to the father.
without their priuity or advice, and that he would leave them engaged: at his
return from Boisleduc, thinking to re-enter into Gorrichom, the gates were
shut against him. This young Nobleman, finding himself debarred from entering
into the town, turned The young Lord of Arckel excluded ou^ of Gorrichom.
head, and went to the Duke of Iuilliers his Uncle. Being gone, those seven
men sent certain deputies of quality unto the Earl of Holland, to require
his aid and protection against the Lord of Arckel, in regard whereof they
offered him all duty of homage and ^ealty. The Earl being glad to win such a
town and country without Leederdam, where he was likewise received for Lord of
Arckel, and generally invested

The Lord of Aspren hearing that the Earl was at Gorrichom, came to meet him
near unto Leederdam, doing him all honor and reverence: and seeing Conrard,
John, The Lord of Aspren acknowledges the Earl of Holland.
Arnold, and Gerard van Haerlaer brethren, Ambrose Woutsersen and John Van
Donck, whom the Earl had newly made Knights, with their collers of gold,
wondering much, he said: My Lord, beware of these new Knights, for what they
have done this day unto their Lord, they may do to morrow unto you. The Earl
smiling made much of him, raising him up under the arm, he lead him to his
lodging, where having feasted him, he returned into Holland. The Lord of Arckel
and his son, devised by what means they might recover their inheritance. The
Earl to preserve it, sent Philip van Dorp a Knight, with 500. Robert, (by
scalado,) The young Lord of Arckel t^s Gor^hom by scaladoe.
which having effected, those of the guard hearing that it was their young Lord,
leaving the rampart, fled here and there. This young Nobleman passing on, brake
open the gate on the East side, and drew in his men with their colors flying,
making great and fearful cries. The Burgesses that were affected unto him,
turned presently on his side, and in this enterprise there was not any man
hurt, but Henry Vander-streat, that was slain at the first entrance. The next
day Didier le Cocque near kinsman to Ambrose Woutersen, had his head cut off.
The rest that were opposite to the Lord of Arckel, leaping over He ^geth the
^ell of Arckell.
Arckel, where the besieged expecting succors from the Earl of Holland,
defended themselves valiantly.

The Earl hearing of these surprises, levied men in all have, and went to
besiege Gorrichom; chasing the young Lord first from his siege, and forcing him
to retire into The Earl of Holland besieges Gorrichom.
Gorrichom. The Earl being fully resolved to force this town, called all the
Gentlemen of his Provinces and Seigneuries, and required them of Vtrecht to
assist him: On the other side Renold Duke of Iuilliers and Geldres, a man of a
turbulent spirit, demanded The duke of Gelders desies the Earl.
nothing more then some occasion to quarrel with the Earl, whom he sent to
defy by a Herald with open letters, as he had presumed before to defy the
French King: The duke re^ into his country.
the Geldrois did rise, and retired himself into his country. The Earl seeing
him gone, went to continue his siege before Gorrichom, and after that he had
well furnished the castle of Arckel and the places there-abouts, he returned
into his country.

A while after the Lord of Arckel and his son did transport unto Duke Renold
of Gelders, all the right and interest which they had to the town of
Gorrichom, upon The father and son of Arckel transport their siegnorie to the
duke of Gelders.
condition that it should never be dismembered from the Duchy of Geldres: for
that the young Lord of Arckel was by his mother the only and sole heir
apparent of the Dukedomes of Iuilliers and Geldres, and of the county of
Zutphen: for that Duke Renold brother to his Mother, had not any children: and
so the siegniorie of Gorrichom was united to the Duchy of Geldres, which was
the cause of great and continual wars betwixt the Hollanders and the Geldrois,
forraging, spoiling, and burning one another. During the which the Hollanders
did ore run at one time as far as Brakel, Beets, Thieler-waert,
Bomunelerwaert, and other places there-abouts. The Geldrois to have John of
Croenenburch governor of Heusden, knowing them to be there, went with such men
as he could get together, to encounter them, and did charge the Geldrois,
although they were three for one, and at the first with great shouting, and
fearful cries, (the fogge and mist being so thick as they could (...) strange
^oute.
not possibly discern them) he struck such a fear and amazement into them,
as they An Act worthy of laughter.
transported with fear, knowing not which way to fly in this thick fogge,
came in the end to the same village of Heeckhuysen, which before they had
burnt, where they did hide themselves in a Hogstie: at night the Sow which had
been wandering abroad all day, returning to her lodging, thrust and gronted at
the door to enter: These hardy soldiars, thinking it had been their enemies
that pursued them, began to cry out, we

The year following in Lent, the Earl of Holland caused a Forte to be made
at Dalhem, beyond Louestein, on the other bancke of the river of Wahal, the
which he manned 1408
witha good garrison: yet before it was fully finished, the Duke of Geldres
came with an Army, meaning to build one in the same place, but seeing that
that of the Hollanders was in defense, he battered it and sought to sorce it:
The Hollanders defended it valiantly, and notwithstanding all his attempts,
finished their Fort: during this time John of Bauaria Bishop of Liege came into
Hollande, and did mediate a Truce betwixt the Truce betwixt the Earl of
Holland and the duke of Gelders. Great war of the Liegeois against their
bishop.
Earl of Hollande his brother, and the Duke of Gelders for three years, the
which

The Liegeois (as we have begun to show before) having chased away John of
Bauaria their Bishop, did choose Henry of Parwis, for Governor of their
Country, and for their Prince and Bishop, Henry of Parwis his son, expelling
all the Chanoins, Curates and Priests, that would not acknowledge this new
Prelate. John of Bauaria was then in Maestricht, whereas the Liegeois with
their Governor and new elected Bishop went to besiege him, meaning to take him
if they could. The Earl of Holland hearing of these news, went speedily to
seek succors of the Duke of Bourgongne, his father in law, against the
Liegeois. These two mighty Princes made an Army out of their Countries of
Flaunders, Arthois, Henault, Holland, Zeland, Friseland John out of Maestricht.
The Earl of Holland, the Duke of Bourgongne, the Duke of Brabant his Brother,
the Earl of Namur, and some other Noblemen and Barrons, sent to desie the
Lord of Parwis, and the elect Bishop his son, which done, they entered into
the Country of Liege. There was a general Proclamation made, that all men
that were able to bear Arms, were they Noble or ignoble, Clergy or Laymen,
Masters or servants, should upon pain of death arm, to give battle to
these Princes, upon a Sunday, the 23 of September. With this multitude (not to
be numbered) the Lord of Parwis went to field, to go and encounter his
enemies. Coming near unto A battle betwixt the Liegeois and the princes
allied to the bishop.
lord of Parwis marking the earl of Holland by his arms in the head of the
foreward, said unto his men: Do you see the mount of Gold, if we can overthrow
it, the poorest amongst us shall be clad in cloth of gold: but I fear we shall
not. The Liegeois hearing this speech, If he who had brought them thither were
afraid? No (answered he) I will march first, he that loves me, let him follow
me. For this day we must either vanquish, or dye.

When thy approached, the arrows and stones flue thicker in the air, then
hail; but it continued not long, before they came to handy blows and to join
with their pikes, halberts, axes, masses, swords and courtelasses: the battle
was exceeding furious. Henry of Parwis and the new elected Bishop his son
were slain, with above A great defeat of the Liegeois. A revenge upon the
mot^s of this war.
40000. men, and a great number of prisoners. Among the which those laymen
which had been the motives to expel their Bishop, John of Bauaria, were
executed by the sword, and the Clergy men were put in sacks and cast into the
river of Meuse. On the Earl of Hollands side, their dyed a very ancient
Knight, called William Vander Poel, William, brother to the Empress Marguerit
who was slain by the Frisons. The Bishop John of Bauaria was then at
Maestricht, and had the same night news of this victory, whereof being
exceeding joyful, he came the next day to his brother and the other Princes,
and thanked them.

Those of Tongres were also in arms; but they came to too late, and were
defeated, and a great number slain: The Bishop and the Earl of Holland his
brother, sent some Captains into the City of Liege, who in revenge of the
injury done unto the Bishop, put to death many of the Chanoins, Priests and
other Officers, which the elect Bishop had placed, the which were cast from the
top of the bridge. Those from whom any Prebends and Benifices had been taken,
for that they had held John of Bauarias

In the year 1409. after this great victory, the Earl of Holland, went to
the French kings Court, and did mediate a peace for John Duke of Burgongne, his
father 1409. The Earl of Holland reconciles the Duke of Bourgondie with the
French king.
in law with the King, by reason of the homicide committed upon the person of
Lewis Duke of Orleans, the kings brother: and so a peace was concluded betwixt

In the year 1410. the Truce between the Earl of Holland and the Duke of
Gelders, being expired, the Earl sent some ships of war into the Zuyderzee,
to keep 1410. The duke of Geldres and the Earl of Holland return^ to war.
them of Herderwyk and Elburch from going to sea. The Earl had also drawn
into his league the town of Amersfort in the country o^ Vtrecht, to which
town he gave many good Privileges and Immunities, for that it was always
open unto him, and at his command; and did serve him as a place of arms, to
enter by it into the Veluwe, and the country of Gelders: On the other side,
the Lord John of Arckel Captain of the Duke of Gelders horse, by the Dukes
command seized upon the castle of Hofeslaeken, Hubert of Culenbourgh, John of
Vianen, and Arnold of Eienburch, knights and captains of the Hollanders,
issued forth with their men out of the town of Amersfort, to go and skirmish
with them of the town and castle of Hoefslaeken. But the garrison of the one
and the other knowing of their coming, abandoned both places. These Captains
finding them empty and forsaken razed them: from thence they went to Nyekerke,
the which they spoiled and fired, and so returned with their spoil into
Amersfort.

In the year, 1412. there was a peace made betwixt these two Princes, William
of Renold Duke of Gelders. By the which it was said: That 1412. A peace betwixt
these two Princes.
the Duke should yield unto the Earl the town of Gorrichom, with all the
appurtenances that depended thereon and that he should cause the young Lord of
Arckel, his cousin to do the like. Moreover it Was agreed, that the Earl
should pay unto the Duke for the charges he had been at in the said Town,
100000. Crowns, and that the Duke should resign unto the said The Articles of
peace.
young Lord of Arckel, the Seignorie of Bron, the castle of Oyen, and seven
villages depending thereon, with five thousand Florins of the Rhine of yearly
pension, assigned him upon the towll or custom of Loebeck: the which was thus
concluded, in the Town of Wyck-terduyr-sted: which done, William of Arckell
transported unto the Earl of Holland, for himself and his heirs for ever,
the town of Gorrichom, with all the country and Seigneorie of Arckell. And by
that means the said Town and country, has remained Gorrichom anexed to
Holland. The duke of Gelders and the Earl of Holland meet. An advertisement
given unto the Earl.
annexed unto the Conty of Holland unto this day.

These two Princes being by the means of this peace become good friends, the
Duke of Gelders accompained with his chief Nobility, went to visit the Earl
of Holland, who received him courteously and with great state, staying there

The Duke being returned into his country, Cont William of Holland had a like
desire to go and visit him: the which he did, being well accompanied. The
Duke knowing of his coming, went to meet him as far as the Velue, and
received him with inestimable courtesies and welcomes, entertaining one another
with great signs of Dear Cousin, it falls out now happily for you that we are
so well reconciled The Dukes speeches confirm the former aduertisment.
and good friends together. Why? (said the Earl) For, said he, if it were not
so, you had bin now my prisoner. The other answered: I cannot believe it.
Without doubt, Cousin, said he of Gelders, it had bin so, and wonder not at it,
for you have some of your chief vassalls had bin actors in it. These speeches
being past, the Earl casting up his head, they ended the banquet merrily. The
Earl (being returned into Holland) was still pensive, and wondered The Earl
grows jealous of them of Egmond.
much who those might be, that would, or durst attempt any such thing against
him, being their Prince. And as he called to mind, that in these last wars,
John of

In the year 1414. the Frisons revolted again from the Earl of Holland,
leauied 1414. The Frisons reuoult.
some men covertly, and came secretly by night and surprised the Town of
Staueren, William as he resolved to suppress them in such sort, as they
should never have more means to rise against him, nor against any others. But
as at that time there fell out affairs of greater importance, he deferred the
making of war against them until a better opportunity and season.

In the year 1415. On Saint Katherines day, as John Lord of Arckel returned
from the funeral of Anthony of Burgongne, Duke of Brabant, passing by
Arpenburgge he 1415. The old lord of Arkel taken prisoner.
was surprised in a certain Ambuscado, which Didier vander Merwen, Lord of
Seuenbergen, Philip of Leck^ had laid for him, leading him into Holland,
covered with a white cloak, of the Order of the Dutch Knights, to disguise him
the better. Cont William was very glad of this prize, and came to the Hage,
whether they said Lord was brought unto him: who sent him prisoner from thence
to the Castle of la Goude, who afterward was brought to Seuenberghe with a
straight guard, where he was ten John of Burgongne their Prince would not suffer
it, nor enter into quarrel with the Earl of Holland, his son in law for
that Lords sake: during the time that the said Lord of Arckel was a prisoner,
he was sometimes carried before Cont William and his Council, before The Lord
of Arckel discouers who they were that practiced against the Earl of Holland.
The kinssolke of the Lord of Egmond offer to justify themselves.
whom he did protest it to be true; and declared by what means and by whom
the Earl should have been delivered prisoner, unto Duke William of Geldres.
The John Lord of Egmond complained that therein they did him great wrong,
knowing himself innocent of that wherewith he was generally taxed. Yet he
protested to be always ready to justify himself, before the Earl of
Holland, his Prince, so as he might have access unto him under safe conduit.
The Earl being returned Sigismonde, to mediate a peace betwixt the Kings of
France and England: the kinsmen of the The Lord of Egmond adiourned to appear
in person.
said Lord of Egmond, entreat him that he would grante the said safe conduit,
that he might purge himself of those crimes in his presence, and before his
Council. The which the Earl would have him do, and therefore commanded that
he should be adiourned to appear in person within forty five days, to
justify himself of such matters as should be laid against him. The Lord of
Egmond, being thrice lawfully For not appearing he is banished, and his goods
forfeited.
adiourned, and appearing not, was upon the third default for his contumacie,
condemned by the Earls council, to be attainted and convicted of treason,
for the crimes and attempts objected against him, and to forfeite body and
goods.

This Lord of Egmond seeing himself thus entreated, retired unto his brother
William of Egmond into his town or castle of Yselstein, with some soldiers
which he had at his devotion. Soon after the Earl sent some Deputies of his
Council to Iselsteyn sommoned, and
summon the said town and castle, to yield unto his obedience: the which being
refused, he presently caused a small army to be levied, whereof he sent the
one half before Yselstein, and with the rest he went over toward Schonhouen,
from whence James of Gaesbeck, Hubert of Culemburch, and John of Vianen,
nearly allied unto the house of Egmond, fearing that they would be the cause
of the Yielded by them of Egmond.
ruin of their house, did labor for their reconciliation with the Earl, the
which they obtained upon condition: that the said Lords of Egmond should
depart with their goods out of Yselstein, and out of the Counties of Holland
and Zeeland, whether they might neither go, nor come without the Earls
express leave; which town and castle of Yselstein they did yield unto him
absolutely with the Seigneorie, appurtenances and dependances. In consideration
whereof, the Earl should pay yearly unto William of Egmond, six hundred
Crowns of the Sun, and to the Lady Yoland their mother 800. crowns more
yearly, the paiments to remain to their heirs for ever, of the which
authentical letters were drawn. And so Cont William was disposest of the said
town, castle and Seigneorie of Yselstein. But since it was restored Iselsteyn
restored since to them of Egmond.
to the said house of Egmond, of the which Maximillian of Egmond Earl of
Buren, was the last Lord of that name, whose daughter and sole heir, William
of Nassau Prince of Orange took to his first wife, by whom he had Charles
Philip of Nassau, now Anne of Nassau his sister, Contesse dowager of Hohenloo,
To whom it does now belong.
sister by the fathers side to Prince Maurice of Nassau, at this day Governor,
General and Admiral of the united Provinces of the Netherlands.

Cont William of Holland, considering that being two and fitie years old,
having The Earl causes the Lady Iaqueline, to be acknovvled^ed for hi^ only
heir in his life time.
no heir but one only daughter, called Iacoba or Iaqueline, married to the
Dolphin, son to Charles the sixth, King of France: assembled the Estates,
Governors, Bayliffes and Officers of all his Provinces, lands and Seigneoris,
of whom he required a promise and oath, that in case he should die without
heirs male, that they should not acknowledge any other, but the said Lady
Iaqueline for their Princess and sovereign 1417
the chief Noblemen and Towns, in the year, 1417.

The Dolphin of France, husband to the lady Iaqueline of Bauaria, was sent for
by the The Dolphin of France, husband to the Lady Iaqueline po^soned and dies.
King his father, to come to Paris; the Earl of Holland his father in law,
conuoyed him into Henault, where he should attend the kings men to conduct him
to the Court. But before he went he was poisoned, and dyed soon after. Some
hold that it was in putting on a shirt of Male, which had been given him. He
was 20. years old, and Iaquiline his wife 19. when he dyed the fourth of
April. 1417. his body was carried to Paris.

Soon after the last day of May in the said year 1417. died William of
Bauaria, Earl Death of William the 6. Earl of Holland.
Iaquiline, widow to the Dolphin of France, succeeded him in all his
siegniories. Her father recommending her before his death to his most faithful
servants; requiring them to marry her again to John Duke of Brabant. He was
interred at Valenciennes in Henault, after he had governed his countries the
space of 13. years. The lady Marguerite of Bourgongne his wife, daughter to
duke John of Bourgongne lived long after him, and was interred at Quesnoy in
Henault. This Cont William was a severe man against his rebels and enemies,
and very courteous, Albert, and William of Bauaria, the which was Lord of
Schagen. This William was twice at Jerusalem to see the holy Sepulcher, and
once at Mount Synay, or Saint Catherines Mount, in which voiages he was
knighted, and at his return made Chastelain or Governor of Medemblyck:
Afterward the good Duke Philip of Burgongne, become Earl of Holland, gave him
in West Friseland the seigneories of Schagen, The first particular Lord of
Schagen.
Bersinghorne and Harynckhuysen, which William caused a goodly castle to be
built in the said village of Schagen, and made a great circuit of the country
to be dicked in, and recovered from the sea near unto Sype and the village S.
Martin, calling it Nyelant. he had to wife Alix the daughter of John of
Hodenpil, by whom he had (besides daughters) three sons: Albert Seignior of
Schagen, a knight; John Escoutette of Harlem, William. He was a very famous and
renowned knight all his life time, for his virtues and valiant deeds, he dyed
old in the year 1473. His eldest son Albert of Schagen, had to wife Adrian,
daughter to the Lord of Nyenrode and Velson, by whom he had one only
daughter named Iasine, who was first married to Walter of Egmond Lord of
Soetermeer, and afterward to Iosse of Borssele.

Count William, had also three Bastards, two sons and one daughter, Lewis
and Cont Williams bastards.
Euerard knights, and Beatrix van Vlyet. Euerard was the first seigneor of
Hoochtwoud in West Friseland, where he caused a goodly house in form of a
castle to be built: and had to wife the daughter of Flores van Kyesweck: by
whom he had Anthony, seignior Anthony had to wife Sophia, the daughter of
John seigneor of Polgeest, who bare him five sons, Baldwyn seignior of
Hoochtwoud, a knight, William, Gerard, Cornellis, and Euerard, who was a Monk
in the Abbie of Egmond, and one daughter named Iudeth, who was a Nun in the
covent of Poel by Leyden. This Baldwyn sold the said seigniorie of Hoochtwood
(for that he had no children) to John the first B^atrix the bastard daughter
of count William, was first married to Philip van (...) a knight, by whom she
had no children: afterward she married again to John of Woerden, siegnior of
Vlyet, by whom she had Ger^ard of Vlyet Esquire.

At that time their flourished among the chie^e of the Nobility of Holland and
Zeeland, (...) N^ (...) of (...) and (...) ^n (...).
Willi^m lord of Arckell, Wallerand Lord of ^ederode, Earl of Genap: William
of Brederode, James lord of Gaesbeck, Abcoude, Wy^k, Putten and Streuen. Philip
vicont of Leyden, lord of Wassenare, John and Henry ^is sons. John of Egmond,
and William of Yselstein his brother. Philip of Leck. W^lsart of l^ Vere, Henry
of Vianen and Ameiden, Floris of Borssele lord of Seuenbergh, Zuylen and S.
Martins dyc^, Fa^er to Fran^ Iaqueline countess of Holland, James of Borss^le
lord of Brigdam and D^yuelandt, Costin of Hemestede and (...) of Hemestede,
John of Cruninghen, John of Renesse, Hubert of Culenburch, Didier of Merwe;
John of La^geraeck, Didier lord of Henckelom, John vicont of Montfort, Arnold
of Lyenburch, Henry of Naeldwyck, and his two sons, Wiliam and Albert
squires: Didier of Leck, John of Hodenpil, William bastard of Holland, first
siegnior of Schagen and his brother Adrian, both sons to count Albert of
Bauaria: ^rard bastard to count William, the first lord of Hoochtwoode, and
Lewis a knight his brother: John of Treslon, bastard to Guy Earl of Blois,
John of Vianen, siegni^r of Noordeloos. John of Woud^, lord of Warmo^t and
Alemada, James of Woude his sons, Daniel of Poele, Cl^wer governor of S.
Ghertru^denbergh (...) of Poelgee^t, and his brother Gerrard, Bartholomew of
Raphorst, John of Hemisted, siegnior of Be^thusen, John of Vlyet: Philip of
Dorp, John, Henry and Ghysbreecht of Croenenburch brethren. Flores of Al^mada,
Gerard of Woert, Gerard of Zyl Giles of Cralingen, Gerrard of Lyesuelt. Floris
of Abeele: Gerard, Conrad, John and Arnold brethren of Haerla^r, Frederik of
Seuenter; Berthold of Assendolse, Did^er of Beets. all knights. Then John of
Egmond, siegnior of So^termeer, an other John of Egmond, siegnior of Wateringh,
Albert of Egmond of Maremsteyn* ^ugh of Al^mada, Herpert of Forest, Didier of
Assendelf, Simon of Burcht, Floris of Adricom. Gerard vuytten Hage. Gerard
Potter, Baldwin of Wietten, Floris of Tol. Herpert of Bossche, William Egger,
first lord and founder of the town of Pourmereinde, John his son. Floris of
Kye^oeck, John vander Myer, Arnold Spyerinck, Nicholas of Waterlandt, William
Nagle, with many other squiers and gentlemen, which were to long to number: and
most of all these noble Famylies are at this day extinct.

IAQVELINE OF BAVARIA, THE 28* Gouernesse in Holland, Zeeland and Friseland,
and Contesse of Henault.
2^. ^acoba Bauari^*


Four times in marriage I my fruit did try,
Yet could I not increase my Progeny;
Gorrichom I won, against William of Arckel,
In which Exploit three hundred English fell
Beneath my Conduct: while one day did shine,
My husbands ransom, made me to resign
My Contries to the Duke of Burgondie:
Ten years with pain, I sat in soueraigntye;
And now in one Grave with my Grandfather.
Peace did my body to his rest confer.
THE Lady Iaqueline (or Iacoba as the Hollanders term her) the William of
Bauaria, Earl of Holland etc. succeeded after the death of her father in all
his Earldoms and seigniories. She was then widow (as we have said) to the
Dolphin of France, being 17. years old, keeping with her mother, the Lady
Marguerite daughter to John duke of Bourgongne, father to Philip. Her fathers
obsequies and funeral pomp being ended, she was conducted throughout all the
towns of Henault, whereof she took possession and received the homages of her
subjects and vassals. By reason of her widowhood and her youth she had much
trouble in the government of her The factions revive again in Holland.


As soon as the Ear^e her father was dead, all the banished men, and those
whom in his life time he had oppressed, rejoiced: amongst others, John Lord of
Egmond, and William Those of Egmond return into Hol^nd. The Lord of (...)
recouers his town.
Lord of Iselstein brethren: who consulted how they might recover their Lands
which the Earl had forfeited. The Lord of Iselstein with some troops having
intellegence in his town, found the means to have a port opened, and entered
secretly in the night, without any discovery or opposition, yet he could not
at that time get the Castle. The Lady Iaqueline being then with her mother in
Henault, during her absence, Walrauen of Brederode, and John Vicont of
Montfort. And the Castl^ into w^ch the bre^hren put themselves.
Before they could be ready for the siege, the two brethren of Egmond found
meaens to get the castle, into the which they shut themselves. Those of Vtrecht
did much affect this siege, knowing that Herman of Lochorst, and John vanden
Spiegel, were also within it, and therefore they built certain Bastillions,
Caualiers, and other places for battery, four days after that the Camp was
planted there, almost all the towns of Hollande came with their coullors
flying, to conquer it. John of Bauaria bishop of Liege, uncle to the Countess
Iaqueline, came thither also with good troops; so as the Town was besieged
John of Heemskerk, there was an agreement made with them, by the which it was
said, that the said Lords of Egmond, and the banished of Vtrecht should depart
out of the town and castle of Iselstein with bag and baggage, the which they
should deliver into the hands of the Lieutenant and deputies of the Countess
of Holland; and that all the inhabitants of The town and c^tle of (...)
yielded to the Countess.
the town above thirteen years old, should take the oath of fealty, and
submit themselves under her obedience; which being done the army entered into
the town. Soon after the lady Iaqueline came out of Henault into Holland, who
hearing of this victory obtained under her authority, and in her name,
thanked her friends, who had been careful Those of Vtrecht (...) Iselstein.
castle unto the ground: the which did much displease the Nobility of Holland.
And for that those of Vtrecht thought it was two near a neighbor unto them,
the same year they had leave to burn the whole town, except the Church and
Monasteries. This ruin of Iselstein happened during the Consulate of Wolpert of
Amerongen, and Didier of Houdam, Bourgmasters of Vtrecht. Which town remained
thus desolate and ruined without walls, unto the time of Charles the warlike
Duke of Burgongne, Earl of Holland etc. Of whom Frederik of Iselstein,
afterward Earl of Buren obtained leave

In the said year 1417. the Contesse Iaqueline was in like sort received, and
took The Contesse Iaqueline rece^ed in Holland, etc.
possession of her inheritance of Holland, Zeland, and Frise-land, as she had
been before in Henault. To fulfill the will of Cont William her father, having
desired, before his death, that she should mary again with John duke of
Brabant, although he were her cousin William, went to Gaunt to Duke John of
Bourgongne his uncle; to whom he used some speech of this marriage. Whereupon
there was a meeting appointed at Byervlyet, whether came the said Duke John,
Philip Earl of Charolois, son to Duke John of Bourgongne, and many other
great Noblemen and Barons; The Lady Iaqueline came also with the Lady
Marguerite of Bourgongne her mother, Aunt to Duke John of Brabant, and Anthony
father to John duke of Brabant was brother to Marguerite, who was mother to
Iaqueline. A marriage concluded betwixt the Contesse of Holland and the duke of
Brabant, the 1. of August; 1417.
John of Bauaria bishop of Liege, uncle by the fathers side to the said Lady,
all accompained with great trains of Noblemen. There it was determined, that
the Will of Cont William the father, should be fulfilled; whereupon a marriage
was concluded betwixt the Duke of Brabant, and the Countess of Holland, and
there they were made John of Bauaria, bishop of Liege should enjoy all that
which Cont Albert his father, and Cont William his brother, together with the
Lady Iaqueline his Niece, had given and confirmed unto him: in consideration
whereof they Bishop did consent unto the marriage: and thereupon the Assembly
at Byervlyet was dissolved. Presently there was a notable Embassage, sent in
the name of the Duke of Brabant, and the Countess of Holland his spowse, to
the Council of Constance, to obtain a dispensation for their marriage,
notwithstanding the proximitie of blood, Sigismond, and this bishop of The
bishop desirous to spoil his Niece.
Liege crossed it all they could: for this bishop had such a conceit, and so
great a desire to be Earl of Holland, as the same year, in September, he went
out of Liege (and never after returned more) came to Dordrecht in Holland, and
sent his deputies to the said council, with an ample Procuration to resign
into the Popes hands his bishopric of Liege, the which he had governed 27.
years, and also to hinder the dispensation of the marriage: whereof the Duke of
Brabant was secretly advertised by some friends which he had in the said
council of Constance.

This John of Bauaria having left his bishopric of Liege, and being at
Dordrecht, writ to all the towns of Holland that they should receive him, and
acknowledge him John of Bauaria seeks to make himself Barle of Holland.
John of Bauaria seeing himself thus refused, returned to Dordrecht much
discontented: where he made a league with the Cabillautin faction, of the
which those of Egmond werethe cheef; and was acknowledged in the said town of
Dordrecht, for Tutor and William of Arckell, John of Egmond, William of
Yselstein; by whose favor and assistance he thought to do wonders, promising
them also to restore them to their lands that were forfeited to Cont William,
father to the Contesse. Afterward John of Egmond found means to surprise the
Town of Gorrichom, Egmond surpriseth Gorrichom
in the name of John of Arckel his cousin. The Lord of Brederode, and other
Barons which held the Contesses party, seeing the town thus surprised,
retired themselves presently into the castle, which Cont William had caused to
be built. William of Arckell arrived soon after, being accompanied with many
Knights and Gentlemen, John of Bauaria went secretly to Gorrichom, conferred
with the said noblemen, and then returned to Dordrecht. The Contesse being
advertised hereof, drew what forces she could together, out of all her
countries: and with the assistance of them of Vtrecht and of Amersfort,
accompanied by her mother, sailed up the river of Merwe, and went before
Contesse Iaqueline besieges Gorrichom.
Walrauen of Brederode, then Lieutenant to the said Lady in Holland, Zeeland
and Friseland. Where the said Princesses being arrived, they were welcomed
into the castle, and their army camped round about. The night following their
men went to the Sapp, and made a breach betwixt the castle and the town, the
which was so great as they might enter with their army in battle. The Lord of
Arckel seeing this breach, put his men suddenly in order, being about 4000.
The Lord of Brederode having disposed of his troops, advanced to enter; but
the Lord of Arckel had suddenly cast up a trench betwixt the Town and the
Castle, so as they could not pass, nor easily approach. Notwithstanding they
of Vtrecht and Amersfort Gorrichom taken again.
But in the end, the Lord of Arckels men beginning to faint, having no hope of
any supplies, and seeing the Contesses forces to increase hourly, they turned
their backs and fled: there was the lord of Arckel slain, and with him the
Earl of Osburch, the siegnior The lord of Arckle with many others ^ne.
of Pettersen. Henry, bastard of Arckell, Allard of Buren, Splinter the bastard
of Nyenrood, Otto of Gelechom, Otto of Ghemmen, William of Appeldorn, and about
a 1000. other gentlemen, Bourgeses and soldiers. Amongst the prisoners were
William Earl of Vernenburch, the Earl of Hulberch, Henry of Hoemoet, the
baron of Batenburch, Didier of Arnold of Ordange and Raes his brother, Didier
of Heumen. The siegnior of Orflot, Arnold of Egmond sieignior of Marestein,
Otto of Buren, John of Heteren, John of Oyen. Arnold of Craenhem, and Arnold of
Haerlaer, all Knights. Those of Vtrecht had the Lord John of Egmond, and above
a 1000. prisoners of all sorts.

Of the Contesse Iaquelines side, their died Walrauen Lord of Brederode, her
lieutenant, The Lord of Brederode slain.
through the negligence of his servants, the which was a great loss for that
Princess, which caused her to mourn: This battle was given in the town of
Gorrichom, the first of December. The lord of Brederode left two sons, Renold
lord of Brederode, and Ghysbrecht cathedral Deane, and afterward elect bishop
of Vtrecht, of whom we shall speak heareafter. Pope Martin by his bulls of
the 22. of November, of his own Constance, dispensed with the marriage of John
Duke of Brabant, with the Lady Iaqueline, Contesse of Holland, without The Pope
dispenceth with the marriage of the Duke of Brab^nt, with the lady Iaqueline.
The Pope reuoketh his dispensation.
any respect to the proximitie of blood: sending the Bull secretly to the Duke
by his Ambassadors. The which being come to the knowledge of John of Bauaria
her uncle, he made his complaint to the Emperor Sigismonde: who taking it ill,
sent to the Pope, letting him understand what quarrels and Factions might grow
thereby among Christian Princes: the which did move the Pope to reuooke this
dispensation, of which reuocation John of Bauaria, sent an authentical Coppie
to the Duke of Brabant, thinking to terrify him therewith, that he should not
proceed any further in this marriage. But the Duke seeming not to know
anything, the 13. of January, 1418.
1418. sent cont Engelbert of Nassau, Lord of Leck and Breda, with Henry lord
of Berghe Iaqueline, being then at the Hage in Holland, with his Bull.

The 8. of March following, the Duke accompained with many Earls, barons,
knights, and Nobles his friends and vassals, came to the said lady Countess
at the Hage, to advise of their marriage. The bishop of Tournay, with other
Noble men, Ambassadors to Duke John of Bourgongne were there present, with the
chief of the council to the Countess, the Duke of Brabant, and the Deputies
of the Towns of Holland, Zeeland, Henault and Frezeland: where they did view
and examine the Bull of dispensation, and the copy of the reuocation, the
which not being found authentical, all well considered, they concluded to
proceed in the consumation of the marriage, according to the The marriage
consumated be^wixt the duke of Brabant, and the Contesse of Holland.
the Deane of the chapel at the Hage, in the presence of the old Lady her
mother, of Philip vicont of Leyden, lord of Waesenare, Henry of Leck, and many
ladies and gentlewomen, among others, the lady of Saint Martins Dyke, the lady
of Ameyden, the lady of Steenbergen and others. The Duke of Brabant was 16.
years old, and the contesse Iaqueline about 18. when as they were married, by
the which their patrimoniall inheritances

A while after, Pope Martin did write unto the duke giving him to understand,
that the The Pope confirms his dispensation again.
reuocation which he had made of the dispensation, came through fear of the
Emperor, and the importunity of John of Bauaria, and for no other cause and
that without any scruple of conscience, they might live freely in that state of
marriage. The which the Patriarch of Constantinople and the Cardinal of Ostia,
confirmed by their Bulls. And so John Duke of Brabant was received and
acknowledged in the countries of Holland, Zeeland, Henault, Friseland etc. for
their prince, as husband to the said lady their princess: except in the Town
of Dordretcht, and the Island of Bryele. As also the said Contesse Iaqueline was
received with great honor in the Towns of the Duchy of Brabant. And for that
John of Bauaria through the treachery of them of Dordrecht, would not only
attribute unto himself the government of Holland, but did also take upon him
the title of Earl and procured great troubles to the Contesse his Niece, the
Histories of Holland, have put him in the number (but without rank) of their
Earls, the which we follow; and will describe his government as succin^tly as
we can, and the disasters of the said Contesse unto the death.

IHON OF BAVARIA, CARRYING himself as Governor, then Earl of Holland and
Zeeland, Lord of Friseland.
28 Dn^s Johannes Bauariae


Thy faith of Dordrect, force, and thy faiths loss^,
Made thee resign thy Bishopric and Cross;
By Merlus aid, thy greedy chests to fill
With great revenues of thy Niece, a Pupil:
At Luxenbrough, thou took'st unto thy spouse
Elisa, carlesse of her blood, or House;
In thy Church Order long thou did not liu^
An Earl, nor married; One black day did give
End to all slipp^rie t^ares let fall for thee,
And to thy short unstable memory.
IHON OF BAVARIA having governed his Bishopric Elizabeth, widow to Anthony
duke of Brabant, father to duke John, and John of Bauaria gets a dispensation
fr^ the Pope to marry.
Duchess of Luxembourgh his Gossip, having been Godfather to a son of hers.
He carried himself at the first, as Tutor to the contesse Iaqueline his niece,
and then Governor of Holland, etc. Then he obtained of the Emperor Sigismond,
William his brother, for want of heirs male, excluding the contesse Iaqueline
his niece. He obtaines the (...) of Holland, etc of the Emperor.
The which the Emperor being at Constance, did intimate unto the Duke of
Brabant his vassal, with a prohibition not to challenge any thing to himself
in the said countries. According to the which John of Bauaria did press the
chief towns of the said Provinces, to receive him for their Lord and Prince.
The towns of Holland and Zeland, made him answer; that they had acknowledged,
and did acknowledge the said Lady The answer of the Provinces to John of
Bauaria.
for their princess, as the only daughter and sole heir to cont William the
6. their deceased prince: and that the said John her uncle had also
acknowledged her for such, and taken John of Bauaria takes upon him the title
of Earl of Holland, etc.
Yet John of Bauaria, took upon him the title of Earl of Henault, Holland and
Zeland, and lord of Frizland: and was so acknowledged at Dordrecht, and at
Bryele, notwithstanding the promise they had made under their oaths and seals,
with the other towns of Holland unto Cont William, father to the contesse
Iaqueline; whereupon John of He makes war in Holland.
Those of Dordrecht and of Bryele, doing all the harm they could unto their
neighbors that held the Princess part.

The duke of Brabant seeing this revolt; defied John of Bauaria, and came with
his wife The Duke of Brabant def^ John of Bavaria.
into Holland, where with his Brabansons he went to besiege the Town of
Dordrecht, lodging his Hollanders upon the dyke of Papendrecht. But this siege
was unfortunate. John of Bauaria being then in Dordrecht, and very glad of
their delivery, seized soon after on the town of Roterdam, whether he went
and caused himself to be acknowledged Earl of Holland; staying there some
time, he sought to be master of Delfe and of Goude. John of Bauaria, ceased not
day and night to molest the Hollanders, and to hinder their Navigations to the
sea, by the River of A treaty ^etwixt the duke of Brabant, and John of Bauaria.
Meuse. And for that during this war many places and castles were daily
ruined, the country made waste, and the mischief increasing daily, there was
an assembly appointed in the town of Wandrechom, whether came for chief
mediators betwixt both parties. Philip Earl of Charolois, son to John duke
of Burgongne, Lewis of Luxembourg, Bishop of Teroagne, and Peter of Luxenbourg
his brother: during which treaty, a truce was made; there also came John duke
of Brabant, and the lady Iaqueline his wife, with the lady Marguerite Douager,
her mother. John of Bauaria sent his Gerrard of Boel lord of Hemskerke, and
some others. There was an accord made, by the which it was said, that John of
Bauaria should remain lord of Dordrecht with the appurtenances, of the town
of Gorrichom, the country of Arkel, of Lederdam, Schoonwert, of Bryele, of the
contrie The articles of the treaty.
of Voern, of the town of Roterdam, and the siegniorie of Waerden, and enjoy
Iaqueline Contesse of Holland, his wife. And moreover he should pay unto him
within a year a hundred thousand English Nobles: remaining Lieutenant of
Holland, Zeeland and Frizeland, for the space of three years, with authority
to dispose of half the officers and magistrates, and the Contesse his Niece of
the other half. These conditions were confirmed reciprocally under their
seals, the 19. of July, in the year 1419.

Those of Vtrecht and Amersfort were also reconciled, and all acts of
hostility laid 1419.
aside, both in Holland, Zeeland, and the Diocese of Vtrecht: yet in all these
treaties of peace, John of Egmond, nor his brother of Yselstein were
comprehended nor spoken of. John lord of Egmond; who took all he could find
upon the river of Leck, coming out of Brabant or Flanders, sinking their
ships, and taking their men prisoners. Those of Vtrecht write unto John of
Bauaria, entreating him to do them reason and justice of the wrongs which ths
said lord of Egmond had done them; but he regarded them not. They considering
therefore in what estate their affairs were, and that they must expect no good
from John of Bauaria, sent unto John duke of Brabant and the Contesse his wife,
to acquaint them with the wrongs which had been done, notwithstanding the
league which was betwixt Holland and Vtrecht. The duke made no account of it,
and the Contesse (being New wa^re be^wixt them o^ Vtrecht and Holland.
Frederic of Blankenhein, their Prince and Bishop, and to the Towns of the hye
diocese, which is the country of Oueryssel. They seeing there would never be
any end of these spoils and thefts, which the Hollanders of the Cabillautin
faction (holding the part of John of Bauaria) did commit upon their friends of
Vtrecht and Amersfort; they held it their best course to make open war, and
to that end, they allied themselves to these Lords; William of Brederode,
Philip vicont of Leyden, the vicont of Montfort, John of The Cabill^ and
Ho^ckins ^ke ^rmes again.
Heemstede, and with all the rest of the Hoackins faction that were chased out
of Holland, against the lords of Egmond, and Gerrard Boel, lord of Hemskerke,
chief counselors to John of Bauaria, and against all their Allies.

The year following John of Bauaria and his faction, did ruin many of their
adversaries 1420. Sund^y ex ploits o^ war.
castles, in the quarter of Woerden, Suylen, Houthorst and Nessen. On the other
side, the lord of Broderode, the vicont and the siegnior of Hemsted, joined to
them of Leyden did also burn some of the Cabillautins castles, as Zuyck,
Raphorst, Rhinburch, and others: running as far as the Hage, but they only
spoiled it, sparing the fire in respect of the Princes court and palace, and
the honor of the earls that had built it. In the same year, John of Bauaria
took the castle of Poelgeest, situated in the village of Coekerke by assault,
causing all their heads to be cut off that were within it, from thence he The
^king of ^s castles by ^n of Baua^a.
went to the castle of Does, the which was yielded unto him: then he besieged
the castle of Waert in the village of Leyrdorp, the which he battered and
took by force, killing Leyden besieged and yielded upon composition.
by the which it was agreed: that all soldiers, strangers (and namely they of
Vtretch,) should depart with bag and baggage; and that John of Bauaria should
be received into the town, without the oppression of any man. The which being
thus concluded, the vicont Philip and the inhabitants did only acknowledge
him, as Governor of Holland. The soldiers of Vtrecht thinking to retire safely
unto their town, the lord of Egmond The accord (...) by the ^d of ^gmond.
lay in wait for them at a passage, and pursued them unto their gates. On the
other side, John of Bauaria (against the said Accord) forced the vicont of
Leyden to resign, and yield up his viconty unto him, and not to retain any
thing for himself, nor his successors, but the castle, the Toll and the
Gruytte: whereas before a vicont of Leyden had a great command and prerogative
in the Town, as the placing of a Bayliffe, four Bourghemasters, and seeuen
Sherifs. Henry the viconts eldest son held at this siege The vicont forced to
resign his vico^ty of Leyden, to o^ of Bauaria
John of Bauaria against his father, who also made session of the said Viconty.
This town being thus yielded to John of Bauaria, they went with them of
Dordrecht, to besiege the Town and castle of Gheertruydenbergh: whereof Didier
vander Merwen was Chastelaine or Governor; whom in the end he forced to
yield, to have their lives and goods saved.

That year 1420. John Duke of Brabant came from Antwerp into Zeeland, at the
request of John of Bauaria, and landed at saint Martensdyk, whereat the
pursuit of the 1420. The Duke of Brab^nt comes into zeeland without the
priuitie of the Contesse Iaqueline.
siegnior of Aschen, they assembled (without the priuitie of the Contesse
Iaqueline) in the house of Floris of Borssele, where the duke of Brabant did
ratify and confirm, unto John of Bauaria, the government of Holland, Zeeland
and Frizeland, for seven years Euerard Tserclaes his steward, discharged and
put away all the Contesse Iaquelines ladies of honor and maids, and quite
altered and changed her estate and train; giving her the contesse of Moeurs,
the lady of Weesmael, Asschen, and others to attend on her. The which did
wonderfully displease the lady Marguerite of Burgongne, Douager of Holland,
Contesse Iaqueline goes from the duke of Brabant her husband.
mother to the Countess, who departed presently with her daughter toward
Brusselles, and coming to the court to the Duke and his council, she sought
to persuade him to dissolve this new estate or train. The which not able to
obtain, she departed discontented, and went to her Inn, called the Looking
glass. The Contesse her daughter

Whilst these things were acting, the barons, nobles and towns of Brabant
held The Earl of S. Pol sent (...) into Brabant.
an assembly in the town of Louuaine, where it was decreed to displace Euerard
of Tserclaes, steward to the Duke, and the siegneor of Asschen; whereunto the
Duke opposed firmly, for that they were his two mignons and chief
counselors. Whereupon the Estates of Brabant sent to Paris to Philip Earl of
S. Pol, brother to duke John, entreating him to come into Brabant to govern
the country, and to rule his fathers inheritance, complaining that Duke John
suffered himself to be ruled and governed by a Iaqueline, and her mother to
Louvaine. Then he appointed an other assembly of the States, on the 29. of
September, at Vilvoord: whereas the said An assembly of the states of Brabant.
Earl being present, with the two Ladies Princesses, mother and daughter, and
all the Deputies of the Estates of Brabant, they attended the Duke only, who
counterfeited The Earl of S. Pol made Reuward of Brabant.


Duke John of Brabant having been persuaded by William lord of Bergen upon
Soome, his chief councellor, and Euerard of Tferclaes to make John of Bauaria,
governor of Holland and Frizeland, having also been the cause of the changing
of the Contesse Iaqueline his wives train. The Bastards of Holland being
incenced, for this cause slew the lord of Bergen, in the Duke his masters
chamber. On the other side, the The Lord of Berghen slain in the Dukes chamber.
Duke hearing that Cont Philip his brother, had the title of Reuwart of
Brabant, and had John his son, the lord of B^ren, Provost of Aiz, and about
300. horse; besides his ordinary train. The Duke attended at the Port, the
Bourgeoises hearing thereof held a council; where it was agreed; that the Duke
should enter with his ordinary train of 120, horse, and no Many of the duke
o^ (...) servants apprehended.
Heynsberg and others, and disposed of them to whom he pleased.

The Emperor Sigismond writ for these Noblemen that were prisoners, to the
states of Brabant, for their libe^ties, threatening them with a proscription of
the Empire. The like letters were written by the Princes Electors to the
Reuward: to whom he made no The Emperor an^ ^ce Elector write into B^abant so
the prisoners. The prisoners set a liberty.
other answer, but that he had caused them to be justly stayed, according to
the custom of the Country, as they themselves had required: and therefore
their cause remained Gerrard vand Zype, chief counselor and most familiar
with the Reuward: who by the persuasion of the said Vande Zype, freed them out
of prison, upon certain conditions. All things being thus past, and the
troubles ended, the Earl of S. Pol, Lord Reuward, resigned up his office of
Reuward (which Wh^t the office of Reuw^rd ^s.
is a dignity, which the States of Brabant have power, according to their
Privileges, to give unto whom they please, to reduce their Dukes unto reason,
when they stray from their duties) into the hands of duke John his brother, who
was by the said Estates, confirmed in the government of his Country. Before
that the Earl of S. Pol went out of Brabant, there were beheaded Euerard of
Tserclaes, knight, Steward to the duke, Adolph of Coudenbergh, William of
Pipenpois, and some 14. of the chief of Many beheaded at Brussels.
John: for some of the said Ladies council, found not the Bull of her marriage
lawful, having not been allowed, but held it to be fraudulent and of no
force. By reason whereof, in the year 1423. she went into England, from whence
she sent to The Contesse Iaqueline causes the Duke of Brabant her husband to
be cited to Rome.
cite duke John to the court of Rome, to hear his marriage declared void
according to the Canons. Pope Martin referred this business to two Cardinals,
to determine Iaqueline, hearing that the Process would be teedious and long,
without attending a definitive sentence, allied her self by a promise of
marriage to the Duke of Gloucester, uncle to King Henry the sixth of England then
reigning, upon condition, that the marriage with the Duke John being declared
unlawful, she should obtain a dispensation from the Pope to marry again.

Soon after the duke of Gloucester, came with the Contesse Iaqueline, his
betrothed The Contesse Iaqueline made ^re to the duke of Gloce^r. He come^ with
an Army into Henault.
Spouse, unto Calais, with a great Army marching toward Henault; and therefore
he divided his Army into three battailions. The Lady Marguerite of
Bourgongne, mother to the Countess requested the Nobility of Henault to
accompany her, and to go and meet them: and so by assistance and favor of the
lord of Haures, Lieutenant to Duke John, they entered into Henault. The duke of
Brabant demanded succors from the duke of Bourgongne, and John of Bauaria, who
promised him all assistance. The Duke of Bourgongne sent him the lords of Croy,
Lisle-dam, and Mailly, with good troops of soldiers.

In the year 1423. John van Vlyet, had his head cut off at the Hage in
Holland, being accused by some of the Cabillautin faction, that he had poisoned
John of Bauaria, 1423. John van Vlyer beheadded at the Hage.
(whereof he had been sick and recovered) for the which he was quartered, and
his quarters hung at the entrance of four of the chief towns in Holland.
John of Bauaria having received letters from the duke of Brabant demanding
succors, sent him word, that if his health would give him leave, he would come
unto him with good Troops within three weeks. But having his army ready to
march, he fell suddenly sick (it may be the poison had not been well purged)
and dyed at the Hage on Twelffe John of Bauaria governor of Holland dies.
day, and was buried there in the Iacobins Cloister. He being dead, all the
Noblemen that had been of his faction, called in John duke of Brabant, and
received him for Iaqueline their Contesse was married again to the duke of
Gloucester; who hearing how he had been received, held a counsel with her The
Duke of Brabant acknowledge^ Earl of Holland in the right of his wife.
friends, by what means she might seize upon some towns and castles in
Holland: and to that end, she sent Floris of Kifhoeck with men, to surprise the
town of Schoonhouen, the which he effected happily, through the assistance of
some townes-men, well affected to the said Lady: but he could not recover the
castle, without a siege of six weeks, at the end whereof he forced them to
yield, to have their goods and lives saved: only Albert Beyllinck, one of the
captains was reserved to be at the Contesse discretion: who notwithstanding
had leave given him to go and visit his friends, having past his word and oath
to return to prison within a month, the which having performed Captain Albert
Beyllinc^ bu^ied alive.


In the year 1425. the siegnior of Gaesbeck, appointed Governor in Holland for
the duke of Brabant, banished all those which had, or did hold the party of
the Contesse 1425. Schoonhouen besieged.
Iaqueline, and went and besieged the town of Schoonhouen, for the space of
24. weeks, battering it furiously with his great artillery (for then Rames
and crossebowes were no more in use, gonpoulder being newly invented by a
Monk) there were in the town, five Knights and twenty Squires, who defended
themselves valliantly, making many sallies forth, upon their neighbor towns
that were enemy, bringing A Truce made at Schoonhouen
was a certain Bull published in Vtrecht, Liege, Cambrey, Holland, Zeeland,
Frizland and Henault, by the which Pope Martin the fifth, did separate from
their marriage, John duke of Brabant, and Iaqueline Contesse of Holland, etc.
The which notwithstanding the Pope did afterward disauowe, and sent Euerard of
Eindouen to the duke; excusing himself, and promising that he should have a
speedy end of this business. The duke of Brabant bebesiegeth the Contesse
his wife in Mons*
Heerevppon the duke went to besiege Mons in Henault, whereas the said Lady
was: That the said Lady should continue in one of the Duke of Bourgongnes
towns, vutill the suit were fully ended, betwixt her and the Duke; or that one
of them should die. That Duke John should be restored to the Country of
Henault, the government whereof should be sequestered, until a definitive
sentence. That A treaty made by the duke of Bourgongne to atteme unto the
Countesses country.
throughout all the Country, there should be abolution of crimes, committed by
reason of the troubles: and all confiscations disanulled. That for the
maintenance of Justice in the Country of Henault, there should be four Judges
appointed; whereof two were to be chosen by the Duke of Brabant, and two by
the Duke of Bourgondie: and that they should assign for the said Lady
Contesse, a competent provision for her maintenance, according to her estate,
upon the revenues of Henault, Holland, Zeeland and Freezland. That the said
Duke Philip should be Aduoe or Governor of Holland, Zeeland and Freezland: as
nearest of the blood, and at that time next heir to the said Lady.

This accord being thus concluded at Douay, Duke John came to Valenciennes,
The Contesse laq^e is delivered into the Duke of Hourgongnes hands.
and three days after returned to his camp before Mons: the which he pressed so
long, as the Contesse came and yielded her self into the hands of the Deputies
of the duke of Burgongne, who went thither to receive her: being in the
Brabansons Camp, she desired to speak with Cont Engelbert of Nassau, and
Henry of Leek, whom she entreated (with tears in her eyes) to work so with
the duke of Brabant, that she might be committed to some town or castle in
Brabant, where it should please him, and not to deliver her intothe power of
the Barguignon whom she feared more then the duke her husband: The Contesse of
Holland led against her will unto Gant.
but it was denied her, and she was conducted unto Gant, there to remain
according to the Treaty. The duke of Brabant caused all the goods, yea the
Dourie of the Marguerite of Bourgongne, mother to the Contesse, to be seized
on, for that she maintained her daughters party. Whilst that the Lady
Iaqueline was thus guarded in the town of Gant, with a very small estate, there
were some Noblemen of Holland (her enemies) which advised the duke of
Bourgongne to send her to the Castle of Lille in Flanders, and their to keep
her during her life. She having some intelligence thereof, sent presently to
advertise her most secret and trusty friends in Holland: who were taking
counsel together how they might deliver their Princess, out of the duke of
Bourgongnes power: There were two Gentlemen, Arnold Spyerinck, and one of the
The Contesse it freed out of the duke of Burgongnes hands.
house of Aelburch, who offered to hazard their lives to set her free. These
two came to Gant, and having their horses ready in a certain place, carrying a
man's apparel

The next day she went to Goude, then to Vadewater, where she was generally
welcomed, much made of, and acknowledged for their Lady and Contesse of
Holland: The Contesse comes into Holland.
being accompanined in all places by the lord of Vianen, and the vicont of
Montfort. Those of Vtrecht came to visit her, and made a League with her. After
that time there were great and tedious wars throughout all Holland: for the
Nobles, and The battle of Alphen whereas the Coneesse was victor.
in the village it self, whereas they fought valiantly; but in the end the
Partisans fled toward

The Duke of Gloucester having news that the Countess Iaqueline, his
betrothed, was in Holland, and had some Towns there at her devotion, he sent
the Lord Fitzwater, The English and Zeelanders defeated, by the Duke of
Bourgongne, at Brouwersh^. Anno 1424. The Cardinals sentenc^ touching the duke
of Brabants marriage with the Contesse of Holland.


The 27. of January in the yeeare 1426. the Cardinals of Venice and Vrsine:
Judges delegated in the cause betwixt the Duke of Brabant, and the Lady
Iaqueline, Contesse of Holland his wife: having had the advice of other
Cardinals therein, pronounced their sentence; by the which they declared, that
the said Lady had wrongfully separated her se fe from the Duke her husband: and
although that she ought to be ioyn^d again to the said duke: yet for some
special reasons moving them, they did ordain she should be safely kept,
until the definitive sentence, and at her own charge, with Amedee, John The
Duke of Gloucester abandons the Contesse Iaqueline.
of Brabant having these news, was much quieted in conscience, and the said
lady much discontented: for that she would not by any means come into the
hands of the duke of Sauoy, but would rather have gone to the duke of Brabant,
but he would none of her, saying, that he must obey the sentence: and so she
remained at Schonhouen and at Goude. And yet notwithstanding the duke of
Bourgongne held still the government of Holland, Zeeland and Friseland. This
duke of Bourgongne seeing his affairs successful, to the end he The Duke of
Bourgongnes ambitious desugne.
might one day attain to that whereunto he did aspire (which was to swallow up
the country Scuenberghe besieged.
English at Brouwershauen, to besiege him in his town, both by Sea and Land,
in the the depth of winter, where he lay fourteen weeks; at the end whereof,
the friends of the said lord did mediate a small truce, the which being
expired, the duke besieged it so straightly, as no thing could enter in, nor
get out. The inhabitants of the Town, considering on the one side, the great
charges and oppressions which they were forced to bear during the siege; and
on the other side, the goodly offers that were made unto their Lord: and that
through his wilfulness, the end of so many miseries which they And yielded up
in despite of the Lord.
did) to yield up the town to the duke of Bourgongue, in despite of him, who
took possession thereof, and in the end, the Lord of Seuenberghe, was forced
to yield him also his castle, with all his land and Siegniorie, living himself
in exile, as a Vagabonde, where he dyed for want.

The 4. of April in the said year 1426. the Contesse Iaqueline, gathered
together some troops out of the country of Vtrecht, and from the towns of
Goude, Schoonhouen 1426. Harlem besieged by the contesse.
and Ondewater, and went by water to Hemestede near unto Harlem; besieging the
said Town. The lord of Brederode came thither to assist her with the Kennemers
and them of Alomar. The magistrates of Harlem had had a little before some
intelligence Rouland of Vtkerk to come to succor them. The suburbs of the
town were burnt, and all the wood about it cut down. They did often shoot
fire into the town, but it was still quenched: many assaults were given and
they were valiently repulst. The duke leauied men in all his territories, to
succor the besieged: whereof he made the siegneors of Litelltenveld and
Vtkerke commanders, having many brave captains, the which he sent into
Holland. Being come to Leyden, they resolved the next day to assail the
Countess: and first of all they sent a spy, clothed like a Lepar, carrying in
his wallet a white loaf, in the which there was a letter sealed to carry into
the town, when he should find his best oppertunity. the which they thought to
effect easily, and having performed it, they would go and

The Contesse having heard this letter read, caused the bearer to be hanged
upon a Tree: and the night following raised her camp, and embarked her army,
the which came at the break of day to Alphen, she being there in person. The
Seignior of Vtkerke A second battle at Alphe where the Contesse is victorious.
finding her to be so near, had no other leisure but to encourage his men to
fight well, where there was a furious charge, and it continued long. In the end
the seignior of Vtkerke (seeing the desaster falling upon his side, and so many
men overthrown,) retired himself out of the prease, the Contesse remaining
victoresse: in which battle all the Picards were slain, 500. other soldiers,
and 80. Bourgeses of Leyden. After the victory, the Contesse created these
Knights, John of Waessenare, Philip who was Vicont of Leyden: Henry of
Croenenburch, Euerard The Contesse makes knights
of Hoochtwoude, bastard to Cont William of Bauaria, father to the Countess.
John of Langerack, seignior of Aspren. Didier vander-Merwen, Gerard of
Poelgeest, seignior of Homade, and Arnold of Gant a Geldrois.

After this defeat, the Kennemers under the Contesse Iaquelins authority, made
William Nagel Captain of the Kennemers.
William Nagel their Captain, and went to destroy the castle of Hemskerke, to
be revenged, for that they of Harlem had before ruined the castles of
Brederode, Heemstede and Assendolph. At the same time they also destroyed the
castles of Heiligersberge, Cralingen and Spangen in Schicland. This done, the
Kennemers went into Waterlandt, where they took the towns of Monikendam,
Pumerende, and Edam: William Nagel causing his men to approache, and to advise
how to force them: those of the town put all their women and maids in order
of battle, with their white kerchers, and white smockes upon their garments,
to make them seem a troop of men all in white armor: the which succeeded
happily for them: for the Kennemers seeing them a far off, thought no
otherwise, but that they had been the Bourgesses armed, which attended to
fight Nagell knowing afterward that they had been deceived by these womanish
soldiers, approached with his troops nearer unto the walls, carrying those
four principal prisoners with him, and telling them of the town, that if
they would not open their gates, he would cut off their heads before their
faces: yet they refused to do any thing, hoping and expecting succors which
the Duke had promised them: who soon after sent Lisle-dam unto them with
forces; who being entered into the town, caused the North-gate to be set open,
by the which he made a sallie upon Captain Nagell and his men, who endured
very Captain Na gel by the Kennemers defeated.
much: for the troops of Amsterdam were arrived at the same instant. The
skirmish Nagel was slain with a great number of Kennemers: those that were
swift in flying, were pursued to the village of Wongom, where as there were
many slain. The Seignior of Lisle-dam had two wounds in this skirmish, the
which were very dangerous, so as he remained a long time in the Surgions hands
at Horn, whether the Duke came soon after in person, and was honorably
received, as well there, as in all the other towns of Waterland.

In the year 1427. on Easter Tewsday dyed John Duke of Brabant, son to
Anthony 1427. The death of John Duke of Brabant.
of Bourgongne, Cousin Germany to Duke Philip, and husband to the Lady
Iaqueline Countess of Holland. He was interred by his father. And for that he
died without issue, all his lands and Seigneuries went to Philip Eatle of S.
Pol, his brother. This Duke John, being married so young (as we have said) by
the lewd Council and private ambition of some of his Counselors) was
entertained in perpetual jealousy of his wife, and in trouble without rest:
besides they of Bourgongne which did gape after Holland, Zeeland, and
Friseland, were the chief motives thereof. After the death of the Duke of
Brabant, the Hollanders holding the party of the Contesse Iaqueline, raised a
good A s^a battle fought near to Wyeringhen.
sea towns, having gathered together a great number of ships, followed them at
sea. The Lord of Brederode seeing them come a far of, landed with his army
in the said Island of Weyringhen, the which he reduced for a time under the
Contesses obedience. And being there, the enemies drew toward them, either to
shut them in, or to draw them to fight at sea. The Lord of Brederode seeing
that they had no desire to land, commanded his men to imbarke again, and to be
ready to fight presently. It was then allow water, so as the great ships could
not be well governed to fight, and the said Lord had a The Lord of Brederode
defeat^d and taken prisone^
be more ready to fly. The charge was with extreme rowing on either side, and
the combat was furious and fearful, in the which the Lord of Brederode had
the worst: and a great number were slain and drowned. The which those of the
reere-ward seeing, having stood still during the fight, they began to be
amazed, and to fly, but they could not escape, for they were speedily
followed, so as they had their shares in the loss as well as the first. The
which had not happened if all their forces had been joined together. The
slaughter was great, but there were more cast ouer-bord, besides the

The 4. of May, at the instance and suit of some noble and wisemen, Duke
Philip of An accord betwixt Duke Philip and the Contesse Iaqueline.
Bourgongne, and the Contesse Iaqueline met together, and did agree, that the
Duke should be acknowledged for Governor and next heir to the said Lady, in
the succession of Henault, Holland, Zeeland and Friseland. This done, the Duke
appointed Franc of Floris Lord of Borsselle, of Zuylen, and of Saint
Martins-dike; and the same year the Duke condemned them of Al^mar, the
Kennemers and the Lord of Brederode in certain pecuniarie fines, for that they
had taken arms against him.

In the year 1429. Duke Philip of Bourgongne bought of Thierry Earl of Namur
(with the aid and help of the Town of Gand) the said Contie of Namur: In the
1429. Philip of Bourgonge buys the County of Namur.
which the said Thierry did inuest him in his life time, and dyed soon after,
leaving no children. Since the said Earldome has continued in the houses of
Bourgongne and Austria unto this day, making one of the seventeen Provinces of
the Netherlands. Of which Earldome the Duke made John of Croy governor.

In the year 1430. the fourth of August, Philip Duke of Brabant and
Luxembourg, Earl of Saint Pol, (after that he had governed the said Duchies
three years) died in 1430. Philip Duke of Brabant dies.
the Castle of Louvain. There was great contention for the succession, betwixt
the Lady Marguerite of Bourgongne, dowager of Holland, widow of Cont William
of Bauaria, and mother to the Contesse Iaqueline, on the one part, (being Ante
to the said deceased Duke, and sister to Duke Anthony his father,) and Philip
Duke of Bourgongne his cousin german on the other part: the which was in the
end decided to the benefit of the said Duke Philip. The deputies of the States
of Brabant and Lembourg, with the Ambassadors of duke Philip, treated together
of the rights, immunities, freedoms, Philip of Bourgongne makes his entry as
duke of Brabant.
privileges, customs, statutes and ordinances of the said countries; which
they required the deceased duke Philip were solemnized, whose body was interred
by duke Anthony John his brother. Lewis of Luxembourg, son to Peter Earl of
Couversan, and Lord of Engien in Henault, did inherit the Earldom of S. Pol.

Four yea^es passed in peace and concord, betwixt the Lady Iaqueline Contesse
of The Lady Iaqueline Cont^ of Holland (...) the four^h ti^e.
Holland, and duke Philip of B^urgongne; among the rest, there was a condition
that she might not marry again, without his liking and consent, if she would
remain Lady of all her countries, of the which notwithstanding, the duke
should be Governor. It happened in the year 1432. that the Lady Marguerite of
Bourgongne her mother, sent her by some Gentlemen, goodly and rich Jewels, and
some horses. The Contesse Iaqueline finding her self bare of money; having no
means to honor her Mothers servants, with presents or any gra^uitie; being
destitute of money through the last The Contesse denied money by her servants.
in her service, during the wars. The said Lady being much perplexed and
troubled, sent unto an other, by whom she was denied in like sort: for the
which she was so grieved, as weeping she retired her self into her chamber,
complaining of the ingratitude of her friends and servants, and of the dishonor
which she feared to purchase if she suffered her mothers servants to return
empty handed. Whereupon William of Bye, seeing his Mistress so desolate,
being careful of her honor, and pitying her, said unto her; Madam if it
please you, I will go to ^ranc of Borsselle, Lieutenant of Zeeland, and
acquaint him with your present necessity, I hope he will do you some good.
The said Lady (being full of tears) answered him. How? he is one of our
enemies, and never received any good nor favor from us: I fear he will refuse
us, and then my disgrace will be greater then before. Notwithstanding if it
please you Madam, said William, I will try him by some means. I fear, said
the Contesse, we shall not prevail; yet go, and let him understand how the
case stands, and tell him that I will acknowledge it in time and place, and
will satisfy him soon. William went into Zeeland, and performed that which he
had in charge. Whereupon the Lord of Brossele Reasos which moved the Con^esse
Iaqueline to lou^ ^ranc of Borsselle.
Tell my Lady, that not at this time only, but during my life, she may dispose
of me and all my means at her pleasure: and having delivered him the money
which he demanded, William re^urned to his Mistress, who was wonderfully glad.
From that day after she ever held the Lord of Borsselle in great esteem: yea
she did so affect him, as she desired to have him to her husband, the which
was afterward secretly performed in her chamber, in the presence of her
servants. ^he mar^yes him secretly.


The year following this secret marriage was diuulged and spread over all
Holland, and the news came unto duke Philip of Bourgongne, being then at the
wars in France with the King of England, who left that business, and
recommended his army to his Captains, and went into Holland: (seeming not to
know any thing, and The Lord of Borsselle app^ended by the Duke of Bourgongne.
the Lord of Borsselle to be apprehended, in the presence of the Contesse
Iaqueline his wife, and to be presently embarked and conuayed to Ruppelmonde in
Flanders. The Contesse (following the Duke where-so-euer he went) did press
him to have her hu^band again, the which he refused, unless she would
resign all her countries. Some say, that during the imprisonment of the lord
of Borsselle, they gave him a refrigeratiue drink; others have spoken of a
more violent course to hinder the act of generation. In the end, by the means
of Frederic Earl of Maeurs, he was set at liberty, The Contesse resignes a^l
he^ Co^ntries to the Duk^ for her husbands liberty.
return unto them. Moreover that the Duke should give unto the lord of
Borsselle, The Duke of Bou^gongne takes possession of Holland etc.
was confirmed, and the siegnior of Borsselle made Earl of Osteruant. Soon
after the Duke with the Contesse and her husband, went into the countries of
Holland, Henault, Zeeland and Friseland, whereof she gave him real
possession, in the chief towns thereof: then the Duke held his Order of the
golden Fleece (whereof he was founder) at the Hage, and among others he made
the Earl of Osteruant one of his Knights.

In the year 1436. on S. Denis Eve, dyed this Princess the Lady Iaqueline, in
the castle 1436. The death of the Con^esse Iaque^ine.
of the Duke of Burgongne, (and it may be, for that she found not her husband
as he had been before his imprisonment) after that she had been Lady and true
heir of the Earldomes of Holland, Zeeland, Henault and Friseland, in great
troubles and continual vexations, for the space of 19. year, She dyed at the
age of 36. years, and lies at the Hage, in the Chapel of the Court of
Holland.

The most renowned in Holland and Zeeland, in the time of the Contesse
Iaqueline, were Nobl^men in the time of the Contesse Iaqueline.
these noblemen that follow. Franc of Borsselle, Earl of Osteruant husband to
the Contesse: Hugh of Lanoy, lord of Xaintes, Lieutenant of Holland, Zeeland
and Freezland, both Knights of the golden Fleece. Reynold lord of Brederode, of
Vianen and Ameyden Ghysbrecht of Brederode Provost, Cathedral, and afterward
elect bishop of Vtrect: William of Brederode their uncle who was lieutenant to
the Contesse Iaqueline in Holland, James of Gaesbeeke, lord of Abcoud, Wyk,
Putten and Streyen, John lord of Egmond, William of Egmond his Brother lord of
Iselstein, Who were restored by John of Bauaria, and afterward confirmed by
Philip duke of Bourgongne, Henry lord of Wassenare (who without the resignation
which he made unto John of Bauaria was vicont of Leyden) and John of Wassenare
siegneor of Woorburch his brother; Henry of Borsselle, lord of la Vere, Arnold
lord of Seuenberghe, and of Hemsted in Zeela^d, John lord of Cruyninghen; Henry
vicont of Montfort: Adrian of Borsselle, lord of Brigdam; James of Borsselle
his brother; William lord of Naeldwyk and of Wateringhen, Albert Phillip of
Cortgeen, Rutger lord of Boeaslaer and of Aspren, Didier lord of Henckelom;
Lewis of Treslon; William of Holland, bastard son to duke Albert; to whom duke
Philip gave in Friseland; the villages Schagen; Baninghen and Harinchuysen; and
was the first sieigneor of Schagen; Euerard of Holland, bastard to Cont
William, father to the Contesse Iaqueline, first lord of Hoochtwoode, and his
brother Lewis, John of Vianen siegneor of Noordeloos; Didier vander Merwin;
Gerrard of Poelgeest; siegneor of Homede, governor of Schoonhouen; Gerrard of
Poelgeest his cousin; Giles of Cralinghen. Gerrard van Zyl, Berthould of
Assendelph, almost all Knights: John vander Leck. William of Egmond siegneor of
Soetermeer, Otto of Egmond lord of Merensteyn, Gerrard of Hemsted, and
Benthuseyn; John of Hodenpyl, William of Langerack; James vanden Wood, Adrien
of Raphorst, Gerrard van Vlyet, Wouter of Mattenesse. Herpert van Foreest,
Ghysbrecht van Swieten, John van Swieten, Baliefe of Leyden, Gerrard
witten-Hage, Frederick of Seuenter, and Floris of Kishoek, whereof some were
Knights, the rest Squiers, and many Gentlemen, which were too long to specify
here; all valiant soldiers, whereof many died in the service of their Prince,
as we shall see in the course of this History. Among the chief families and
nobles of Friseland were Otto of Broek, Aurick and Emden, Sicco Syaerda,
Wybrandt Hermana, Sicco The chief Nobility of Friseland.
Liaucama, Peter Campstra, Aelko Campstra brethren, sons to Tako, Douwe
Tyessama, Ie^mer op Adeleen, Sybrandt Tyaerda, Wybet Walta, Pibo Eelcxima,
Wopke, In die Stedde, Gerrit and Tyaert Iongama. Herman Dowwema, with an
infinite number of other Gentlemen, Houelinghen, which is as much to say, as
Courtiers.

An end of the 2. Book.
30 Philippus Burgund Cogn. Bonus.
PHILIP DVKE OF BOVRGONGNE, Earl of Holland and Zeeland, lord of Friseland,
Duke of Brabant, Lembourg, and Luxemburg, Earl of Flanders, Arthois, Henault,
and Namur, Lord of Salins and Macklyn.
The first wife I espoused was Lady Michell,
The second, lady Bonne; the third Isabell,
When the false Ganthois, and the Brugeois ^re
Rebellious arms, a peace with France I swore:
The golden Fleece I first of all deuisde,
Laid siege at Calais, Luxembrough surprisde.
Subdued Liege: In Holland, I oppressed
The league of Hamecons: four and thirty years
I raignd, and Dijeon drunk my funeral tears.

The Argument of the third Book.
PHILIP the first of that name, called the good Duke of Bourgongne, (accompting
Ihon of Bauaria Uncle to the Contesse Iaqueline) was the 30. Earl of Holland,
etc. the which he wrested (...) the said Lady in her life time: he takes
revenge of the Ganthois for abandoning him before Calais: he was in great
danger in Bruge^, who in the end were reconciled. War betwixt the Hollanders,
Zelanders, and the Esterlings. The factions of Sceringers and Uetcoopers in
Friseland. Those of the Hoecks and Cabillaux revived in Holland: war betwixt
the Duke and the Ganthois. He disgraceth the two brothers of Brederode
wrongfully, to advance David his bastard to the Bishopric of Utrecht. Lewis
Daulphin of France comes to the Duke for refuge, who afterward conducts him
into France to be crowned King. A quarrel betwixt Arnold Duke of Geldres and
Adolph his son, who deals impiously with his father. The Lord of Croy and
Launoy hated of the Earl of Charolois. John of Koesteyn having undertaken to
poison the Earl of Charolois, is convicted and executed. A division betwixt
the Duke and the Earl of Charolois his son, by reason of them of Croy, but
in the end reconciled. King Lewis the 11. dissembles with the Duke of
Bourgongne: he sends Ambassadors to him which accuse the Earl of Charolois,
who answers them bravely. A new dislike betwixt the Duke and the Earl for them
of Croy. Civil war in France, called the war of the Commonweal. The
French King and the Liegeois in league against the Duke of Bourgongne. The
Earl of Charolois goes with an army against the Liegeois: a peace is made.
Dissembling, betwixt the French King and the Earl. Those of Santroin and
Dynant in the country of Liege break the peace. Dynant besieged by the Duke
of Bourgongne, taken and punished. A second peace made betwixt the Duke and the
Liegeois. The Earl of Charolois marries the lady Marguerite sister to the King
of England: the death of Duke Philip. The art of Printing invented at Harlem
in Holland, and stol^e away to Mentz.

PHILIP the first of that name, the 30. Earl of Holland and Zeeland, 1437.
and Lord of Friseland: son to John Duke of Bourgongne, slain at Montereau
faut-yonne, was at the first Governor of those Provinces (as we have said) then
by the death of the Lady Iaqueline, Countess of the said Provinces, he was
right heir and lawful successor, both by Duke Philip right heir to Holland,
zeeland and Friseland.
father and mother. And so was Duke of Bourgongne, Brabant and Lembourg; Earl
of Flanders, Artois, Bourgongne, Henault, Holland, Zeeland and Namur; Marquis
of the holy Empire, and Lord of Friseland, Salins and Macklyn. He did
afterward purchase (having conquered it by arms in the name of the widow of
the deceased duke) the duchy of Luxembourg, and other siegneories, so as he
was the mightiest Prince of all his Predecessors in the said countries: He had
to his first wife Michelle, daugh^er to Charles the sixth, king of France, who
dyed without children, in the year 1422. and lies buried at Gant. Then he
married Bonne, or Olande, daughter to the Earl of Eu, by a dispensation from
the Pope, for that she had been His wives and children.
formerly married to Philip Earl of Neuers his Uncle, the which was a
wonderful fair lady, and dyed also without children. For his last wife he had
Isabell, daughter to John King of Portugal, Aunt to the lady Elenor, who was
wife to the Emperor Frederick the third. This Isabell was brought by sea into
Flanders, and landed at Scluse, in the year 1430. by whom he had three sons;
the eldest at Brussels in the year 1431. called Anthony: who lived not long.
Then in the year 1433. an other son called Iosse, who died also very young.
The year following 1434, she was brought in bed, at Digeon in Bourgongne, on
S. Martins Eve, of her third son, called Charles Martin, for that he was
borne the said day. There was in this Princess (as some say) some thing worthy
of observation, which was, that when she took her leave of her father, to go
into Flanders to the Duke her spouse, the father having given her his blessing,
said unto her, that she should have three sons, whereof two (which she should
not nurse her self) should be short lived, as it happened to the two first;
and therefore she her self gave suck unto the last son Charles: who after
that he was baptized, was made David bishop of Teroan^ Duke Philips ^ards.
and afterward of Vtretch, who did much mischief to them of Brederode.
Cornellis who died in his youth, being slain at the defeat of the Gantois,
before Ripelmond. Anthony Earl of Steenbergh. Baldwin a Knight, Philip his
Admiral at sea, and John. Then Anne, wife to Adrian of Borssele, signior of
Brigdam, who was afterward married to Adolfe of Cleues, Lord of Rauestein,
brother to the duke of Cleues.

In the year 1438. the Esterlins envying the sprosperitie of the Nauigations
of the 1438. War betwixt the Esterlins and the Hollanders, and zelanders.
Hollanders, and Zeelanders, trafficking in all places at sea, as well as
themselves; sought

In the year 1444. the faction of Schyeringers and Vetcoopers, being somewhat
1444. The factions revived in Holland.
pacified in Friseland: new troubles grew in Holland by the factions of the
Hoocks and Cabillaux, upon this occasion, especially in the towns of Harlem,
and Amsterdam, but chiefly at Leyden; in the which the Magistrates had granted
a Subsidy unto Peter's day, there was a great insurrection in the Town of
Amsterdam: the A tumult at Amsterdam by the factions.
Hoeckins chasing away all the Cabillautins, and their adherents, who made
their retreat unto Harlem, being of their faction. The Duke keeping his court
at Brusselles, hearing of this disorder, sent the Lady Isabell his wife, with
some of his counsel to redress it, and to pacify their quarrels. Hereupon
the like tumult happened in Harlem, The Duchess comes into Holland, to
pacify the troubles.
was presently advertised thereof, and sent a gentleman of her Household, with
Gerard van Zyl thither; who being arrived, commanded the people in the Princes
name, to lay aside their arms, the which was done, but yet the troubles seized
not: for they were much incensed against the lord of Lalain, Governor of
Holland, to whom they did impute the cause of these Impositions; so as if they
could have once gotten him, they would without all doubt have murdered him,
The Duchess went to Harlem, whereas the next day after her arrival, the
Cabillautines chased away all the Hoeckins, so as she was greatly troubled to
preserve them from spoil: causing all the

In the end leaving the affairs of Holland in this confusion, and not able to
pacify them, she returned to Brusselles, where having informed the Duke her
husband, of the She returns without any effect The Duke sends for the heads of
both factions.
estate of the country, he sent for all the Lords, Knights and Deputies of
the towns of Holland, of both factions, to come before him at Brusselles,
upon great penalties: and with them the Lord of Lalain. The duke having heard
both parties, he dismissed the Lord of Lalain, from his place of Lieutenant,
instituting in his place, a worthy and wise man of Flanders; called Gosswin of
Wild. And to the end he should not William Institution of the (...)
President in Holland.
of Lalain did carry himself ill in his place of Lieutenant, this Goswin
behaved himself much worse; for he afterward lost his head, for his wicked
life.

At this time there happened a great tumult in the town of Leyden: so as they
fell A tumult at Leyden.
Pancratts Church, whereas many of the Hoeckin faction were slain, wounded,
and taken Prisoners, to the number of six score, whereof three of the chief
that were the motives of this trouble lost their heads: and there had been
more executed, if the Earl of Osteruant had not saved them: the rest were put
to great fines.

The Duke hearing what had past at Leyden, resouled to go into Holland, to
pacify The Duke comes into Holland.
these troubles and reconcile his subjects. Whether he came accompanied with
John Earl of Nassau, Lord of Breda, and many Barons and knights. Whether
likewise came John of Hensberg, bishop of Liege, at the request of Ghysbrecht
of Brederode, Pro^ost Cathedral of Vtrech his cousin, to reconcile the
Hoeckins with their Prince. The He reconciles the two factions.
Ghysbrecht of Brederode was there also. And being of the Hoeckin faction, the
Earl of Nassau and the bishop of Liege made his peace with the duke to the
great discontent of his enemies the Cabillautins. From thence the duke went to
Amsterdam, where he restored all them that had bin banished and expelled:
renewed the ^aw of Sheriffs, appointing two Bourgomasters of either faction,
and the Sheriffs, equally commanding them to lay aside all factions and
partialties, and to live brotherlike together in all love and amity, imposing
great punishments upon them, that should break his commandments in that
regard, and for the authors of any troubles; how mean so ever they were. This
done, after that he had reduced

The duke having the year before besieged Calais, pretending it to be of the
lymits War betwixt the Duke of Bourgongne and the Ganthois.
of Flanders, as part of the county of Guynes, which came unto him by Session
from Charles the 7. King of France, was abandoned by the Flemmings at this
siege. He remembering the affront which they had done him (having punished them
of Bruges before) he resolved in the year 1452. to do as much to the
Ganthois, to begin and to 1452.
satisfy himself of the great loss and charge he had been at, by reason of
the raising of this siege: he laid a new imposition upon all the Country of
Flanders, of six Pattars The cause of this warre^
upon every sack of Salt, coming from France, Spain, or elsewhere. Whereunto
the Ganthois would by no means yield. The Duke seeing their obstinacy and
wilfulness, 1453. The Ganthois submit themselves unto the Duke, and are
re^onciled.
Duke, to ask him forgiveness in the name of all the people, and the 30.
following, by the prayers and intercessions of some Noblemen, both clergy and
secular, they were reconciled unto the duke upon certain conditions, who
received them into grace: the war having continued five years. The
conditions of this reconciliation (by the which the greatness of the Ganthois
was much impaired, and the duke assured for the remainder of his life from
their mutinies, and all the wars which the Ganthois had had at that time) are
written at large in the Chronicle of Flanders. At that time Adrian of
Borsselle, Lord of Brigdam, Duyuelant, Galmeade, Somersdyk and Zuyburch, Anne
the bastard daughter of duke Philip of Bourgongne, by whom he had one son
called Cornellis, who dyed young, and two daughters, Agnes and Anne. The Lord of
Brigdam was then great Chamberlain to Duke Philip, and afterward to duke
Charles his son. The 4. of March 1455. died Rodoph of Diephont bishop of
Vtrecht, having gouernd his 1455. The death of the Bishop of Vtrecht.
Philip sent Cont Ihon of Nassau, to the Chapter of Vtrecht, entreating them to
choose his bastard son the bishop of Teroane. Arnold Duke of Geldres came in
person to sue for Stephen of Bauaria Chanoine of Cologne. The Chapter without
any respect of the entreaty of two mighty Princes, nor Great competitors for
the bishopric.
of these two competitors, chose Ghysbrecht of Brederod their Provost
Cathedral, a wise and a virtuous man. This election was made jointly by them
all, except Gerard vanden Massche, and John of Wittenhurst Chanoins, who gave
their voice to Stephen of Bauaria: yet seeing all the rest were of one mind,
they yielded and consented to their election.

This election did not much please them of the Cabillautin faction in Holland,
for Sugiestions by the ^oeckin faction against the bishop of Vtrecht.
that those of Brederode were of the Hoekins, seeking all means to hinder it,
and Ghysbrecht of Brederode remained absolute bishop, he was in danger to loose
his Earldome of Holland, if he did not prevent it by his wisdom. For that
(said they) Renowld Lord of Brederode his brother, would (with his aid)
attempt to conquer it, under a color that he vaunts himself to be issued
from the ancient and first Earls of Holland, having already purchased many
friends in the diocese of Vtrecht, and in East Friseland, by whose favor he
might easily seize upon the country.

The Duke giving ear to these false reports, believed them; although that the
lord of Brederode was well known to be a mild and quiet man, who would never
have The duke bel^ (...) ^ports against them of Brederode.
entertained such a thought, having made it sufficiently known unto his Prince
with David his bastard, for whom Alphonso King of Arr^gon did also solicit.
Ghysbrecht the elect bishop, had also sent his Ambassadors to desire
confirmation thereof, whom the Pope held in suspense, yet receiving his The
duke of Bourgongne means to make his bastard son bishop of Vtrecht by force
annuat or first fruits, which was 4000. ducats, but he made them no other
dispatch. Whilst that these Ambassadors were at Rome, the Duke and the Earl
of Charolois his son came into Holland, being resolved to install David
bastard of Bourgongne in the bishopric of Vtrecht, by force: being at the Hage
the Duke kept open court, and did solemnize the order of the Golden Fleece, of
the which he created 26. Knights, himself

Those of Vtrecht hearing that the Duke meant to bring his base Son into the
Bishoprik by force: sent him word that their preuiledges and ecclesiastical
orders, did David the duke of Bourgongnes bastard made bishop of Vtrecht.
those of the house of Brederode, having obtained from the Pope provision of
the said Bishopric for David his bastard) he forced Gysbrecht that was chosen
Bishop to compound with him, and to yield up his bishoprik to David: Upon
condition that he should remain Provost Cathedral, and Provost of Oudt
Minster in Vtrecht, and Provost of Donas in Bruges, and that yearly during his
life he should have an Annual pension of 4200. florins of gold, out of the
bishoprike of Vtrecht: and for the charges he had David into the town of
Vtrecht, and put him in possession. But those of Deuenter and other towns of
the contry of Oueryssel, which is the high diocese of Vtrecht, opposed
themselves, and would not acknowledge David for their prince and pastor, until
the duke besieging Deuenter, forced Lewis Daulphin of France fell in disgrace
with King Charles the 7. his Father, being much perplexed, and doubtful for a
time whether he should retier himself to the King of Lewis Daulphin of France
comes to Brusseles to the Duke of Bourgongne.
England or not. But he thought it best to go unto his couzin Duke Philippe
of Bourgongne, taking his way toward Brusselles with a small train, which
made the duke yield to a composition suddenly with them of Deuenter that he
might go and receive him. This Prince was so honorably entertained, feasted and
treated, as he remained five years in the Dukes Court, until the death of
the King his Father: having an estate and train appointed him, as if he had
been the Dukes own Son.

In the year 1460. died the said French King Charles the seventh called the
Gentle. The Duke of Bourgongne being advertised thereof, assembled all his
Barrons and 1460. Death of king Charles of France.
Lewis Daulphine of France, and to see him take possession, as the eldest Son
of the deceased King, of the Realm and Crown of France. The King being
crowned by the help of the Duke of Bourgongne, being desirous to show
himself thankful for so great a service, having as it were led him by the
hand unto the Crown, gave him great thanks, and to recompense him in some
sort, he gave unto Lewis King of France falls in dislike with the Duke of
Bourgongne.
the Earl of Charolois his Son certain towns and castells in France, with
a yearly pension. The King would have make an exchange with the Duke of some
towns, but they could not agree, so as many years after, the King discovered
a spleen and dislike which he had conceived against the Duke, and that before
he had confirmed the

The Earl of Charolois besides his seigneuries of Bethune, Chasteau-Bellain,
Archel, Putten, Streyen, and the Country of Goyelandt, received in the year.
1461. by 1461. Certain signtories come to the Earl of Charolois.
Adrian of Borselle his Atorney in that behalf, the possession of the moeity
of the Seigneury town and castle of Aspren, by reason of a certain murder
committed by one William van Buren, upon Rutger of Boetselaer lord of the other
moeity. And in the year 1462. the said Earl was received lord of the town of
Henkelom, being but a 1462.
quarter of a league from Aspren, by the forfeiture of John of Henkelom and
Otto his Son, who in the end did resign it unto him by agreement. And so
this signeury of Henkelom returned to that of Arckel, from whence it issued at
the first. At that John lord of Croy had in his youth bred up a poor boy in
his house, named John of Koestein, whom he advanced to be first an assistant
and then a groom What John of Koesteine was.
of the Dukes chamber, who carried himself so loyally and virtuously, as the
duke esteemed him very much, giving him great means, and having made him
knight, he was his taster for his drink. By which aduancements both in goods
and honors, he grew so proud and arrogant, as he began to contemn
others, yea Barons, so gracious he was in the Duke his Masters favor, as he
seemed to be the only man to manage his most important affaiers. At the same
season John of Croy and John of Lanoy Governor of Holland, conceived a secret
hatred against the Earl of Charolois Croy lanoy and Koestein conspire against
the Earl of Charolois.
John of Koestein, who fearing likewise to be disgraced and put from his
Offices, after the dukes death, (being also wholly bound unto the lord of
Croy, for his advancement) gave ^are willingly unto them: and took the charge
upon him, They seek to poison him.
what end it was. This gentleman called John d'Iuy having performed his
voyage, and brought this poison to Koestein, demanded that which he had
promised him: the which he not only refused to pay him, but also abused him
with injurious words ^Iuy discontented at this answer, complained to an other
gentleman of Bourgongne, called Arguenbant, and discovered unto him the whole
secret. This Arguenbant (being wonderfully amazed) advised Iuy to go speedily
and discover the whole truth of this matter unto the Earl of Charolois,
saying, that if he went not he himself would go and accuse him. John of Iuy
without any farther stay, went unto the Earl, and casting The practice
discovered unto the earl.
John of Koestein. The duke having promised to do him justice, the Earl went
unto his lodging, commanding John of Iuy to go unto Rupelmond, and to attend
him there as he did.

The next day morning, John of Koestein being a hunting in the Park at
Brusselles, the duke called him, commanding him to go with the lords of Aussy
and Creueceur to Ruppelmond, to make answer to a gentleman that did greatly
tax his honor. Koestein Anthony bastard of Bourgongne, the Bishop of
Tournay, with the lords of Croy and Goulx. The Earl of Charolois came also,
and caused Koestein to be put into a Tower, of the which he himself kept
the keys, so as no man Koestein committed to prison.
might speak unto him but in his presence. These four Noblemen made the
process of the said Koestein, after that he had been confronted with John of
Iuy, declaring him guilty, and condemning him to loose his head, and his body
to be cut in four He is condemned to loose his head.
John of Iuy was called, of whom the Earl demanded, if Koestein had kept his
promise with him, and paid him John of Iuy that accused Koestein beheaded also.
the sum as he agreede upon, whether he would then have revealed the fact:
the poor fool answered no, and therefore he presently caused his head to be
cut off.

About that time Lewis the leauenth King of France, made a proclamation
throughout the Earldomes of Flanders and Arthois, that none should presume to
inrowle himself in the service of Edward King of England, nor any way assist
him. He would also have raised an impost upon the sault in Bourgongne, the
which had never been practiced before. But the duke would not admit of the one
nor the other: for he was a Causes of dislike betwixt the king of France and
the duke of Bourgongne.
friend and had made a truce with the King of England. Whereupon he sent the
lord of Chimay to the French King, to show him the causes why he could not
allow of such innouations in his countries, and to entreat him to forbear.
But the said lord was long at Court before he could have audience. Seeing one
day that they fed him still with delays: he attended so long before the
Kings chamber, as in Is he of an other mettell then the rest of the Princess
of my Realm? yea my Leege (answered Chimay) being a bold man and of great
courage) the Duke of Bourgongne my Master, is of an other stuff then the
Princes of France, or of all the Countries about: for he has kept you,
nourished The answer of the Lord of Chymay to the French King.
and supported you against the will and liking of the King your father, and all
others, whom it did displease, the which no other Prince would nor durst do.
At these words the King held his peace, and returned into his chamber.
Afterward the said Lord of Chymay returned, making his report unto the Duke.

The French King being resolved to pay unto the duke of Bourgongne 450000.
crowns, and redeem the towns which were engaged unto him in Picardie, on
this side the river of Some, by the treaty of Arras, he gathered together
great store of treasure from all parts of his kingdom: for there was no Abbay,
Chanonlerie, nor rich Merchant that was esteemed to have money throughout all
France, but did either give or lend him. And having recovered the said sum,
he sent it to 1463. The French King comes to (...) to the Duk^ of Bourgongne.
great honor and state, and lodged him in his own lodging in the Castle,
where he promised to accomplish all that remained of the Treaty of Arras: but
he failed afterward in some points. During his abode at Hesdin, the duke sent
diverse messengers to the Earl of Charolois his son, being then in Holland,
to come and do his duty unto the king. But he refused to come, saying: That
so long as Ihon of Bourgongne Earl of Estampes, and the Lords of Croy and
Lanoy, should be about the King, he would not come, holding them for his
mortal enemies, (for these Noblemen Ihon of Koesteyn, and to have councelled
the Duke his father to accept of the money for the redeeming of the above named
towns. The Duke was wonderfully discontented The Earl of Charolois (...) to
come to the King which discontents his (...).
at his sons refusal, and would not for a long time after see him. The King
parting from Hesdin, the Duke entreated him to confirm those servants (which
he had placed in the redeemed Towns) in their offices: He granted it, but
he performed little: changing all the Governors, Captains, Prouosts and
Magistrates thereof, appointing and committing in their places, such as he
thought were not greatly affected unto the duke, as the Lords of Lanoy, Croy

The coffeehouse betwixt the Duke and the Earl of Charolois his son,
continued The duke of Bourgongne and his son reconciled.
so long, until the States of the Netherlands (to whom the Earl had made his
complaints, especially of the lord of Croy) had reconciled them together:
according to whose advice, the Earl accompanied with many Noblemen, Knights,
Gentlemen, and the chief Deputies of the said States, came to Bruges, where
the Duke was. All the chief Noblemen of the Court, and the Magistrates of the
Town went to meet him: conducting him to the Duke his fathers lodging, where
he lighted, and went The Earl comes to his father (...) speech unto the Duke
his father.
up unto his chamber, as soon as he saw him, he kneeled down three times,
and at the third time he said; My most honored Lord and Father, I have
understood that you are offended against me for three things (declaring the
same three points, which he had made known unto the deputies of the States)
whereof he excused himself: Notwithstanding (said he) if I have in any other
thing moved you to anger, I most humbly cry you mercy. As for all your excuses
(answered the Duke) I know the truth, speak no more of The Duke of Bourgo^gne
reconciled to his son.
them: but seeing you are come to ask forgiveness, be you a good son, and I
will be a good father to you: then he took him by the hand, raised him up,
and pardoned him all. This done, the Deputies took their leave of the Father
and the Son, being glad to have performed so good a work. The same day that
this reconciliation was made, the Lord of Croy parted early in the morning from
Bruges, and retired to Tournay to the French King, who was there then.

In the month of June 1464. the French King came to Amiens, and from thence
1464.
to Saint Pol: where he found the Duke of Bourgongne. The Earl of S. Pol
feasted them with great state, then they went together to Hesdin, whereas the
king required him to yield unto him the government of Lille, Douay and Orchies,
satisfying him the sum of two hundred thousand Livers, and paying him 10000.
Livers of yearly pension, Which is 20000. pound starling.
King of France long since to an Earl of Flanders. Whereunto the duke
answered; that when his Grandfather duke Philip called the Hardy, son to
John King of France, took to wife the Lady Marguerite, daughter and only
heir to Lewis of Male Earl of Certain demands made by the French King unto
the duke of Bourgongne.
Flanders, the said Chastelenies were given to him and his heirs males for
ever by the King: and in case he had not any, then to return unto the Crown,
for the said sum and yearly rent. The King made certain other demands unto
the duke, but he would not hearken unto them, for that they were unreasonable.
The duke for his part made three requests unto the King: the first was, that he
would receive the Earl of Charolois The Dukes requests unto the King.
his son into his grace and favor, for that he heard the King had been
displeased Arras, the which he had promised and sworn, when as he redeemed the
towns that were engaged. To which requests the King lent a deaf ear, and
parted the next day from Hesdin.

During the Kings stay at Hesdin, the bastard of Rubempre had charge to enter
into The bastard of Rubempre sent into Holland to surprise the Earl of
Charolois.
Crotoye, with a great ship called the Balleuier, and forty choice soldiers
with him, to go into Holland, whereas the Earl of Charolois then remained,
who coming Rubempre and his companions apprehended.
prison: Soon after his companions were delivered, and the bastard remained
still in prison, with one other. They had sent to seize upon the Ship, but
hearing of the Captains apprehension, it put to Sea, and returned to Crottoy.
The common fame was then, that the French King had given charge by letters
written and signed with his own hand to this Bastard of Rubempre, to take the
Earl of Charolois alive or dead. After which done, being ready with a great
army near unto Hesdin (which they said was prepared for England) to set upon
the Duke of Bourgongne, The Kings intention touching Rubempres act.
of Charolois daughter at his pleasure, (being then but eight years old) and
to have divided the Dukes countries, the Duchy of Brabant to the Earl of
Neuers, and his other Provinces to whom he had pleased. But GOD disposed
otherwise.

As soon as the bastard was taken, and had confessed the matter unto the Earl
of Saint Pol, who kept then in Holland: the Earl of Charolois sent letters
presently to the Duke his father, being yet at Hesdin whether the King had
appointed him to come: and that he should attend him there. But at the same
instant the Duke received letters about dinner time from his son, acquainting
him with the bastards The duke of Bourgongne re^res in have from Hesdin.
went presently after dinner to horseback, and retired with a small train to
Saint Pol to his bed, whether every man followed presently, leaving Adolph of
Cleues his cousin, and the Lord of Crequi, to guard the town, inioyning them
notwithstanding, that if the King would come, to open him the Town and Castle.
As soon as the King was advertised that the Duke was gone so suddenly from
Hesdin, he went to Rouan: and the Duke of Bourbon came to Lille, to see the
Duke of Bourgongne his Uncle, and from thence to Gaunt, to the Earl of
Charolois his Cousin.

The fourth of November the same year 1464. the Earl of Charolois came 1464.
The ^rench king sends Ambassadors to the duke of Bourgongne.
horse in his train. All the people were very joyful at his coming: being
alighted from his horse, he went to do his duty to his father. The next day
there came into the same town of Lille the Earl of Eu, Moruillier Chancellor
of France, and the Archbishop of Narbone, Ambassadors from the king: the next
day The French kings demands.
who was detained prisoner in Holland. The second was, that reparation were
made unto the King, for the imputations which had been laid upon him since
the imprisonment of the said Bastard. The third, that the Duke should send unto
the King, one of the Earl of Charolois household, called Oliver de la March, a
knight of Bourgongne, who had first published those scandals to the Kings
dishonor: the which a Preacher had afterward preached in the Town of
Bruges, requiring also to have the said Preacher sent, to do justice of them
according to their merits: Alleging for the Kings excuse, that the said
Bastard of Rubempre, had been sent into Holland to take Francis Duke of
Britain, whereunto the Earl entreated his father to give him leave to
answer. But the Duke said unto him, I have answered for thee as much (in mine
opinion) as a father ought to do for his son, yet if thou have so great
desire, think of it against to morrow.

The next day the Ambassadors were called again before the Duke, and there The
Earl of Charolois answer.


In the end the father was very humble and wise in his conclusion, beseeching
the King that he would not lightly believe any thing against him nor his
son, but to continue them still in his good grace and favor. After which,
wine and some confections being brought, the Ambassadors took their leave
both of father and son.

When as the Earl of Eu and the Chancellor had taken their leaves of the The
Earl of Charolois sends a message unto the King. The Duke of Bourgongne falls
sick.
but before that the year pass he will repent it: The Archbishop did not
fail to do this message, the which bred great hatred betwixt the King and the
Earl.

Soon after the Duke fell grievously sick at Brusselles, so as they did in a
manner despair of his health: the Earl of Charolois was then with him, who
seeing that the Lord of Croy and his adherents, had in a manner the whole
government of his fathers contries, holding the best and strongest places:
knowing that above fifteen days before The Earl of Charolois made Governor
of his fathers contries. Hi^ speech unto his friends.
the Earl of Saint Pol, Anthony and Baldwine his bastard brethren, brave
Kinghts, and the most of the Duke his fathers counsel; to whom he said: My
masters and friends, I cannot nor will not conceal from you any longer my
hearts discontent: but will presently deliver unto you that which I have kept
long secret. I would have you know, that the Lord of Croy, with his kinsmen and
Allies are (and so I repute them for) my greatest and most mortal enemies:
Then he made known the causes unto them, the which he sent in writing to all
the good Towns of his fathers countries. Having spoken thus unto his friends,
he gave notice unto the Siegneor of Quivarin (who was chief Chamberlayne to
the Duke his father) by two, or three Knights, that he should retier himself
from the Duke his fathers service, and that he should be packing with as A new
quarrel betwixt the Duke of Bourgongne and his Son.
be shut and the Porter to be hidden, so as the Duke could not get forth:
whilst they sought for the keys, the duchess of Bourbon his Sister and many
ladies of his house came, with Anthony of Bourgongne his bastard, who used
such mild persuasions as they did some what pacify his rage, and he returned
into his chamber. During this trouble the Signior of Quieurain got out of the
Court, and departed with one with him as secretly as he could.

The Earl knowing that his Father was much displeased with him, was every day
in counsel, as well with his own, as with the Dukes chief Counselors,
seeking all means to pacify him, every man employing himself all he could in
that good service. The Earl of Charolois writs to all the Towns.
of his Fathers Countries, what his heart thought, and the reasons which moved
him, to discharge them of Croy from the service of his house, which letter
should be red publicly in all places, that every man might be advertised
thereof. The like letters were sent unto all the chief of the Nobility, the
tenor whereof is to be red at large in my great chronicle the which I omit
here for breuities sake, they were dated the two and twenty of March 1464. The
same month of March the Signior of Roubais 1446.
with good troops, went by the Earls command, to seize upon the town and
castle of Lanoy, thinking to find the lord of the place there: being Nephew
to the The town and castle of Lanoy taken taken.
coming, he had retired himself with all his gold, silver and richest
mouables, into the town of Tournay, two leagues from thence, then held by the
French. The Earl gave the said town and castle of Lanoy to James of
Luxembourg, brother to the Earl of Saint Pol, withal the provision that was
found within it, the which was very great, both in poudred flesh, meal and
other provisions and munition of war.

At that time Charles duke of Berry, brother to Lewis the leauenth the French
King, being about eighteen years old, whom the King kept in his Court
simplier and Charles the seventh; one day he made show to go a hunting with
ten men only, and fled for refuge to the Duke of Britain, the discourse of
all the troubles which followed after in France, being called the war of the
commonweal, is written at large in the Inventory of the History of France,
to the which I will refer the Reader, for that it does not properly belong
unto our subject. The Earl of Charolois writ letters to them of Arras, Letters
from the Earl of Charolois to them of Arras.
sending them word that he was advertised that the lord of Croy and his
friends, did leauy men, to lead them out of the duke his Fathers countries: and
that the Earl of Neuers was gone with the lord of Croy to molest the said
countries, the which he meant to prevent; and therefore he commanded them to
make public proclamations

The twelfth day of April 1465. which was the day of our Redeemers passion, a
1465.
great divine preached at Busselles in the chapel of the Court, in the
presence of the The Earl of Charolois reconciled to his father.
he would pardon his son the offense which he had committed. The next day
about noone the Earl went to present himself before his Father, upon his
knee, saying. My most redoubted lord and father, I beseech you for the honor
of the passion of our Lord Jesus Christ that it would please you to pardon me
that which I have misdone, for what I have done has been to preserve you and
my self also from death: and for the preservation of all your Countries and
subjects, as I will give you to understand at large hereafter. And having
spoken other words, wisely and humbly, to the great satisfaction of all the
hearers: The duke holding him by the elbow, and looking still in his face, said
unto him. Charles my Son, all that ever you have misdone unto this day, I
pardon, be a good Son unto me, and I will be a good father unto thee. In
speaking of which words the tears stood in the dukes eyes, the which moved
the hearts of all the company, so as some could not forbear weeping.

This reconciliation made betwixt the Father and the Son, and the feast of
Easter past, in the year 1465. the duke sent for the three estates of all his
Provinces to come to Brusselles, to whom he showed letters written from the
duke of Berry brother to The duke of Bourgongne leauies an army to succor the
duke of Berry.
according to their estate. In the mean time the army was preparing, in the
which were Lewis Earl of Saint Pol, and his three Sons, James his brother:
the lord of Rauestein Nephew to the duke. Anthony and Baldwyn of Bourgongne,
the dukes bastards, and almost all the Barons, Knights, Squiers and Gentlemen
of his countries, unto the number of 14000. fighting men, that is to say 1400.
Lances 8000. Archers, and the rest Harguebuziers, pikes and corselets. Those
of high Bourgongne The Earl of Charolois forces.
in his march, being 600. lances, and about 6000. foot, whereof the Prince of
Orange, the Marshall of Bourgongne, the lords of Argeuil, Charny and Toulongeon
were the chief.

The 15. of May the Earl of Charolois having his army ready, beginning to
march with his Artillery, toward Quesnoy the Conte in Henalt. It was
necessary he should take his leave of the duke his Father, being at
Brusselles. At his parting, the The dukes speech to his Son at his parting.
duke said unto him. My Son go: do your best endeavor, die rather then
fly, if you be in danger, you shall not be forsaken, though I employ a
hundred thousand men. The Earl entering into Piccardie many towns opened their
gates, others he forced calling Lewis the French King, and the Earl of
Charolois, where they ran away on both sides, yet in the end the Earl kept
the field: after the which the Princes of the league being joined together,
they marhed with their army before Paris, where at last a Peace was concluded
betwixt the King and the Princes, all which you may read at large in the
French History. A little before the battle of Montleherry, the French King
had made a league with the Liegeois, ancient The French King makes a league
with them of Liege. The Liegeois in arms against the duke of Bourgongne.
and mortal enemies to the house of Bougongne, who were so presumptuous and
with the Duke of Cleues and other his friends, resolved to go fight with them
in

The 25. of September the same year, their dyed at Brusselles, the countess
of The death of the Contesse of Charolois.
Charolois, daughter to the Duke of Bourbon, a virtuous and very religious
Lady, leaving one only daughter called Marie: she fell into such
distemperature and alteration, when she heard the news, that her husband had
been defeated at Montleherry, (for so it was reported in the beginning) as
she fell sick, and languished some two Months, until she dyed, for the
which there was great heaviness and mourning at

The 3. day of October, the siegnior of Roubay assisted by Fromelles and
Arguembaut a Gentleman of Bourgongne, surprised the castle of Peronne by
Scaladoe, whereas Peronne surprised for the Duke of Bourgongne.
they found the Earl of Neuers, the Siegneor of Sailly and some others in bed.
He presently wone the Town, which was opened unto him, and so it was subjected
under the Duke of Bourgongnes obedience. The Earl of Neuers was carried
prisoner to the castle of Bethune, and Arguembaut remained Governor of Peronne,
for that he had been Author of this enterprise.

During these broils in France, the Liegeois were mad, and especially those
of Dynant, trusting in the strength of their Town (vanting that they had
endured seauenteen The insolency of them of Dynant.
they made, to the which (in despite of him and of his son) they did a
thousand villainies before the gates of Bouvines in the county of Namur,
belonging unto the Duke, with the foulest reproach that any man could utter, yea
or think, against the said Princes and their wives that were dead. These
outrageous injuries came to the knowledge of the duke and his son, the which
did so incense them, as the Earl swore he would be revenged, as it fell out
afterward. The Earl of Charolois, being still at Constans before Paris,
received several letters from the Duke his father, commanding The Earl
prepa^res an army against the Liegeois.
made the Earl to haste out of France, to be revenged of the indignities of
them of Dynant. And notwithstanding that after the conclusion of the peace in
France, many of his men were retired: yet he speedily gathered together about
Maziere, a greate^ army then he had in France; for the good towns of the
Dukes country, sent their sworn Bands of crossebow-men and Archers: whether
also went many Knights and Gentlemen of Picardie, and of the countries that
were restored by the peace: and of those that had served the King against the
Earl.

The Liegeois advertised of the Treaty of peace, thought they had been
comprehended The Liegeois sue for peace.
1465.
they promised, he caused his army to march, and writ to the Duke his father,
entreating him to send him such forces as he had; being resolved without any
further delay, to fight with the Liegeois. The Duke sent the Lord of Saueuse
unto him, with his Troops, commanding him not to fight until he himself
were there in person. A peace concluded with the Liegeois.
Treaty of peace, such as he had set down, sealed, with the great Seal of
the city of Liege, and that the Liegeois craved pardon: which treaty he had
accepted with the

The treaty was seen by the Earl and accepted, upon amendable and profitable
reparations, the which being performed, the Earl did pardon them. The
profitable reparatio^ they should make, was to pay unto the Duke 600. thousand
florins of the Rhine, in 6. years; by equal portions. And that the Earl when
he should be Duke of Brabant, and all other Dukes after him, should be
Mombours, that is to say, Gardiens, and Captains of all the Country of Liege,
and have 2000. florins of the Rhine yearly pension. And that the Liegeois might
not after that time attempt nor begin any thing of Importance, either of war
or peace, without the leave and liking of the said Curator. There were many
other conditions in the said Treaty, which for beuities sake I omit, and the
rather, for that the Liegeois soon brake The Liegeois offer an affront to the
Earls men.
better satisfaction; and so he departed from them, and went to the town of
Saintron; whereas the Liegeois did an affront to his men, unto their cost; so
as if the Eale had not arrived in time the town had been spoiled, and many
inhabitants slain.

Soon after the Earl went to Brusselles, where he was joyfully received by
the duke his father; having stayed there some days, he went te visit his
towns of Picardie. Passing by Bethune, the Earl of Neuers came unto him, and
asked him forgiveness The Earl of Neuers reconciles himself to the Earl of
Charolois.
Anthony of Bourgongne, his bastard brother.

In the year 1466. Those of Dynant (being weary of the peace which they and
1466. The Dynandois (...) the peace.
the Liegeois had bought dearly of the Duke of Bourgongne and his son, the
Earl Dinant besieged.
them straightly; made great Bridges over the Meuse, near unto Bouines,
battered it furiously, and resolved to give a general assault. The besieged
seeing their towers and walls beaten down, sent eight of their principal men
to sue for mercy, but they prevailed not: for the next day the Town was taken
by assault, and all that were found armed, put to the sword. The Duke caused
800. prisoners to be drowned before Bouines. Dinant taken and razed.
the Liegeois came in great troops to succor it, Duke Philip (for that he was
very old) retired himself: but the Earl marched toward him with his Army.
Then came the Deputies unto him, beseeching him to take pity of that people.
The soldiers of Liege in a bravery, would not avowe the words of their
Ambassadors: yet after two or three messages, it was agreed that they should
pay a certain sum of money presently, The Liegeoi^ reconcile themselves again
to the Earl of Charol^is.
promising for an assurance of the said accord, to deliver 300. Hostages,
named in a Roll by the bishop of Liege, by 8. of the clock the next day: but
it was Noone before the Hostages came: the Earl and his counsel, disputed
whether they should charge them that they durst not fight, using other insolent
speeches. The accord being

In the year 1467. the Duke of Bourgongne being in his castle of Scluse in
Flanders, 1467.
sent for all the Noblemen and Barrons of his Countries* inuiting many of his
kinsfolk, friends and Allies, where as they treated of diverse matters, the
Duke laboring to reconcile them, and to make them good friends before his
death. At the same time, the marriage of the Earl of Charolois with the Lady
Marguerite, sister to Edward the The Earl of Charolois marries Marguerite
sister to the King of England.
fourth, King of England, was concluded; and Anthony Bastard of Bourgongne
deputed with 400. gentlemen to fetch her: who conducted her to Scluse to the
Earl her husband, and from thence to Bruges to the Duke of Bourgongne, who
received her very lovingly, as well for his sons sake, as for the King of
Englands her brother.

Soon after, the Duke being aged and weak, fell into a new disease,
whereunto in his latter days he was much inclined. The Noblemen that were
about him hoping that he should recover as he had formerly done, did not
presently advertise the earl his son, being then resident at Gaunt, but the
third day following seeing that he declyned more and more, and that the
Physicians dispaired of his recovery, they advertised the Earl of the Estate
of his sickness, desiring him to come speedily to Bruges. The Earl came in
post, where being arrived, he found his father laboring for life, who within a
short The death of duke Philip of Bourgongne.
time gave up the ghost, the fifth of June 1467. being 73. years old, after
that he had governed the contries of Holland, Zeeland, Friseland and Henault,
as well with the title

He was a valiant Prince and of great courage, feared generally of his
enemies: he was of a tall stature, and of a good representation, sweet in his
speech, and yet subject Duke Philips qualities.
to choler, high minded, and not willing to be braued of any how great soever,
as he did often show to King Charles the 7. and Lewis the 11. of France: he
was very curious to entertain peace with his subjects, whom he loved, and
sought their quiet: so in his time all his countries flourished in wealth and
abundance* He was a wiseman, discreet, charitable and a great Almes-giuer, by
reason whereof he was called the good; but full of revenge and very ambitious:
desiring to make himself great by what means so-euer, as appeared by so many
falls bounds which he played to the contesse of Holland, his cousin. He exceeded
all his Predecessors, Dukes of Bourgongne in riches, Seigneories* greatness of
state and pomp: so as in his time there was no Christian Prince, that

The Duke being dead, the Earl of Charolois, his only son and sole heir,
called for the Seals, the which he presently brake. This done, after that he
had given order for the dead body until his return: he took post and went
to Lille, where he sealed up the chamber and the cofers of his fathers
treasure; appointing gardes that none might touch them: then he returned
presently to Bruges, where he performed the funeralles Arras, and his body
was laid in a coffin of lead, and left in the Church, until that it should
be transported from thence to Jerusalem, and interred near to the holy
Sepulcher: having given great gifts to the Covent of Friars of the said
Sepulcher. The Lady Isabel his wife dyed the 17. of December in the year 1471.
in the town of Air, and was interred in the cloister of Nuns at Gouvay by
Bethune: afterward her body and the duke her husbands, were carried to the
Chartreux by Digeon in Bourgongne, where as they lie under a stately tomb of
brass guilt, richly and curiously wrought. About that time, the art of
Printing was invented, whereof those of Harlem in Holland, Printing first
^uented.
challenge the first honor: yet afterward it was brought to perfection at
Mentz, by one Laurence Ianson of Harlem, the first inuentor: and ran from him
to Mentz with his tools; they write his name was John Faustus, as they of
Harlem do constantly affirm.

Carolus Dux Burgund.
CHARLES THE WARLIKE, THE 1. OF that Name, the 31. Earl of Holland and
Zeeland, Lord of Frizeland, Duke of Bourgongne, Brabant, Lembourg. Luxemburg,
Earl of Flanders, Arthois, Henault and Namur, Lord of Salins and Macklyn.
Of so many goodly Countries successor to my father,
Of three wives I had but one only heir.
At Montlehery I defeyted the French bravely,
At Macklyn I erected my heigh Parliament.
Being incensed I made the Liegeois feel my spleen,
If against the Cantons I had not taken Arms,
I had been more happy, and cruel death
Had not showed his force against me at Nancy.

The Argument of the fourth Book.
CHARLES Duke of Bourgongne, in the life of his father the good Duke Philip,
was called Earl of Charolois, the 31. Earl of Holland, etc. At his first
entry into Gant, the Inhabitants maintained against him, but he brought them
under. The Liegeois break the peace, and entered into war against the Duke;
he defeats them in Battle, whereupon the Town of Liege yielded. The Duke of
Bourgongne makes a peace with the French king, who comes to the Duke to
Peronne: he was in fear there least the Duke should have detained him. The
Liegeois arm a new against the Duke of Bourgongne: he forces King Lewis to
go with him to the fiege of their Town, the which he ruins, practices to
ruin the house of Brederode. The Duke makes war against the Frisons. He
entertaines many Princes with the hope of marrying with his daughter. The
french king and the Duke of Bourgongne, seek to deceive one another. The
Constable of S. Poll grows odious to the^ both, and they resolut to ruin him.
He seeks to reconcile the duke of Gelders and his son, and besieges Neuse. The
motive of the war against the Swisses. A truce for nine years betwixt the Duke
and the French king: they swear the Constables death, who in the end is
beheaded at Paris. The duke makes war against the Swisses: he is defeated by
them, first at Granson, then at Morat; wherewith the Swisses were enriched: the
Duke besieges Nancy, where he was slain in battle, by the treason of the
Earl of Campobachio, an Italian. Marie of Bourgongne his only daughter
succeeds him and was the 32. commanding in Holland, etc: The French Long
seazeth upon the towns of Piccardie and Arthois, with an intent to ruin her:
this Princess being in the Ganthois power, suffers much, putting her cheifest
servants and Counselors to death: the Flemings defeated, and the young Duke of
Gellers slain. A marriage betwixt Maximilian of Austria, the Emperor
Fredericks son, and the Lady Marie of Bourgongne.

CHARLES of Bourgongne, called the Warlike, for that he had been so great a
Warrior; succeeded unto Duke Philip of Bourgongne his father, in all his
Estates, and Siegneories; and was Duke of Bourgongne, Brabant, Lembourg, and
Luxembourg, Earl of Flanders, Arthois, Henault, Bourgongne, Holland, Zeeland
and Namur, Marquis of the Duke Charles pourchaseth the County of Ferrette.
holy Empire, and Lord of Friseland, Salins and Macklyn. His father having left
him great treasures of Gold and Silver, he bought (or as some write had in
morgage) of Sigismond Archduke of Austria, the Earldom of Ferret, in the
Country of Elsatia, near unto Basil in Swisserland, upon the Rhin, somewhat
near to the Duchy of Bourgongne, and too far from Sigismond to defend it
from the incursions of neighbor Princes. He was 33. year old when he
succeeded all these His wives.
goodly Estates. Katherine the daughter of King Charles the 7. of France, was
first promised him to wife, but she dyed young, before she was married.
Afterward he married Elizabeth daughter to the Duke of Burbon, his cousin, by
whom he had one daughter and only heir, called Marie. This Duchess
Elizabeth being dead, he married Marguerite daughter to Richard Duke of York,
and sister to Edward the fourth, King of England, by whom he had not any
children. His father gave him in his youth to maintain his estate the Earldome
of Charolois (which is in the Contie of Bourgongne, otherwise called Franch
Contie) with the Siegniors of Bethune, Arckel and Bellain. In his fathers life
time he wanne from the Sea, a great circuit of country, opposite to Rotterdam,
causing a Village to be built there, the which he called (with the whole
country) by his name Charolois, and so it continues unto this day. He had
begun a great fort in the town of Gorrichom, upon the River of Wahal, but
it remained during his life imperfit.

This Duke Charles, Earl of Holland, Zeeland, etc. His fathers funeralles
being Duke Charles takes posse^on of his coun tries.
finished, having settled his estate, and the affairs of his house; went in
person to take possession of all his Countries and Siegneories. Frist at Gaunt,
to be invested in the Earldom of Flanders. The Regents and chief of the
town went to meet The Ganthois mutine against their Duke.
upon the corn freed, and to have their privileges restored, which the Duke
his father had taken from them, with other demands: coming armed unto the
market place with their Enseignes, crying out that they would not part from
thence, until the Duke had granted what they demanded. Duke Charles seeing
this, and knowing with what people he had to deal, after he had spoken unto
them, seeing they departed not, The Duke yields to the Ganthois,
Gaunt, and went to take possession of his other Provinces: then he came to
Brusselles, whether the deputies of the mutinous Ganthois came unto him,
craving pardon for the excess committed by them against his greatness,
carrying him back the letters which they had forced from him, and offering to
make any reparation he should please. The Duke pardoned the offense, and would
advise of the reparation. The deputies The Ganthois submit themselves unto the
Duke.
departed with this prouisionall pardon. Two years after, the duke did
intimate unto them, that for a reparation of their offense, the Ganthois should
tear in pieces all the Enseignes, Banners, and Standards of their companies
and trades, the which was put in execution in the town of Brusselles, whether
they were brought. And as for their

A while after, those of Macklyn rebelled against their Governor and
Magistrates, whom they chased out of the Town. The duke went thither, with a
resolution to ruin A tumult at Macklyn.
the town, if the Nobility and best Bourgeses had not sued for mercy, and
obtained it; upon condition that they should deliver up all their privileges
into his hands: repair the house of John Muse Knight, which they had ruined,
and restore that which they had taken: and more-ouer to pay him for a fine
thirty thousand Lions of gold, The Liegeois break the peace.
it. In the mean time Lewis the eleventh the French King, labored all he
could by goodly offers and promises, to draw the duke of Bourgongne from the
alliance of Francis duke of Britain, and in that respect he would abandon the
Liegeois that were newly revolted: the which duke Charles refused. The King
insisting still upon the same demand, sent the Earl of Saint Pol Constable of
France, and the Cardinal of Balue his Ambassadors unto him. To whom the duke
made short dispatch; telling them plainly that he would not do any thing: and
in the presence of the said Ambassadors The Duke goes with an army against the
Liegeois.
directly with his army before Saintron. A little before they were in council
to determine what should be done with the 300. hostages, whether they should
put them to death or not. Some among others gave their opinions, that they
should dye. But the lord of Humbercourt, giving a more modest, mild, and wise
censure, to preserve the dukes honor and reputation, and for some other
respects, said, that the best course was to send them back; and at their
departure to let them understand what grace the duke had done them, having
their lives in his power: and that they should labor to draw the The Duke
sends back the 300, hostages.
people to a good peace: and in case the Liegeois would not yield unto it, yet
at the least (acknowledging the grace which he had done them) they should
promise never to carry to have made so fair an escape. The duke being camped
before Saintron ready to The Liege ois came to raise the ^eege at Saintron
hundred horse, and great store of Artillery, advanced to raise the seege: and
about two of the clock in the morning came unto a village that was strong of
it self, and partly enclosed with marish grounds, called Bretan. The camp
was advertised thereof, having a general alarm given them. The duke knowing
them to be so nere him, put his army in battle, and after that he had
disposed of them that should guard the camp, he placed 1200. men on either
side of the village of Bretan, and he himself stood right against them with
about eight hundred. The lord of Rauestein leading the A battle betwixt the
duke and the L^geois.
vant-gard, with some men at arms and Archers, and certain pieces of
Artillery, marched The Liegeois defeated.
being pursued by the dukes horse, but the darkness of the night saved them.

The duke being a conqueror, returned the same night unto his camp, before
Saintron, with his whole army, two days after this battle, the Liegeois
babbling was well cowled: for the beseeged, imagining that the defeat had been
much greater then it Saintron yielded.
was, yeedled the town, leaving their arms, they delivered ten men at the
dukes pleasure, Tongres yielded.
also their heads cut off, among the which there were five Hostages. From
thence the duke marched with his army before Liege, the which did much trouble
the inhabytants, some desyring to hold good, and to defend the City, saying
that they had men enough, especially a hardy knight, called Rasse de Lattre,
others seeing their country Liege yields unto the duke.
themselves to his mercy, except from fire and spoil. At the which there was
present the lord of Money Ambassador for the French King, and John Preuost his
Secretary, who were come to make the like demand and charge unto the duke, as
the Constable had done a little before. But they prevailed no more then he had
done.

The day of the reduction, the duke thinking to make his entry, sent first the
lord of Humbercourt, for that he had good acquaintance there: but the entry was
forbidden him that day, the mutiners opposing all they could against the peace.
The lord of Humbercourt remained in an Abbay in the suburbs, where he wrought
so pollitikely, as The Liegeois in doubt to deliver the town.
early the next day, many Hostages came unto him entreating him to come unto
the Palace, whereas the people were assembled, and that he would there swear
two points, whereof they were in doubt, which was that they should be free
from fire and spoil, and that presently after, they would deliver him the
ports. He presently advertised the duke thereof: from whom having received
commandment so to do: he went and swear for their better assurance, which
done the Liegeois commanded their The duke enters into Liege ^ke a conqueror.
was Master of the said town and City of Liege, into the which he entered
the day following, in great triumph: causing twenty fadomes of the wall to be
beaten down in his presence, and the ditch to be filled up against the
breach. There entered with The duke returns into his countries.
Gand, who with some other towns had begun to rebel. But now they received
Charles, as we

The duke being at Gand the French King sent many Ambassadors unto him to
persuade him to abandon the duke of Brittayne: and he on the other side sent
unto the King to excuse himself, saying plainly, that he could not do it.
This refusal did much displease the King, but especially the victory which he
had had against the Liegeois his allies (whom notwithstanding he had least
engaged). In the end Summer being come, the King burning with desire to ruin
the duke of Britain, caused his army to enter into his country. The duke of
Bourgongne having intelligence Balue came thither to him, but stayed not long,
having made some ouerture of a treaty, (the King tending to no other end but
to divide him from the other Princes) telling him that the dukes of Normandy
and Britain, would accord Duke Charles marches with an army to succor the
duke of Britain.
with the King without him. Duke Charles made him a short answer, which was,
that he was not come to field to make war against this King, but to succor
his Allies. Presently after the Cardinals departure, there came a Herald
called Brittayne, to the duke, bringing letters from the dukes of Normandy and
Brittayne, containing that King Lewis the leauenth desires to speak with
Charles duke of Bourgongne.
whose name was Frobisser. The king trusting his secrets very much unto this
man, told him that he desired much to speak with the duke, hoping to win
him: considering rebel again, by the persuasions of the Kings Ambassadors
which he had sent unto The French Ambassadors persuade the Liegeois to rebel.
have any such desire the accord made betwixt the King and the duke, would
distaste them. Yet notwithstanding all these difficulties the King resolved to
come to Peronne, having received a safe conduit from the dukes hand.

In the mean time the duke desirous to settle things in good order in the
country of Liege, sent their bishop his couzin (for whom all these broils
had happened) with the lord of Humbercourt his Lieutenant in that country,
with souldiars. The King coming to Peronne brought no guard, relying in the
safeguard which the duke An en^eruewe at Peronne be twixt the king and duke.
had given him: commanding the lord of Cords captain of the dukes gardes to

These four Noblemen entered into the town wearing read Bourgongne crosses,
thinking to come time enough to go and meet the King: but they came a little
to late. They went all to salute the duke: the lord of Bresse speaking for the
rest, beseeched him to take them into his protection, notwithstanding the Kings
coming, as it had been assured them in Bourgongne, promising him to be
faithful, and to serve him against all men. The duke granted their request by
word only, and thanked them. The Marshall of Bourgongne of the house
Neufchastell, who hated the King no less then the other Noblemen, (by reason
of the town of Espinal in Lorraine which the King had sometimes given unto
him, and afterward taken it away to give it to the duke of Calabria) was
lodged abroad in the country, as it had been appointed by the duke. The King
jealous of some Noblemen of Bourgongne.
Bourgongne which they carried, grew amazed and fearful, (you may see what
the remorse of a guilty conscience may do in a man (how mighty soever) that
has wronged an other) and sent to entreat the duke to lodge him in the
castle: saying that all those that were then arrived, were his enemies: The
duke was very glad, and caused the lodging which he demanded to be prepared,
assuring him upon his word. The dukes army was come about Peronne, almost as
soon as the King; the which the duke could not countermande, being already
come into Champagne, when they treated of this enteruiew. Yet these Princes
treated, as lovingly of their affairs as might be. Having spent three or four
days in this treaty, there came great news from Liege.

The King coming to Peronne had forgotten those two Ambassadors which he had
The Liegeois rebel again.
sent to Liege to stir them up against the duke wherein they wrought so well,
as the Liegeois having gathered together a great number of souldiars, went and
surprised Tongree, in the which they took their bishop and the lord of
Humbercourt, although they had a 1000. men to guard them, whereof some were
slain, others saving themselves by flight left all they had there. The lord of
Humbercourt yielded himself The cruelty of them of Liege.
to a knght called William of Wild, who promised to save his life, but he
could not do it, for presently after he was slain. The people joyful to have
their Prince prisoner, and some Chanoins whom they hated, put five of them to
death, and among the rest one named Robert, very familiar with their bishop,
whom they did cut into

These news were soon brought unto the duke, by some that had seen the lord
(...) ^uke transpo^ted with the news of Liege.


The King seeing himself coopt up in this little castle and many Archers at
the port, was not without fear: and that which did more terrify him, he was
lodged Lewis the II. in great fear and perplexity.
near unto a great Tower whereas the Earl of Vermandois had caused one of his
Predecessors Kings of France to die. The duke having thus caused the gates to
be shut, complained among his familiars, among the which was Philip of
Commines lord of Charles of Voisin a groom of his chamber and others: without
whose comfort, and the counsel which they gave him, it was likely he would
have played some bad part with the King, or at the least have lodged him in
that great Tower. These news were presently dispersed throughout the whole
town, and castle, so as in the end they came unto the Kings ears, who then
was in greater perplexity then ever, for he saw no means to escape from
thence: the castle gates were thus shut and guarded three days together,
during the which the duke never came unto the King. The first day there was
nothing but terror and amazement in the town, the second the duke was somewhat
pacified, and the third day he held a council most part of the day and
night. The King caused some to be dealt withal, who he thought

Most of the dukes council were of opinion, that he must keep the sauety
which he had given unto the King inviolable: others maintained flatly that they
must detain him prisoner, without any ceremony. Others advised him to send
speedely for the duke his brother, and to make a benificiall Peace for the
Princes of France. The King caused an offer to be made that he would give
Hostage, the duke of Bourbon, The French King os^ers Hostages to have h^s
l^berty.
the Cardinal his brother, the Constable and diverse others, to the end that
after the peace concluded he might go to Compiegne, and that he would cause
the The Dukes resolutions.
to be revenged of the wrongs and affrontes which the Liegeois had done and
to carry as many men and as few as he pleased. This answer did much please
the (...) Lewis (...) duke (...)


This peace thus made, the next day the King and the Duke parted from Peronne,
toward Cambray, and so into the country of Liege. It was then entering into
Winter, and a very bad season: yet the Duke burning with a desire of revenge,
having called a counsel, made his army to advance, and commanded the Marshall
of Bourgongne, to go and lodge in the city of Liege with all his Troops,
and if they refused him the entry, that he should force them if he could. The
people went out armed to The dukes A^ (...).
encounter him, but they were soon defeated, their Bishop during the combat
escaped, and retired to the Dukes camp.

There was within the town a Legate from the Pope, to pacify the troubles and
to examine the controversy, betwixt the Bishop and the people, who stood yet
upon terms of excommunication. This Legate in stead of pacifying them, (hoping
thereby to make himself bishop) provoked them to arms, and to commit stranger
follyes. But seeing this siege approach, and the apparent danger into the which
he was like to fall, thinking to fly away, was taken with 25. of his men well
mounted. The Duke being advertised The ^opes Legate taken p^soner.
thereof, willed them that had taken him prisoner, to make their profit of him,
as of a simple merchant, without making any show that the Duke knew it. But
when as they which guarded him were grown into some question, for his spoil
and ransom, and that they came to him to be judge betwixt them, being at
dinner he sent for him, doing

The Dukes Foreward marched directly toward the city, thinking to enter:
but thrust on by covetousness they desired the spoil rather, then to accept
of the composition that was offered them: thinking it needless to attend
either King or Duke, who were 8. leagues behind them. They advanced so fast, as
they arrived confusedly at night in one of the suburbs joining to the Port,
which was somewhat repaired. John of Vilet, a knight, and some other Captains
of the town seeing their disorder, issued forth by their ruined walls and
other places upon them, killing about 800. men at arms, and had done them
much more harm, if the Bourgongnons had not had four pieces The Duke of
Brou^ne (...) sus^ous o^ the king before Le^ge.
that he would enter into the city, or else that he would fly away before it
were taken: or being lodged so near him, he would do him some wrong. For the
preventing of all mischief, he laid 300. men in a^great Barn that was
betwixt both houses. Those of the Town gave them some Alarmes, but they were
nothing: till in the end, seeing (...) o^ the L^egeois.
with their net, and went directly to them that were in the guard at the King
and Dukes lodgings, who never were in greater danger: yet the resistance was so
great, that the Host of the Dukes lodging, and other leaders of these
Franchimonts were slain; and those of the town which issued forth to succor
them, beaten beacke into their Ports. The King and the Duke having escaped this
danger not foreseen, held Council the next day, what was to be done touching
the assault whereon they had resolved. The which did much trouble the King,
fearing that if the Duke should fail to take it, all the peace not 15* days
before, yet they could not trust one another.

The duke having resolved to give a general assault the next day, the King
propounded many great doubts and discreet considerations, very pleasing to the
Dukes counsel, for every one feared this assault, for the great multitude of
people that was within the oittie, and for their great courage. All which
difficulties they reported to the Duke, from the Kings mouth. The which he
took in ill part; saying, that the King did it to save them: but he would not
fail to give an assault in the morning, as he had resolved, foding the King
word: That if it pleased him to go to Namur, until the Town were taken, he
was contented: but for his part he would not go from thence until he had
seen the and of it. The King answered, That he would not go to Namur, but
would be present the next day with the rest: for without doubt, where there was
honor to be gotten, he would not (...) taxed of Cowardice. Every man rested
himself a little being armed: day being come, and drawing near to eight of
the clock,, the Duke caused a Canon and 2. Serpentins to be discharged, to
advertise them of the Vantgard, who were quartered on the other side far from
him: they heard the warning, and prepared themselves for the assault. The Dukes
trumpets began to sound, and the Coullors approached the wall. The King was in
the street well accompanied. When they came to join they found no resistance,
and there were but 2. or 3. men in guard: every man being gone to his home, not
thinking they would give an Assault on the Sunday: they found in every house
the cloth laid, Liege taken.
and the table covered. There was as little resistance whereas the Fore-warde
charged, who entered first. All the people being retired beyond the bridge of
the River of Meuse, Lambert, where his soldiers would have entered by force to
spoil it, under a color to take prisoners. And although he had set some
Gentlemen of his household to guard it, The Duke saues the great church from
spoil.
yet could they not be masters, but they offered to force the 2. doors. The
Duke seeing this outrage, slew one of his household servants with his own
hands, the which The king d^parts from Liege.
by the King, the which he did: whereupon the King took his leave of the
Duke, and he conducted him half a League.

The King being gone, the Duke commanded the town to be burnt, reserving only
the Churches and the Chanoins houses, in the which there were 4000. of the
Country of Luxembourg employed. He caused a great number of poor prisoners to
be cast into the River of Meuse, this done, they went to ruin the Country of
Franchimont, (whence are drawn the brauest soldiers of all the Country of
Liege) and was The great misery of the Liegeois.
day 4. Leagues from thence, where they might hear the cries and lamentations
of poor people, as if they had been within the City. The desolation
continued the next day, until it was quite burnt, except the Churches and some
300. houses of Chanoins and Priests, which was the cause it was so soon
re-edified, for the people returned Aix la Chapelle submit themselves to the
duke of Bourgongne.
these wars given some aid and assistance unto the Liegeois, the duke
meaning to be revenged, threatened them. But the Regents of the town went to
him to Maestricht, to ask him forgiveness, offering him all service in time to
come, and promising to pay him 80000. florins of the Rhine in three years, and
so the duke was pacified.

In the year 1469. at the suit of the bishop and Chanoins, the duke
consented to the restoration of the town of Liege: whereas he placed for
Governor Guy of Brymeux, 1469. Liege re-edified.
Great Princes come to h^ duke of Bourgongne.
whether many great Princes and Ambassadors came to visit him. Among others
Sygismonde duke of Austria Brother to the Emperor Frederic. The Prince of
Trebisonde in Greece, the Palatin of Rhine; the Marquis of Ferrara. The duke of
Cleues and the lord of Rauestein his brother: the duke of Somerset an
Englishman and many other great Noblemen Barons and Knights. The bishop of
Liege, Vtrecht, Tournay, Pouille and Salerne the dukes confessor. The Popes
Ambassador, which was his Nephew his Sisters Son, accompanied with the duke
of Mantoua: one from the Venetians Charles accompanied with all these Princes,
writ unto Adolph Prince of Geldres (who kept his own father in prison)
entreating him that all excuses set aside, he would come and honor that Noble
company with his presence, hoping to persuade him to deliver his father out of
prison. But this Prince doubting the worst: excused himself upon his Nobility
and Adolph Prince of Geldres refuses to come to the Hage.
towns, entreating the duke not to take it in ill part, if he came not, for
certain special causes.

At that time there fell great contention betwixt the duke of Bourgongne and
them of Vtrecht; the duke demanding of them the country of Goyland and all the
goods, A controversy betwixt the duke of Bourgongne and them of Vtrecht.
lands and signeuries belonging unto the deceased James of Gaesbeke, the which
quarrel Gerard Ensem, a famous man borne at Enchuysen: who was well received
by the States of the country, sending unto the duke the Abbots of Lidlum,
Stauerea and Florencampe, with some of their Nobles and deputies of towns to
the Hage and there accorded with him. The which was done and the troubles ended
by the wisdom of these deputies, who were mediators betwixt the duke and the
commons of Friseland. In those times the lord of Brederode, and Ghysbrecht his
brother Provost Cathedral of Vtrecht, were in great credit with The lord of
Brederode in great credit with the Bishop of Vtrecht.
the bishop, and governed the whole city: so as by their means the bishop
did

In the year 1470. those whom the two brethren of Brederode and their Allies,
1470. The brethren of Brederode falsely accused.
had of a long time banished out of Vtrecht, seeking to be revenged, and to be
restored to the town, made many false reports unto the duke of Bourgongne,
and the Bishop although these two brethren were exceedingly well beloved in
the town of Vtrecht Walrad Drossort of Hagenstein, Renold Baylife of Vosholl,
Henry, Hans and John the younger. This done The Lord of Brederode and his
brother taken prisoner by the bishop.
the Bishop went to Vtrecht, and seized the same day of Ghysbercht his
brother whom he carried likewise to Wyke: releasing four of his bastards and
retayning only Walrad.

The enemies of these Lords of Brederode, gave it out generally that they were
Traitors, and that if the Bishop had not committed them to prison, within three
days they had expelled him his Bishopric; the which they spoke, the more to
incense the Bishop and the duke of Bourgongne against them. But they were
held to be their Practices to ruin the house of Breberode.
own practices, to have some color to ruin this house of Brederode, by
these slanderous and false reports. For what color or likelehood was there,
that these two brethren (who knew they had private enemies within the
country) would have attemped any thing against the duke of Bourgongne, (for
what touched the Bishop touched him) whom they knew to be mighty: who had
even newly forced the French King, and ruined the Liegeois: who were ten times
as powerful, as all those

Informations were sought for in all places at the Bishops charge, to ruin
them. The Bishop did also cast into prison John of Amerongen Baylife of
Vtrecht. He would also willingly have laid hold of the Vicont of Montfort,
but he retired himself. Walrad bastard to the Lord of Brederode was tortured,
having it given him The bastard of Brederode put to the torture.
four times most cruelly: but he would never confess any thing of that which
they demanded, persisting still in the negative. They did also put John of
Amerongen to the rack upon the like interrogatories, who confessed something
with the torments: whose confession was sent to the duke of Bourgongne, who
grew The Baylife of Vtrecht tortured.
Yolante wife to the lord of Brederode, who by the intercession of the Lady
Isabella of Portugal, the dukes mother, and some Noblemen, was a suitor unto
him, that it would please him to take some knowledge of her husbands cause, and
that (being a Noble knight of the Golden fleece) his process might be
adjudged and ended by other knights and his Noble Peers, and according to the
Articles of the said order, the which was denied her: whereby it appeeres that
they began betimes to infringe them, and made way for the Spaniards, who
have broken them since.

Walrad bastard of Brederode having been so cruelly tortured, yet confessed
nothing, The Bastard of Brederode escapesout of to prison.
That Walrad his Bastard and John of Amerongen had confessed them, and upon
this confession suffered death by the sword, and that he must confess them in
like sort, and in so doing he should have grace. The That he could not say
any thing to those Articles: and that if Walrad and Amerongen had confessed
them, they should have been confronted with him before their death. These
four Commissionars, (Judges The lord of Berderode put to the racks.
picked out to seek the ruin of this poor Noble Gentleman) not content with
this answer caused him to be laid upon the Rack, stretching him in such sort
thrice together, You may cause me to die in this marterdome, but you can never
force me to say any thing but the truth. The duke of Bourgongne hearing what
had been done unto him (for the knights of the order made great complaints
unto him) having seen his confessions and denialls: he appointed that his
process should be vewed and examined by the knights of the order, and he
himself heard verbally in his defenses: there were therefore sent He is sent
for to the duke to be tried by his Peers.
John of Berghes knight and John Halewyn conseller, to bring him to the duke.
These two came to Wyke for the lord of Brederode and the Baylife Amerongen:
before they were delivered, the bishop would have the lord of Brederode put
again to He is tortured before he goes.
two whole days; he was once stripped and laid upon the bank: but seeing they
could draw nothing from him without greater torments, nor from Amerongen, they
suffered them to go with the said Comissioners, who led them to Berghen upon
Some to the duke, but they found him not there, being gone to the seege of
Amiens, so as they conducted them to Ruppelmond in Flanders, whereas they were
detained almost a whole year.

At the dukes return the process being referred to the judgments of the
knights Engelbert Earl of Nassau Barron of Breda, the lords of Crequy, Lalain
and The lord of Brederode freed by his Pe^res.
others, to the number of twelve Barrons, the said lord of Brederode was
adjudged free and absolved of all crimes imposed upon him, and was restored to
all his Estates, goods and honors, to the great content of all these Noblemen
and knights, who complained much of the great wrong that had been done him:
and he was honorably received of all men. He lived not above two years after,
he died in the year 1473.

Two years after John of Amerongen was found innocent of the crimes that were
objected against him, notwithstanding his confession upon the Rack, and in
like sort Am^ongen Baylife of Vt recht ^eed.
absolved, enlarged and restored to his Office of Baylife, to the great content
of the Bourgeses of Vtrecht. As for Ghysbrecht Provost Cathedral, brother to
the lord of Brederode, before he could recover his liberty, he was forced to
resign his Prouostship to an other, and to swear never to keep his residence
in Vtrecht: the which having performed, he was set at liberty in the year
1470. and went to live Ghysbrecht Provost of Vtrecht delivered.
at Breda, where he died a year after, and was buried at the Chartreux by
Geertruydenbergh. Charles not satisfied with the annual contribution or
tribute, which the Frisons paid him according to the last appointment, writ
unto them that they should send their deputies to the town of Enchuysen the
seventh of April 1470. to hear what should be propounded unto them on his
behalf. They sent their Deputies. But the duke being troubled with the wars
of France, came not in person, but A meeting a^ Enchuysen with the (...).
sent Philip of Wassenare lord of Woerburch and others his commissioners. There
were many things ambiguously and doubtfully propounded and debated, and so many
cauillations found out to intrappe the Frisons, as it did much displease the
Noblemen of Friseland, who retired themselves, and would not treat in that
fashion, desiryng to go plainly and roundly to work. Yet the Clergy and
Deputies of towns charge from the Estates to yield to above three Liards or a
soulz at the most: the The Frisons mean to defend themselves aga^ their (...).
Duke Charl^s resolves to force the Frisons.
arms, and to land in Friseland. But it fell out happily for the Frisons, that
Edward the forth, King of England, being expelled his realm, came into
Zeeland, to the duke his brother in law, to demand succors of him against the
Earl of Warwike who had Edward, the which carried him back into England.
Afterward the duke had so great wars against the French, Suisses and
Lorrains (in the which in the end he was slain,) as the Frisons remained in
peace without any further disturbance.

In the year 1470. Lewis the leauenth the French King, had a great desire to
be revenged 1470.
of the brauary which the duke of Bourgongne had done him at Peronne,
practicing under hand to have the towns upon the River of Some revolt: the
which being hard to effect by secret practice, he must attempt it by open
war, true it is that he had just cause to apprehend the dukes affronts at
Peronne, who had forced him to make War begun betwixt ^wis of ^ance an^ ^he
duke o^ ^gongne.
The duke of Bourgongne adiourned to appear at Pa^s.
against him. An Vssher of the Parliament went to Gand, to adiorne him (being
under the souerainty of the crown of France) which he did at his coming from
the mass: whereat he was much amazed and discontented: having caused the Usher
to be put in prison, yet soon after he suffered him to depart without any
further harm.

The duke being advertised that the King came to assail him, leauied a great
number Baldwyn of Bourgongne his bastard brother, and some of his household
servants, leaving him, went to serve the French King, this did amaze him more,
fearing it had been of some greater consequence, for at that time the
Constable put Saint Quentin The towns of Picardy revolt from the duke.


These two chief towns of Amiens and Saint Quentin being yielded: there was
an other practice: the Constable laboring to make a marriage betwixt the duke

Fifteen days after the yielding up of Amiens, the duke of Bourgongne went to
field near unto Arras, and notwithstanding any resistance, having past the
river of Some at Pygneur, where he did beat the Kings Archers, he went and
lodged about Amiens, where he made three camps, saying, that he would see if
the King would The duke of Bourgongne comes before Amiens.
come and fight with him, and in the end he approached so near to it, as his
Cannon A ^ruce betwixt the King and the duke.
were dismissed; the King retyring into Touraine: the Earl of Guienne into his
The duke of Bourgongne entertaines many Princes with the hope of his daughter.
Maximilian of Austria, Son to the Emperor Frederick and others. But during
the treaty of this great and Noble marriage with the duke of Guienne, there
was still some new enterprise made by him against the King his brother, to
blind the duke of Bourgongnes eyes.

During all those dissimulations betwixt the King, the duke of Guienne, the
Constable and the duke of Bourgongne, intermixed with some petty wars betwixt
the French Charles duke of Guienne brother to the French King, died, the which
brake the peace betwixt the King and the duke of Bourgongne, having been They
fall again to arms.
sworn, by the means of Peter Dariole Chancellor of France, and the lord of
Craan: but the King hearing of the death of his brother, refused to swear it.
Whereupon the duke to recover these two principal towns of Amiens and S.
Quintin, entered with an army into Piccardie, and took Nesle, Roye and
Montdidier: then he marched with his army into Normandy, thinking to take
Beauvois iu Beauvoisin, against the which he did all The duke of Bourgongne
takes Nesle, Roye and Montdidier.
he could to force it, but prevailed not: from thence he came to Eu and Saint
Vallery,

It was an usual custom betwixt the King and the duke of Bourgongne, ever
when as winter approached, to make a truce for six months: according to which
custom they made one, which the Chancellor of Bourgongne, with his Adjuncts
did negotiate A truce betwixt the king and the duke of Bourgongne.
and treat. During which treaty they did murmor on both sides against the
Earl of Saint Poll, the King and the chief of his council grew in hatred of
him, and the duke of Bourgongne much more: for he had been the cause of the
taking of Amiens The Constable ^owes odious to both parties.
began he was his capital enemy. Moreover he would in a manner have
forced him to marry his daughter to the duke of Guienne.

He had yet an other cause of spleen against him, for whilst the duke was
before Amiens, Baldwyn of Lanoy Knight of the order of the golden fleece: for
it was not then the manner to use burning on either side, which made the duke
to set fire on some parts of Picardy and Normandy. They divised therefore some
mean to be rid of the Constable of Saint Poll. On the Kings behalf there was
an ouerture made by some that adrest themselves to some serving the duke, that
were the Constables enemies, and who hated him no less then their Master,
every one exclayming on him as the Author of the wars. Then they began to
make a collection of all that he had said against these two Princes: they
examined his actions, descouered his practices and sought his ruin. All that
year during the truce, was spent in practices against the Constable, for the
which there was a meeting appointed at Bouines in the country of Namur: John
Hoberge The assembly at Bouines against the Constable.
afterward Bishop of Eureux, and for the duke of Bourgongne came the
chancellor of Bourgongne and the lord of Humbercourt, the last hated him
mortally, for a lie which the Constable had given him in a conference of State
betwixt the King and the dukes men, the which did afterward cost him his head.

This assembly of Bouines was in the year 1474. In the which it was concluded
by both their deputies, that the Constable for certain reasons set down in
writing, was 1474.
guilty of high treason against both these Princes: and all that should serve
or assist him. Moreover the King should give unto the duke the town of S.
Quentin withal his treasure and mouables that should be found in the Realm of
France, with all the lands The King and the Constable talk together.
that he came armed for the hatred and fear of him, from thence the Constable
went to lodge at Noion, and the next day at Saint Quentin, well reconciled as
he said and thought. The King hearing what the world said of this his
conference with the Constable, he excused himself for his folly and baseness,
to have treated with his subject Adolph of Geldres detained his father Duke
Arnold in prison in the year 1464. which was the cause of great wars. The
Duke of Bourgongne did often seek to reconcile them, but he could not: in the
end The duke of Bourgongne seeks ^o reconcile the duke of Geldres and his
son.
the Pope and the Emperor dealt in it, commanding the Duke of Bourgongne to
draw Duke Arnold out of prison: the which he did upon a sommons made to
Prince Adoph, Dourlans to the duke of Bourgongne, at such time as the French
King was about Amiens. Prince Adolph his Son appeered also upon the same
adiournement. Once among the rest, being called into the dukes chamber,
thinking to reconcile them in a great assembly of his counselors, where they
pleaded their cause: the good old duke presented his gage of battle unto his
Son. The duke of Bourgongne (for the alliance, which Prince Adolph had The
old' duke of Geldres offers the combat to his Son.
made in his house, and through the reco^mendations of the deceased duke Philip
his Father) desired much to reconcile them, yet he favored the young Prince
most, offering unto him the title of governor of Bourgongne, and the country of
Gelders withal the M^bour, Gardien or Regent of the country. The lord of
Argenton in his memorials writs, that he was commanded by the duke of
Bourgongne to deliver this message unto Prince Adolph who answered, That he
had rather have cast his Father headlong into a well, and himself after, The
cruel and foolish answer of the duke of Geldres.
then make such an agreement. That his Father had been duke forty four
years, and that it was now time he were in his turn, but he would willingly
yield him 3000. florins a year upon condition that he should never come into
the Country of Geldres, with many more wicked, and impious speeches. The Duke
of Bourgongne hearing the villainous speeches of this young Prince, was very
much moved, and would force him to make an end with his Father. But as the
duke (after the taking of Amiens) parted to go to Hesdin, this Prince attyred
himself like a Frenchman, and escaped away with one man in his company to go
into his country; passing a bridge near unto Namur, where there was a certain
Toll to be paid, he paid a Florin for his passage. But a Priest knowing
him, discovered him to the Tol-gatherer, who stayed him, and caused Prince
Adolph of Geldres prisoner.
Arnold his Father was very joyful of his imprysonment: who to revenge the
injury and outrage that Duke Arnold resign^ his duchy of Gel dres to the duke
of Bourgongne.
had been done him, resigned his Duchy of Geldres to the duke of Bourgongne,
who kept his son prisoner: who took possession thereof, notwithstanding the
great resistance he found there, and inioyed it until his death.

The duke of Bourgongne after the Inuestiture of this Duchy of Geldres,
returned into his country, having his heart swollen with pride, to have
enlarged his territories and increased his revenues, with this goodly Province.
He began to have some taste in these matters of Germany; for that the Emperor
Frederic was a quiet still man, who Two Competitors for the bishopric of
Cologne.
the one was brother to the Landtgraue of Hessen, the other kinsman to the
Palatin of Rhine. The duke of Bourgongne would hold the Palatins party, and
undertook to put him into possession by force, hoping to get some share. And
in the same year 1474. he went to beseege Nuys five leagues from Cologne, and
of that Diocese; a strong Town, in the which the Landtgraue of Hessen
himself was, and many of his Kinsmen and friends, to the number of 1800.
horse. The duke had never such Nuys bes^eged by the duke of Bourgongne.


This German army was great: for all the Princes both spiritual and
temporal, An army of Germans to (...) Nuys.
with the Bishops and Towns had sent their forces. The Emperor was seven
Mediators for a peace at Nuys.
camp unto an other to mediate a peace. The King of Denmark came also himself
in person and lodged at Greuenbrooke in the country of Iuilliers, who labored
what he could. But the duke would give no ear to any, contynuing still
obstinate at this siege, doing what he could to take it. The Duke being thus
obstinate, there was war Sigismond of Austria, with the help of the Diverse
make war against the duke of Bourgongne.
Swissee and those of Strausbourg, took the contie of Ferret, and made war
in Bourgongne, took Blaumont and besieged the castle of Hericourt belonging to
the Marshall of Bourgongne, of the house of Neufchastel. The Bourgongnons went
to succor it, but they were defeated, and the Swisses returned into their
country laden with spoils.

In the beginning of the year 1475. the Duke holding yet his siege before
Nuise, the truce ended betwixt him and the French King, the which the King
would willingly The French king makes war in Picardie.
have prolonged, but seeing it could not be, he made open war in Picardie,
took James of S. Pol, Brother to the Constable of France; the siegnior of
Contay, heir to the old Lord of Contay, the Lord of Carenchy and other
Gentlemen.

The French King had entreated the Emperor to make a mutual promise, not to
make a peace with the Duke of Bourgongne, one without another, councelling him
to seize upon all his lands, which held of the Empire: as Brabant, Gelders,
Lembourg, Luxembourg, and that he would seize upon those that are held of the
Crown A wise an swear of the Emperor.
answered wisely to his Ambassadors: telling a Tale of two companions which
soulde the Bears skin to their Host, before the beast was taken; as if he
would say, come as you have promised, we will take the man, and then divide
his goods. The Constable was much grieved for the taking of James of S. Pol his
brother: but this mischance came not alone; for at the same instant the Earl
of Roussy his son, Governor of Great mischances fallen to the Constable.
Bourgongne for the Duke was taken: and there withal dyed the Constables wife,
a virtuous lady and sister to the Queen of France, who had been a great support
to him. After these three mischances he was never assured, living in contynuall
fear, and swimming

The Duke having continued his siege a whole year before Nuise. 2. things
pressed him extremely to rise: the first was the war, which the French King
made against him in Picardie; the second was the goodly and great army the King
of England made The reason^ why the duke of Bourgongne did raise his siege from
before Nuise.
at his request, having always persuaded him to come into France, and could
never induce him unto it until that time: and now the King of England and his
Nobles were much discontented, for that the Duke stayed so long before Nuise,
and came not to join with them, using threats unto them, considering their
great expenses and the approaching winter. The Duke of Bourgongne held it for a
great glory, that this great A peace betwixt the Emperor and the Duke of
Bourgongne.
peace betwixt the Emperor and the Duke of Bourgongne: the Town of Nuise was
delivered into the Legates hands, to dispose thereof as the Court of Rome should
decree: the which had yielded to his mercy through famine, if he had
continued but ten days longer, but he was forced by the threatenings of the
English, to make composion, and to raise his Camp.

In the mean time the Constable of France was much perplexed, thinking of the
wrong he had done to the Duke of Bourgongne, touching S. Quintin, and he was
out Loup of Angiers for his safety, which he refused to do: which drove him
into despair. At this time the King of England past at Calais with his army,
and the Duke of Bourgongne raised his siege from before Nuys, and went to the
English with a small company, sending his Army to refresh

After the English being repast the Seas; the French King retired to Vervins,
upon the fronters of Henault. The Duke of Bourgongnes Chancellor and other his
Ambassadors were at arms in Henault. The King desired now to have peace with
the Duke; and upon some difficulties that were propounded, would himself
treat personally with the said Ambassadors: in the end a peace was concluded
for nine years. But the Ambassadors beseeched the King, that it might not A
peace betwixt the French king and the Duke of Bourgongne.
Resolutions against the Constable.
begun to be much amazed, sending to the Duke of Bourgongne, to beseech him
to send him his letters of safeguard, to go and confer with him of some
matters of

This man who was wont to be great in credit and authority, did then study
which might be his best course to fly and save himself: holding many
consultations with his friends upon this point: in the end, he resolved to
go to the Duke of Bourgongne, and went to Mons in Henault with some twenty
horse, whereas the siegnior of Aymeries The Constable flies into Henault.
(his dear friend) was great Baliffe, and stayed there, attending news from
the Duke, who was then in war against the duke of Lorraine, for the causes
before mentioned. The King advertised that the Constable was gone into Henault,
seized upon Saint Quintin, to prevent all reconciliation with the Duke: who
hearing of these The Constable delivered to the Kings men, and beheaded.
the contens of his letter and promises; the which he delayed until he might
see an end of the siege of Nancy, yet fearing least the King should hinder him
in his enterprise of Lorraine, he writ unto his Chancellor, and to the Lord of
Humbercourt (both mortal enemies to the Constable) that they should go unto
Peronne, and at a certain day, deliverer the Constable, to such as should be
sent by the King: commanding the Siegnior of Aymeries to deliver him to them.
The Constable (according to

The Duke of Bourgongne leaving Lorraine, being angry, went to be revenged of
The Duke of Bourgongne goes against the Swisses.
Sigismond of Austria to recover the Earldome of Ferrette: executed the
siegnior of Hagenbach (otherwise called Arquembault) in the Town of Basil:
taken much land from the Earl of Romont, and the Town of Granson from the
Lord of Chasteau-Guyon. The Swisses hearing that he came to assail them, sent
twice unto them to make great offers of submission,

The Duke contrary to the opinion of his counsel at war, resolved to go
and meet them at the entry of the mountains, being in a place of great
advantage for him. He sent a 100. Archars to guard a certain passage of these
mountains, and he himself advancing, incountred the Swisses, the greatest part
of his army being in the plain. The first rank of his Troops, meaning to
retire and join with the body of his Army, The Duke defeated at Granson.
Swisserland a very poor Contrie in those times.
making suit unto the Duke to divert him from this war, said unto him: That
there was nothing to he gotten from them, their country being most poor and
barren: that he should have no good prisoners there; and that he did think
the bits of his horses and the spurs of his army were of more value, then
all the goods of the Inhabitants of the Country, or the ransom of them all in
general (if they were prisoners) could amount unto.

After this defeat, the Duke was careful to gather together his scattered
Army, so The Duke of Bourgongne defeated at Morat.
with lying three days so near the Duke idly, for that he kept himself in
a place illustrissimi Burgundionum Ducis Exercitus Moratum obsidens ab
Heluetiis fusus, An Epitaphe of the duke of Bourgongnes Army.
hic sui monumentum reliquit: Anno Domini, 1476. Before this Chapel there was
a Ditch great and spacious, upon the Lakes side, (which had at the least, a
hundredth foot in circomference) where as by the report of those which be near
1467.
dwellers had beeene buried all those that had been drowned in the Lake, that
number

The Duke having lost these two famous battles, in the year 1476. in less
then 3. weeks, he retired himself into Bourgongne, to a place of pleasure,
called Riuiere, where he remained above six weeks, having a desire to raise
a new army: yet he went slowly to work, and continued there in a manner
sollitarie. During which abode, many places were recovered from him in
Lorraine, as Vandemont, Espinal and others, N^ (...) by (...) o^ Love.
the small towns thereabouts yielded unto him: yet the Duke of Bourgongne
held Pont a Mouson still, which is within four leagues of it. In the end,
though the duke of Lorraines army before Nancy were very weak, yet through
the imporunitie of the soldiers that were within the Town, the siegnior of
Bieures, a brave Knight, of the house of Croy, was forced to yield it, upon
composition to depart with bag and baggage. Two days after the yielding up of
the Town, the duke of Bourgongne came well accompanied, having received new
Supplies from Luxembourg and his other

The Duke of Bourgongne went again to besiege Nancy, whereas he grew obstinate
Nancy besieged by the duke of Bourg^ne.
again, as in all his former enterprises: during this miserable and wretched
siege, (for so might it well be called, both for himself, his daughter and his
subjects) many of his own men began to practice against him, his enemies being
increased of every side, and his friends grown cold: and among others,
Nicholas of Campobachio, borne in the realm of Naples, and banished (for that
he had been of the Angeuin faction) one of his chief Captains, who had great
command and credit in the Army: this Earl (from the duke his masters first
siege before Nancy) had had intelligence with the duke of Lorraine, a near
kinsman, and next heir to the house of Aniou, after the Rene, his granfather
by the mother, promising to work so at the siege, The E^le of (...) ^yes (...)
^ster.
as there should want victuals, and other necessary provisions in the Duke of
Bourgongnes camp: which he might well effect, considering the credit he had
in the Dukes Army. The discourses of all whose practices and treasons, I omit
for breuities sake, being written at large in the French Inventory.

The duke of Lorraine having treated with the Cantons, for men to fight with
the duke of Bourgongne before Nancy, all the Towns were inclined to assist
him; but there wanted nothing but money. The French King did comfort him by his
Ambassadors 4000 Pounds ste^ling.
which he paid, the towns did furnish him, some at their own charge,
besides he had a great number of voluntary french Gentlemen: with all which
Troops he made a goodly Army, and went to lodge at Saint Nicholas of
Orenuille, near unto Nancy, where they camped some few days.

The 5. of January 1477. the Duke of Lorraine dislodged with his army, to go
1477.
and fight with the Duke of Bourgongne. The same day the Earl of Campobachio,
the practices and treasons of Campobachio, it could not have held out

The Duke of Bourgongne being advertised that the Duke of Lorraine, the
Germans and the Swisses marched, held a small Counsel, although it were not
his custom, but to do all things of his own head. Many advised him to retire
to Pont at Mouson, not far from thence, and that he should lodge his Troops
in such places as he held about Nancy: saying that as soon as the Germans
had victualled Good counce^l given to the Duke, but not follovved.
this Town they would retire, and the Duke of Lorraines money would be spent
(who should not be able in a long time to gather so many men again together)
neither could their victualling be so great, but they would want before that
half the winter were spent: and in the mean time, the Duke of Bourgongne
should raise

The Earl of Campobachio being come to the Duke of Lorraine, the Swisses and
Germans sent him word, that he should retire; and that they would not

The two Armies coming to join, the Duke of Bourgongnes army (which The
battle of Nancy where the Duke of Bourgongne was defeated and slain.
had been lately twice defeated) being few in number and ill appointed, was
presently Naucler writes that he had seen the said man.

The French King was well advertised of the defeat, whereof they did hourly
expect some news. The Lord of Lude (who lay without Plessis, where the King
then was) heard the first news by the Post, which the Lord of Craon and
others had sent, but no man did assure the Dukes death: but only the defeat
before Nancy, and that he was fled. The King at the first was sole transported
with joy at these news, as he knew not how to contain himself; yet he did
think that if he were taken by the Germans, they would compound with him
for some great sum of money, which he would easily pay them. On the other
side he was in great care, if the Duke were defeated and escaped, whether he
should seize on the Duchy of Bourgongne, advertise the duke that he did it
with an intent to preserve it, that the Germans might not destroy it: for
that the said Duchy did hold of the Souerainty of the crown of France, the
which he would not have fallen into the hands of the Germains, and that what
soever he should take, he would yield unto him again, which few men would
believe.

Duke Charles had been a Noble and valiant Prince, well bred up in his youth,
and The disposition of the duke of Bourgongne.
instructed in the tongues and liberal Arts, yea in Astronomy and Music, a man
well spoken and of a good grace, exceeding chaste, but very high minded, who
would not endure any injury of his equal, nor of any greater Prince then
himself, exceeding cholerike froward and wilful: he left one only daughter
and heir.

(...) Maria Charlesia.


My father being deceast I was young left,
A Pupil to the Cleuoys for a while
But tho of father I was quite bereft
Me, Maximilian, gave the marriage style:
I him, my faith and dowry: In years five
I became Mother of three Children fair,
But being twenty six I left to live,
My soul unto her Maker did repair:
Bruges reserved my bones, my corpse lay there.
MARY DVTCHESSE OF BOVRGONgne, Duchess of Brabant, Lembourg, Luxembourg and
Geldres, Countess of Flanders, Arthois, Henault, Namur, and of Zutphen, Lady
of Sallins and Macklin, Marquis of the holy Empire.
MARY the daughter and only heir to Charles duke of Bourgongne, (called the
Warlike) succeeded unto her father in all his countries,

After that Lewis the leauenth, the French King had certain news of the dukes
death, he sent the bastard of Bourbon, Admiral of France, and Philip of The
French King seizes of the towns of Piccardy and Arthois.
Comines lord of Argenton, into Piccardie, with commission to receive all those
that would submit themselves under his obedience. These two Noblemen went to
Abeuille, which was one of the towns given to duke Philip (called the good) at
the peace of Arras, by King Charles the seventh, the which for want of heirs
Mas^e should returno John de la Vacquery first President of the Court of
Parliament at Paris. These Noblemen entering into conference, the Frenchmen
demanded to have the city opened for the King, and to be Mary of Bourgongne,
daughter to their deceased Prince, who was lawfully descended from the Lady
Marguerite of Flanders, her great great Grandmother, who was Countess of
Flanders and Arthois etc. the which was married to Philip the Hardy duke of
Bourgongne, son to King John of France, and brother to King Charles the fifth:
Beseeching the King to entertain the truce, which continued yet betwixt him
and

The French King marched with his army toward Picardy, joyful by the death of
the duke of Bourgongne,) to see himself victorious over all his enemies,
whereof the duke was the mightiest, who with his father duke Philippe had been
in war with him and King Charles the seventh his Father for the space of 32.
years, having all his lands and Seigneuries joining upon France, and his
subjects disposed and accustomed to John and Nicholas of Calabria, of the
Earls of Prouence and Mary their Cousins, and of the Earl of Armaignac, who
had been slain at Estore, of all which the King had inioyed their goods and
possessions, both moouables and immoouables, Charles the eight) to the Lady
Marie Princess of Bourgongne, daughter and only heir to the deceased duke,
although he were then but fifteen years old, and she eighteen. But when
he did see the father dead, all his thoughts and cogitations were only to
spoil this Orphan Princess of her fathers inheritance: wherein God did not
bless his actions nor his designs, the which were for the most part
overthrown by the marriage which the said Princess made with Maximilian
Archduke of Austria, Son to the Emperor Frederic, as you shall presently
hear.

The King being entered in Piccardie with his army, the towns of Peronne, Ham,
Lew^ (...). enters into Picardy with an a^my.
and Bohain were yielded unto him. He sent his Barber, called Oliver le Dain
unto Gand, and Robinet of Audensort unto Saint Over, where they had friends, to
put

Oliver the Kings Barbar, who termed himself Earl of Meulan (a little town
nere unto Paris, whereof he was captain) carried letters of credit to the
Princess of The (...) comm^on by the ^ing to (...).
Bourgongne, and had commission to confer with her secretly, and to persuade
her Philippe and Charles had taken from them. Having remained at Gand some
time, he was sent for to deliver his charge: he went and delivered his
letters of credit to the Princess, being set betwixt the duke of Cleues and
the Bishop of Liege, and accompanied by a great number of Noblemen. She read
his letter, and Master Oliver was commanded to deliver his charge openly, who
answered, that he had no commission but to speak privately unto the Princess.
They said unto him, that it was not the custom especially to so young a
Princess: yet he persisted in his first speech, and they answered him, that
he should be forced ^o deliver, whereupon he grew fearful: making some
excuse, and so departed without delivering of his charge.

Some of this council skorned him by reason of his old age: and for the
speeches he used, especially the Bourgesses of Gand, who knew him to well,
being borne in a nere Village, and did him some affronts and disgraces,
threatening to cast him into ^he (...) out of Gand.
the River, the which they would have done, if he had not speedily fled. At
his departure from Gand he went to Tournay, being then a Neuter town, but
much affected to the French. He knew the said town to be near to both
countries, and fit to annoy either party, so as they might draw in any
souldiars, (the which the (...) would not have yielded unto, having never
showed themselves Oliver sent secretly for the Lord of Mour (whose Son was
Baylife of the afforesayd Town, but was not resident there) (...) he should
come at a certain time appointed, and bring with him his company of men at
arms, which were at Saint Quintins and some other soldiers out of those
parts, who failed not to come at the prefixed hour to the town Tournay
brought under the Kings obedience.
Oliver with forty men, who partly by love, and partly by force, caused the
Bar to be opened, and so gave entrance to the men at arms; wherewith the
people were somewhat content, but the Magistrate nothing at all; of the which
he sent seven or eight prisoners to Paris; where they remained during the
Kings life. Thus was Tournay put into the Kings hands by the dexterity of his
Barber; wherein a wiser or a greater personage then himself might have failed.

The King being at Peronne, there came unto him from the Princess, certain
Ambassadors, which were of the principal men about her: whereof the chief were
William Ambassadors from the Princess of Bourgongne to the King.
Hugonet her Chancellor, the Lord of Humbercourt, the Lord of Gruythuyse
Governor of Holland, and the Lord of Vere of Zeland, and many Prelates and
Deputies of The King regards not the marriage of the Daulphin with the
Princess of Bourgongne.
if the King had taken this course (which he himself had sought and desired
before the death of the Duke of Bourgongne) the wars and ruins which have
been since, and continue even unto this day in the Netherlands, had not
happened, and the said Provinces had been successively under the Crown of
France, and had never felt the furies of Spain: but we were not worthy to
receive so great a benefit from the

The King had good intelligence with the Lord of Cords Governor of Arras,
whose name was Philip of Creuecaeur, brother to the Lord of Creuecaeur, who had
all his living in Picardie, lying along the river of Some. The King required
the Ambassadors, that they should cause the City of Arras to be opened unto
him: for at that Arras yielded to the King by consent.
to the Lords. The which he did willingly, retiring out of the town, and
drawing forth his men at arms. Then holding himself discharged of the
Princesses service by this consent, he took an oath unto the King, and became
his servant, for that Roye and Montdider, and captain of Bologne and Hesdin,
as he had held them in the Charles of Bourgongne. After that the King had
disposed of the City of Arras, he went from thence to besiege Hesdein,
whether he led the Lord of Cords, who was Captain and Governor, whom the
besieged hearing to speak, making some Hesdin yielded ^o the King and Bologne.
show as if they would preserve it for their Princess, in the end they yielded
the place. From thence the King went before Boulogne, the which did the like,
after that they had made some show of defense for the space of five days.
Whilst the King stayed before Bologne, those of the Town of Arras found that
they had been deceived, being shut upon every side, and a great number of
soldiers and Artillery about them: they did therefore what they could to
furnish their town with men at Arms: and to that end did write unto their
neighbor towns, as to Bethune, Douay and Lille. There were in The succors
going to Arras defeated.
them in the way, charged and quite defeated them, most of them were slain,
the rest were taken prisoners, among the which was the Lord of Vergy. The King
came Arras yields by composition, the which is (...) kept.
which was not well observed and kept: for the Lord of Lude put many good
Citizens Philip and Charles: which privilege (to speak truly and properly,)
served them to no other end, but to make occasion to pick quarrels with their
Princes.

The King thinking that all things had been to his mind, assured himself,
that he should see them more succesfull then they proved, knowing the factious
disposition Arras: there came certain Ambassadors unto him from the three
Estates of the said (...) sent (...) the States to (...) King.


The King heard them, among other speeches, they said: that what they had
propounded to his Majesty touching a peace, did proceed from the motion and
will of their Princess: who in all things was resolved to govern herself by
the advice and council of her States: desyring his Majesty to desist from
making of war as well in Bourgongne as in Arthois: and that it would please
him to choose a day for a friendly treaty, and that in the mean time there
might be assurance of arms. The That their Princess would not do any thing
without the council and advise of the three Estates of there countries, and
answered them, that they were ill informed, for he was well assured that she
would govern her affairs by private persons, who desired not any peace: and
that they should be disauowed. Whereat the Ambassadors were much perplexed,
and like indiscreete men answered suddenly: that they were very well assured of
what they said, and that they could show their instruction if need were.
Whereunto some replied, that if it pleased the King, he could show them
letters written by such a hand as they would believe it: the which did import,
that the Princess would not govern her affairs but by four special
persons: they answered, that they were assured to Douager of Bourgongne, widow
to duke Charles deceased, and Sister to King Edward of England then reigning:
and part of it by the hand of the lord of Rauestein, brother to the duke of
Cleues near kinsman to the said Princess. So this letter was written by three
sundry hands, although it went in the Princesses name only: the which had
been done expressly, to have the more credit. It was a letter of credit for the
Chancellor and the lord of Humbercourt. And moreover the Princess did declare,
that her intention was, that all her affairs should be governed by four
persons. The Douager, her mother in law, the Lord of Rauestein, and the said
Chancellor and lord of Humbercourt: beseeching the King that whatsoever he
should please to have managed with her, might be by their hands, and that he
would be pleased to direct himself unto them and not to confer with any other,

When the Ambassadors had seen this letter, they were wonderfully troubled and
The king incenseth the Ambassadors against the Princess.
perplexed, being incensed more and more by such as treated with them for the
King. In the end the same letter was given them, and they had no other dispatch
of importance. Whereupon they returned directly to Gand, whereas they found
their Princess, accompanied with the bishop of Liege and the duke of Cleues.
There was also William of la Mark a valiant and goodly Knight, but cruel and
il conditioned: whom the bishop had taken William of la Mark.
he defeated the said Bishop in battle, slew him with his own hand, and
caused him to be cast into the River, where he remained three days. The Duke
of Cleues was nearest unto the Princess, hoping to make a marriage betwixt his
son and her, which seemed very fit and convenient for many respects: but his
humors were not pleasing to her, nor her servants, and muchlesse to her Ladies;
for he had bin bred up in that house:

The Ambassadors from the States of the Netherlands, being returned out of
France to Gaunt, a Counsel was held, and the Princess set in her seat, with
these Noblemen about her, to hear their report. They began to charge her
touching the letter above That it was not so: thinking assuredly the said
letter had not been seen. Then presently the Pensioner, or Orator of Gaunt
(who made the speech) drew the said letter out of his A disgrace done unto the
Princess by the Ganthois.
bosom* before all the world) and gave it her: wherein he played the part of
a simple and uncivil man, to do this public disgrace unto his Princess, in
the presence of the Duchess Dowager, the Lord of Rauesteyn, the Chancellor,
and the Lord of Humbercourt. They had before had some speech with the Duke of
Cleues touching the marriage of his son, which bred an alteration in them
all, and they began to enter into great division. The Duke of Cleues had
been always in hope until that time, that the Lord of Humbercourt had
favored this marriage. But seeing this William of la Mark, for those things
which had past in the city of Liege, whereof the Lord of Humbercourt had
been Governor. The Earl of S. Pol, son to the Constable of France (of whom
we have spoken sufficiently before) hated the Chancellor, and Humbercourt to
the death, for that they delivered his father at Peronne into the Kings
servants hands. Those of Gaunt hated them, not for any offense they had done
them, but only envying their great authority and credit.

Finally, the night following, after that this letter had been shown in the
morning, The Chancellor and Humbercourt prisoners.
the Chancellor Hugonet and the lord of Humbercourt were committed to prison,
by the Ganthois, notwithstanding that they were sufficiently advertised thereof
before, William of Clugny, bishop of Teroane (who dyed afterward bishop of
Poitiers) all three were put together in prison. Those of Gaunt observed a
certain form of proceeding against them, (the which they had not accustomed
to do in their reuenges) and appointed some of their magistrates to examine
them, giving them an assistant, of the house of La Mark, a mortal enemy to
the Lord of Humbercourt. In the beginning they examined them; Why they had
caused the Lord of Cords to deliver up the city of Arras unto the King? but
they stuck but little upon that point, although Commissiooners appo^nted for
their trial.
they could not have convinced them of any other: their passions were not
busied Objections against the Chancellor and Humbercourt.
which they objected, they had received, and especially for a suit which the
City of Gaunt had lately gotten by their sentence, and pronounced by the
Chancellor, against a private person: wherein they accused him; To have sold
justice, and to have taken a bribe of them to have their right. Whereunto the
accused answered; That in that they had obtained their suit, it was according
to equity and justice, that they had judged it: and as for the money which
they had received, they demanded it not, but took it when it was offered. The
second matter wherewith the Commissioners did charge them, was; That during the
time they were in service with Duke Charles their Master (and in his absence
his Lieutenants) they had done many things against the Privileges and Statutes
of their Town: and that any man that attempted any thing against their
Privileges, must loose his life. Hereunto the accused answered; That therein
there was no matter to charge them withal, being neither Bourgesses of the
Town, nor any way subject unto it, and therefore they could not break their
Privileges. That if Duke Charles, or his father had taken any from them, it
was by a composition made betwixt them, after many wars and rebellions: but
those that had been left them, had been well observed. Notwithstanding all the
excuses and iustifications of these famous and worthy men, unto those two
crimes objected, after they had tormented them cruelly, without all order of
Law, the Magistrates of The Chancellor and Humber^ourt condem^ed to die.
Gaunt condemned them to die. They hearing this cruel sentence, were much
amazed, and not without cause, seeing themselves in their hands, whereas
reason had no place: notwithstanding for that the sovereignty of Flanders
depended on the crown

This short time being expired, they led them to the Marketplace, upon a
Scaffold, The Princess comes to the place of execu^ion; and ^ues for them.
to execute them by the sword. The Princess hearing of this condemnation, went
to the Towne-house, to sue and entreat for these two Noblemen, but it
prevailed not: from thence she went into the Marketplace, whereas all the
people being in arms, she saw these two Noblemen that were condemned, upon
the Scaffold: she was in The Chancellor and Humbercourt executed.
should dispatch them, whereupon they lost their heads: and this poor
Princess returned desolate to her house.

After that the Ganthois had done this execution, they did sequester from their
The Princess restrained of her liberty by the Ganthois.
which the King had taken from her by force; but to see her self in the power
and subjection of ancient Rebels, and very persecutors of her house: and that
which was the greatest misery of all, was to see her self so deprived of her
liberty, and sequestered from her most familiar friends.

They of Gaunt, having forcibly seized upon the government of State, and of
their The Duke of Gelders slain.
was slain, with a good number of his people. The Princess of Bourgongne and
those that loved her were glad of this defeat, and of the death of the Prince
of Geldres: for it was said that the Ganthois intended to force her to marry
with him, else she would never have done it with her own good liking, for his
great disloyalty and cruelty against his father.

In the mean time there was a speech of diverse marriages for the Princess of
Bourgongne, all men concluding generally that she must have a husband to
defend all the rest of her Seigneories: or else that she should marry the
Daulphin of France, that she might enjoy all in peace. Some did much affect
that Royal

There were others that labored for the prince of Cleues: Others for
Maximillian, Frederick.

This Princess had conceived an extreme hatred against the French King, for
the discovery of her letters, for she imagined that he had been the cause
(in giving The Princess hates the ^rench king.
them to the Ambassadors of Gaunt) of the death of these two good men, and of
the disgrace she received, when as they produced them before so great a
multitude: and that it had given the Ganthois such liberty, as they had
presumed to chase away her old servants, and to separate her mother in law and
the lord of Rauestein from her, and had struck such a fear into her Ladies
and Gentlewomen, that neither she nor they durst receive nor open a letter,
without showing it to them, nor yet talk together in private. See what a
liberty, a rascal multitude will take, when as they have

They had before held a counsel about that matter, whereas the Lady of Halwin,
the first lady of honor to the Princess was present, who hearing speak of the
Dolphin, said; That they had need of a man and not of a child; that her
Mistress was a woman able to bear children, whereof the country had most
need. All were of this opinon. Some would blame the said Lady for speaking so
freely: others commended her, saying That she spoke but of marriage, and of
that the Country had most need. The question was now, to find out this man? If
the French King would have been content, she should have married with the
Earl of Angoulesme, it may be she would have consented, she had so great a
desire to be allied to the house of France. The Duke of Cleues labored for his
son, but she had no disposition to it.

The Emperor sent his Ambassadors to Gaunt, to the Princess, to entreat a
marriage, The Emperor sends to the (...) of Bourgongne to (...) a (...).
who being first arrived at Bruxelles, they were requested to stay there a
while, and they should be sent for: the which the Duke of Cieues did, having no
delight in their coming, and practicing to make them return discontented. But
the Ambassadors, (who had good intelligence in the Princess court, especially
with the Duchess Dowager of Bourgongne, her mother in law) past on: for she did
advise them to come

It was resolved on in Counsel that they should have audience, and the
Princess was put in mind to say (after that they had delivered their charge)
That they were very welcome, and that she would consider of their propositions,
and that at that present she would Audience given to the Em^erors Ambassadors.
say no more unto them, but that they should have an answer given them. The
Ambassadors being entered into the place of audience, whereas the Princess was
set in the midst of her Counsel, presented their letters when they were
appointed; and delivered their charge: which was; That whereas a marriage had
been concluded and agreed upon, beewixt the Emperor and the Duke of Bourgongne
her father, with her own priuitie and consent as did appear by Letters
written with her own hand, which they did produce: with a Diamond, which they
said; h^d been sent, and given in sign of marriage: desiring earnestly in the
behalf of of the Emperor their Master, and the Archduke his son; That it
would please the Princess to accomplish this marriage, which was conformable
both to her father (...) and her own: Sommoning her moreover; to declare
openly, if she had written the s^id Letter or no, and if she had any desire to
perform her promise. Whereunto without demanding futher counsel, she
answered; That she had written the said Letters, by the (...) of the Duke her
Lord and father, and had sent the Diamond, avowing all. Whereupon the
Ambassadors did thank her most humbly, and returned joyfully to their
lodgings. The Duke of Cleues was discontented with this answer; which was
contrary to that which had been decreed in Counsel, telling the Princess,
that That she could not otherwise do: that it was a thing promised and past,
the which she could not recall, nor gainsay. Which answer being heard, and
knowing well that the greatest part were of the Princess mind, the Duke of
Cleues held his peace, and resolved to give over his pursuit for his son, and
to return into his own Country: and the Ambassadors well satisfied to the
Emperor and the Arch duke their Masters, to make their report to hasten their
young Prince to come. Who soon after their return came to Cologne, whereas
some of the Noblemen and Barons, (servants to the Princess;) went to meet
him, and was by them conducted unto Gaunt, having eight hundred horse in his
train.

(...) Austrius
MAXIMILIAN ARCH-DVKE OF Austria, son to the Emperor Frederick, by the Lady
Marie of Bourgongne his wife the 33. Earl of Holland Zeeland, and Lord of
Freezland.
Nor am I Heir, nor Earl, but countable
Unto my son, and for his good I hold it,
I only twelve years kept the Dukedom stable,
To render it to him at years ^'vphold it,
What I possess is his, for him I keep.
My Empire me contents, no more I thirst,
Two wives I had, but now with death I sleep,
At Newstad with my Mother, I lie Herst,

The Argument of the fifth Book.
THE good parts of the Archduke Maximilian: the knowledge of Tongs revived:
the Archdukes marriage with the Princess of Bourgongne: the order of the
Golden Fleece given to the Archduke. The birth of Prince Philip of Austria:
the Geldrois reuolts from the house of Bourgongne: the battle of Guinegate,
whereas the Archduke is Victor. Tourney yielded to the Archduke: Truce
betwixt the French King and the Archduke: war betwixt the Geldrois and
Hollanders. New tumults in Holland by the two Factions, which the Archduke
does pacify. Dordrecht surpized by the young Lord of Egmond. Many towns in
Gelders yielded to the Archduke. The factions revived in Freezland. War
betwixt the Hollanders and them of Vtrecht: the death of the Arch-dutchesse:
the Flemmings take upon them the government of the Country, and fall to their
old mutinies. Petty wars in Freezland: the Lady Marguerite carried into
France after the peace, to be married to the Dolphin. New troubles at Vtrecht,
and the Bishop prisoner afterward restored by the Archduke. Engelbert Earl
of Nassau, made governor of the Neitherlands, by the Archduke Maximilian and
Philip his son. The Archduke creat^d King of Romans: the Factions revived
and great troubles in Freezland: the Ganthois and Brugeois mutinue again, and
keep the King of Romans prisoner: to whose succor the Emperor Frederick
his father came: against whom, and against the Frisons he made Albert Duke of
Saxony his general: a private war in Holland: a peace betwixt the Flemmings
and the Archduke: diverse Factions armed in Freezland. Duke Albert seeks a
quarrel against them both: a peace betwixt the Archduke Philip of Austria and
Charles the 8. the French King: the Archduke takes possession of the
Neitherlands: war betwixt the Duke of Gelders and the Archduke: the Estates of
Freezland held at Sn^cke, whereof followed great wars: Duke Albert obtaines of
the Emperor the hereditarie government of Freezland: the continuance of the
war in Freezland: Duke Albert slain before Groningen: the Archduke inherits
the Realms of Spain by his wife: Duke George of Saxony after the death of
Albert, his father, conti^ues the war in Freezland: the Duke of Gelders
reconciled to the King of Castile: the death of the said King: war renewed
betwixt the Geldrois and the Bourguignons.

MAXIMILIAN Archduke of Austria, son to the Emperor Frederick, was borne
the 12. of March 1459. from his infancy until he came to be fourteen or
fifteen years old, he was of a heavy disposition, and slow in speech, for he
grew somewhat big before he could pronounce his words; but being come to age
he recompensed that defect by wisdom and readiness of speech, especially in
the Latin tongue: Nature and the bounty of God did adorn and enrich him with
so many virtues, for the good of the Empire, as by the judgment of every man,
he did exceed all His disposition and virtues.
the Christian Princes of his time, in vigor, viuacitie and quickness of
spirit; in domestic, public, polliticke and military virtues: in zeal to
religion, in bounty worthy of such a Prince, and of an invincible courage as
well in prosperity as in adversity.

He was about 20. years old when he married his first wife Marie, Duchess
of Bourgongne, Countess of Holland, Zeeland, etc. By whom he had the first
year of His wife and children.
their marriage one son, named Philip (who was father to Charles the fifth)
the second year he had one daughter, named Marquerite, the which in her
infancy was betrothed to Charles Dolphin of France, son to King Lewis the
11. The third year he had a son named Francis, so named by Francis Duke of
Britain. The fourth year he dyed as we will show in the deduction of this
History.

This virtuous Prince marrying this Princess of Bourgongne, was withal wedded
to great wars, which we will discribe hear, for that which shall concern
the Neitherlands, as succinctly as we can, referring those of Italy and
Germany, to Paulus Iouius, Francis Guichardin, and others that have written of
that subject.

The French King had no care but how he should devour all the siegneories of
this Princess, but hearing of her marriage (whereon he thought least) he did
somewhat Maximilian: It was therefore needful for this Prince to crave the
succors and means of his father, and his friends in Germany, for the
Neitherlandes were much unpeopled, both of their Nobility, and of their best
Commanders in war, and of common soldiers, which had been lost in those
three defeates, and those few which had remained in Picardie (as the Lord of
Cords and others of the country of Arthois) had

The Arch duke having visited all the Provinces of the Duchess his wife,
where The Archduke makes a general Assembly at Bruges.
he was well entertained, and having received the oaths and hostages, returned
to Bruges; where he called an Assembly of all the Princes, Earls, Barons,
Knights and chief Gentlemen of the said Countries, with the general Estates,
to resolve of the best means and course that was to be taken, to resist the
attempts of the French king, who did daily seize upon some piece of his
estate. But for that he was not yet Knighted, his desire was (before he
undertook any war against the French) to receive Philip (his wives
grandfather) had instituted The Archduke made Knight of the golden Fl^e.
it. Having therefore received the choler from Adolph of Cleues, Lord of
Rauesteyn; he held a general Chapter of the said Order, which he renewed and
added some other Knights. Among the which were William of Egmond, brother to
Arnold Duke of Gelders, father to Prince Adolph. The feasts and tryumphs of
this Ceremony being ended, the Archduke began to levy men of all sides to
expel the French out of his Territories, who had already taken many places in
Henault. But hearing of this preparation for war, and of so great a levy of
men, they left all and abandoned the country: whether the Archduke went in
person, and in a short time reduced all the country under his obedience and
subjection, after some light skirmishes and

The 22. of June in the year 1478. was borne in the city of Bruges, Philip
of Austria, first child to the Archduke and the Lady Marie of Bourgongne,
which brought 1478. Philip of Austria bo^ne.
great joy to all the Neitherlands, giving thanks unto GOD that had given them
a Prince, who in time to come might govern them in peace, and defend them
against the French, their natural enemies.

We have formerly said that Duke Arnold of Gelders, had sold the Duchy to
Duke Charles of Bourgongne, by reason of the great wrong which Prince Adolph,
his son had done him by his imprisonment: whereof Duke Charles had taken
possession in Arnold. But after the death of Duke Charles, and of Prince Adolph
(who was slain as we have said before Tournay) the Geldrois did revolt,
especially the Towns of Numeghen and Zutphen, with their dependances. The
children of Prince Adolph were at that time bred up in the Court of Bourgongne:
whereupon the The Geldrois revolt from the house of Bourgongne.
Geldrois sent for the Lady Katherine of Gelders, sister to prince Adolph, to
come and govern the country, the which she did, which was the cause of great
war betwixt the house of Bourgongne and the Geldrois. The Archduke
Maximilian having reconquered the Country of Henault, he marched with his
troops toward the Contrie The Archduke marched into Gelderland.
of Gelders, he came to Ruremond, where he was received, and at Venlo also,
and in all the quarters there abouts: then he returned into Flanders, and went
to Gaunt, Frederick of Brunswick (whom the revolted Geldrois had chosen for
their Governor) fell sick, and so retired into his country. Then the Geldrois
took Henry of Swartsenbourg, Bishop of Munster for their new Governor, who
took upon him the charge, and came well acompanied.

About the end of the same year, 1478. the Archduke went from Brusselles with
all his Nobility of Brabant and Flanders, leading with him a goodly army and
marched

The truce being expired in August. 1479. the Earl of Romont, Governor of
1479. Cambray and Bohain surprised.
Arthois, surprised Cambray and Bohain, a little town three leagues from
thence. The Earl of Saint Pol, brother in law to the said Earl of Romont,
having married his sister was made Governor of Flanders for the Archduke,
although he were much Engelbert of Nassau, Philip of Cleues son to the Lord
of Rauesteyn, the Lords of Fiennes, Beueren, Lalain and other Noblemen of the
Netherlands, being followed by a goodly army went and camped near unto
Teroanne, being resolved to beseege it. The French, namely the Lord of Cords
coming out of Picardy with 1800. pikes, and 14000. Archers, thought to fight
with the Archdukes army, and to charge them in their camp, But the Archduke
being advertised thereof in time, having left some troops of soote with 800.
horse under the command of Philip of Cleues, to guard the camp the vittelers
and the baggage, he went himself in person, to meet them in the open field.
The The battle of Esguinegate.
the forward: and the Earl of Nassau commanded the reerward. The French men
coming down from the mont of Esguinegate charged the forward of the
Bourguignons, the Earl of Romont with his Flemings stood firm and maintained
the fight valiantly against the French archers. In the mean time the garrison
of Teroanne, meaning to charge the reerward, fell upon the camp, where they
grew amazed, and made so small resistance, as they did what they would, so as
the horsemen that were there ingard, having been defeated and put to rout,
were pursued even into the suburbs of the town of Air. The French whom the
Earl of Romont had in front (noting them that fled being greedy of spoil)
left their places and fell upon the baggage. The Archduke The Archduke vvines
the victory.
there were about 5000. slain upon the place, and a great number of prisoners,
he remaining master of the field, with a memorable victory which GOD gave him
on the seventh of August. 1491.

After the Battle the Archduke returned victorious into the town of Air,
and the Earl of Romont with part of his troops went to beseege the castle of
Malonoy, near to the Abbaie of Han, belonging to the house of Croy, in the
which there was The Castle of Malonoy taken and the Captain with 50.
soldiars hanged.
a French garrison, from whence he brought Captain Cadet a gentleman Gascon
prisoner, to the Archduke, who for his presumption and bravery caused him with
50. of Cadet had been hanged ten, before the gates of Arras ten, at the Port
of Douay ten, before Saint Omers ten, and at Tournay taken by the Archduke.
the gates of Lille the last ten. After this victory of Esguinegate, the
Archduke led his army before Tournay, the which he beseeged so straightly, as
in the end necessity forced them to yield upon composition, with a condition
that if they did ever rebel any more against him, they should forfait all the
rents and fees that they had in Flanders Adolph of Geldres they should build up
a Chapel in perpetual memory thereof. The French King seeing the happy
success of the Archduke Maximilian, and that he had a son borne, sent a
notable Embassage unto him with rich presents, betwixt whom there was a truce
made for a time. At that time there revived in Holland the factions of Hoecks
and Cabillaux, for that one Martin of Velaere Baylife of the town of Horn the
which was of the Hoeckin The factions revive in Holland.
faction and he a Cabillautin having been expelled the town without any hope
of return, resigned his Office to the young Lord of Egmond, promising to give
entrance to him and all the Cabillautin faction into the Town, they laid two
plots to surprise it but both failed: whereupon the town of Horn allied it
self with Enchuysen, Eedam, Monick, Endam-Metemblick, and other villages there
abouts. These factions were the cause of great troubles at that time in Harlem
Rotterdam, Leyden and else where; one party chasing an other out of these
towns. The Cabillautines surprised Oud-water, seized upon the court at the
Hage, from whence they chased away the servants, and spoiled the moueables,
plate and Jewels of the Lord of La Vere Governor

A while after the Governor went to Rotterdam, to remain there for his better
safety, but few of the Council went with him, for the most of the town were
of the Cabellautin faction: when the Noble men of that faction which had fled
from the Hage, heard that the Governor was retired with his followers, they
returned, forced the Hoekins lodgings, and brake down all they found, as they
had done to them before. And they were not content therewith, until they had
drawn the Archduke into their quarrels, who to please them, put the Lord of
La Vere from his government of The Lord of Vere put from his government of
Holland.
Holland, for whom the Cabillautins laid ambushes to kill him at his return
to La-Vere Ghysbrecht Pyecht Lord of half the town of Aspren, against Wessel
of Boerslaer Lord of another moeity and of an other Castle; this holding of
Holland and the other of Gelders, which Castle the Archdukes men took by
assault, the siegeior Pyecke being fled before. The Archduke having The Castle
of Pyecke taken by assault.
during his abode at Gorrichom, settled the estate of Gelders, he went to
Dordrecht carrying with him all of the Cabillautin faction that had been
expelled that town to restore them again to their houses. But the magistrates
and Superintendents of the same town did give the Archduke such reasons as
they entered not for that time; whether came the Prince of Orange, Cont
Engelbert of Nassau, Wolfart of Lauere, John Vicont Walrauen Lord of Brederode
and many other gentlemen of the Hoeckin faction, where having treated awhile of
business the Archduke went to Rotterdam, accompanied with many of Rotterdam and
la Goud, as it were for his conuoie, where there was much trouble betwixt the
noblemen of both factions, the which notwithstanding was pacified without any
effusion of blood; so as in the end, to avoid all factions and partialities,
the Archduke made one Governor of Holland, that was a neutrall A new Governor
to Holland
and not borne in the contry, which was Simon of Lalain, Lord of Montigny
Saints and Knight of the order of the golden fleece, appointing new
councelors in the Provincial council. This done he went to Leyden, leading
with him many of the Hoeckin faction, that had been expelled the town but
they could not all

In the same year 1480. the Archduke having been sick some time at the Hage,
and recovered his health, having taken the advice of his privy Council, to
make 1480.
the navigations of the river of Rhine free; he sent John of Cleues with John
of Egmond, and all his Caualerie to beseege the town of Wageningen in the
Duchy of Gelders; the garrison whereof stopped the passage of the Rhine into
Holland, which town Wageningen taken.
in the end they forced to yield upon composition to have their lives and goods
saved. Soon after the Geldrois surprised Venlo, and did incite the towns of
Nimeghen and greatly molest his country of Luxembourg whether he went; being
in the chief

The Lord of Lalain Governor of Holland, etc. to discharge his duty, began
with the new Council to moderate and pacify the factions. For the effecting
whereof, he The new Governor of ^olland (...) ^o (...)
went first to Horn, being accompanied by Nicholas van Adrichom Abbot of
Egmont, whether he led all those of the Cabillautin faction that had been
expelled the town, except Martin of Velaere, the Bayliffe who had resigned his
place to the young Lord Reyer van Bronkhuysen a Geldrois, and Henry van Nyeuelt
a Hollander: who found the means in the hardest time of winter, when the
ditches were all frozen, to surprise the Town by scaladoe, and took the
chief of the Cabillautins prisoners, namely the Magistrate of the town, in
whose place they appointed six men, who during the troubles should have the
government of the town, to administer Justice, with some Captains and
Centeniers for the guard thereof. The other towns of Holland, as Harlem, Delfe,
and Amsterdam, hearing that the Hoekin faction (the which two years before had
been expelled the town of Leyden) had now seized thereon, and that the
Magistrate and the chief of the Cabillautin faction were prisoners, they
sent^some of the chief men Bronckhuysen and all his adherents, out of the said
Town of Leyden, joining for an assistant John van Ranst Marckgraue or
Governor Leyden surprised by the Hoeckins.
of Antwerp, with his company. The above named Towns sent also some troops
under the command of Philip Bastard of Brabant, all which were lodged in
Rotterdam, fearing the affronts of them of Dordrecht and Goude, of the Hoeckin
faction. Leyden besie^d by the Governor.
their complaint of the Magistrate that was prisoner. Notwithstanding all this,
the Archduke commanded the Governor to besiege them, so as in the end, after
many skirmishes, and taking of Castles on either side: the Leydois by the
intercession of them of Dordrecht, Goude and Schoonhouen, were reconciled.

At the same time the young Lord of Egmont, remaining as Chastelaine or
captain in the Town of Gorrichom, accompanied with some banished men of the
Cabillautin faction, meaning to be revenged of an injury which the Bayliffe
of Dordrecht had Dordrecht surprised by the young lord of Egmont.
done him, found means to surprise the said Town. In which surprise the
Bourgmaister Town of Leederdam, which the Archduke gave to Gasper of
Culenbourg, in recompense

During the time that the young Prince of Gelders, son to Adolph, was brought
up in the house of Bourgongne, (as much to say as a prisoner)* the Duke of
Cleues seized upon many towns in Gelders, for which cause the Geldrois made
sharp war against the Cleuois and Brabansons, and growing daily more
obstinate, they did ^strange and withdraw themselves wholly from the house of
Bourgongne: whereupon the Archduke resouled to make war against them. Those of
Numeghen, Thyel, and Bomel (having some intelligence thereof) went to him to
Boisledu^, where they submitted (...) towns (...)
David of Bourgongne bishop of Vtrecht, being expelled the town by the vicont
of Montfort, made an enterprise with his Partisans (...)
upon the said town: the which succeeding not happily, the Archduke having
disposed of his affairs in Gelders, came to Wyck-ter-duyrsted to him, where
they had much conference: from thence the Archduke returned into Brabant, the
Duchess his wife being ready to be brought in bed, and was delivered of a
son, whom the Duke of Francis, by his own name, but he lived not long.

If in Holland the factions of the Cabillaux and the Hoecks tormented one
another, in Friseland the partialities of Vetcoopers and Scyringers did no
less, the Country being so divided there, as not only the Nobility and
towns made war one against another with all violence: but also the villages,
pesants and other private persons, which had any power or means: yea the
Abbeis, Cloisters and Monestaries, as well with their Provost Monks as with
their lay Friars; whereof there followed great ruins, desolations and burning
of villages, castles, and other possessions, as well Ecclesiastical as
Secular. All this time there was sharp war betwixt the Hollanders that
succored the Bishop of Vtrecht, and them of the town of Vtrecht and Amersfort:
of whom John vicont of Montfort and Reyer van Brouckheuysen were the chief,
and (...) bi^op and the Town of Vtrecht.
beaten by them of Vtrecht, near unto the fort of Waert, which the Hollanders
did besiege, lost their artillery, and left the banners of their chief towns
behind them: the Lord of Lalain saved himself being much amazed in
Schoonhouen: and those of Vtrecht returned victors with many prisoners into
their Town, who having afterward surprised the Town of Naerden in Holland,
but seeing they could not keep it, they spoiled it, and so left it. The Lord
of Lalain sent the Markgraue of Antwerp thither, and little Salezard a Knight
of Gasconie (whom the French King had dispoyled of his means, which made him
to come and serve the Archduke, with a good troop of brave soldiers Gascons)
to lie in Garrison there, with a

This war betwixt the Diocese of Vtrecht and the Hollanders, increasing and
growing more violent by sundry wrongs, they did one unto another: the
Traiectins having no Protector, sent their Ambassadors to John Duke of Cleues,
beseeching Thos^ of (...) the Duke of (...) to help (...)
Englebert of Cleues, to be his Lieutenant, and General there. The which the
Duke accepted, and sent his brother, where he was well received and lodged in
the Bishops Palace: whom the Taiectins did acknowledge for their Protector,
making an oath of fealty unto him, as is accustomed in the like cases.
Afterward the Hollanders defeated the pel mel with them, and won the City.

In the year 1482. in Lent, the Lady Mary of Bourgongne, Archdutchesse of
Austria, 1482. Death of the Lady Mary of Bourgongne, Contesse of Holland.
Countess of Holland, and Zeeland, Lady of Frisland, etc. wife to the Archduke
Maximilian, being a hunting, mounted upon an ambling Gelding, fell (some write
for the fear which her horse had of a wild Boar, which ran betwixt his
legs) wherewith she was so bruzed in her body, as the 27. of March she dyed,
to the great grief of her husband, who loved her entirely: she was buried with
a funeral pomp worthy of her greatness, in the Quier of Saint Donas Church
at Bruges, after that she had Philip about three years old, and one Daughter
but two years old, who by the treaty of peace was made sure to King Charles
the eight, son to Lewis the 11. the French King. But this marriage being
broken, she was married to the only son of Dom Fernando of Arragon, and of
Isabella King and Queen of Castille, called also Dom Fernando, by whom she had
one son, who dyed within the year with the father: afterward she married
with Philebert the 8. Duke of Sauoy, who died after he had been seven years
married. The said Lady Mary of Bourgongne being dead, the Archduke her husband
took upon him the title of Tutor to her children, that with this quallitie he
might preserve, maintain; The Archduke calls himself Tutor.
and defend them against the French King, Lewis the eleventh, who had done so
Charles her father. This quality of Tutor did not greatly please many of the
Netherlanders, especially the Flemings. Those of Gaunt, Bruges, Fran^ and Ypre,
(which make the four members of Flanders,) appointed by their private
authority certain commissioners, to govern the country of Flanders jointly
with the Archduke, until it were otherwise ordered. By reason whereof the
States were assembled in the city of Gaunt, where it was concluded that they
should not receive the said Governor, but for a certain time limited, upon
certain conditions, and with an oath to keep them: refusing to admit any
particular Governors or Captains, if they were not chosen A new order set
down by the Flemings touching the government.
and placed by the Archduke and their commissioners jointly, for that (said
they) Robert of Halewin great Bayliffe of Bruges, out of Flanders for fifty
years, and put many Gentlemen of good account from their places and Offices,
so as in those times the Nobility was very much oppressed i^

The Lord of Cords Governor of Teroane for the French King, made ordinary
courses then into Flanders, and spoiling the country. For the preventing
whereof, these Comissioners appointed for the government, gave commission to
Charles of Sauoy, and the Lords of Beuere and Merwede, to go with some good
troops of men which the Ganthois did furnish. And at the same time the Bastard
of Hennin had an encounter near unto Bethune against the French, whom he put
to route, and slew many of them. At the same time there were many ships of
war put to Affronts do^ unto the French.
Sea, both Flemings, Hollanders, Zelanders and Frisons, which came along the
coast, so as the French durst not boldly put to Sea. The Seignior of
Chanteraine going was in Holland, where he was acknowledged by the States of
the Country, for The Archduke acknowledged in Holland, zeeland and ^seland for
Gardien.
Philip of Austria, Duke of Bourgongne, being then but four years old; the
like was done in Zeeland and West-friseland. But the Flemmings naturally
inclined to innouations and mutinies, especially the Ganthois, did greatly
cross him.

The Factions of Schyeringers and Vetcoopers in Frizeland, were then as violent
as ever (as those of the Hoecks and Cabillaux in Holland) the which were no
sooner pacified and reconciled in one part of Friseland, but they kindled
again in another, and continued so long in that estate, before they were quite
suppressed that the country was made a prey to Strangers, and quite ruined, as
we shall hereafter show.

In the year 1482. the Duke of Cleues made a levy of above 10000. men, horse
The Traiectins besiege Iselstein.
an army, presumed they might conquer all Holland, and went to camp before
Iselstein. On the other side the Lord of Lalain, Governor of Holland, with many
Noblemen went to field, with all the forces he could get, and camped just by
them, being resolved to charge them in their Trenches, and to raize the siege.
Heerevpon the Cleuois mutining against the Traiectins fearing they should be
surpized during their division, whereupon they dislodged from thence, leaving
a part of their Artillery and carriages behind them, which those of Iselsteyn
took and carried into their town. The Hollanders not content with this, did
run over the Country of Vtrecht, and

In June the same year, there arrived in Flanders a Herald from Lewis the 11.
the French King, bringing a safe-conduit for 60. of the Neitherlanders, which
should go and treat with him of a peace, the which were chosen by the 2.
Estates, Secular and Clergy. This Treaty had bin begun in November, the year
before in the City of Arras. Of the Archdukes Deputies were the States of
Brabant, of Arthois, of Henault, and the A peace concluded betvv^t the French,
and the Bourguignons.
he of death. In the end a peace was concluded betwixt these Deputies, whereof
a treaty was made, containing a hundred and one Articles. Among others: That
the Dolphin of France should marry with the Lady Marguerite of Austria,
daughter to the said Archduke Maximilian, and the deceased Lady Marie of
Bourgongne, being about four years old. With many other Articles, which for
breuities sake we omit. The Deputies of the Neitherlands went to confirm them
at Tours where the King was, who received them courteously, ratified the peace,
and confirmed the marriage of his son: and after that he had honored them
with rich presents, he thanked them and gave Philip of Creuecaeur, Lord of
Cords slept not, but went to besiege the town of Air in Air y^led to the
French.
Arthois, betwixt Bethune and S. Omer; the which made some show of resistance,
but it was soon yielded, or (to speak truly) sold, for the Captain had
3000. crowns. The Inhabitants that would not stay, to the number of 500.
retired themselves to Bethune and S. Omer; being ill affected to the French.

A peace being concluded betwixt the Archduke and the French King, and the
marriage agreed upon betwixt the Dolphin his son and the Lady Marguerite the
Archdukes daughter, about Easter in 1483. The Earl of Beauieu (afterward Duke
1483. The Lady Marguerite of Austria deli^ed to the (...).
of Bourbon, the Kings son in law, came into Arthois to receive her, where
she their traffic of merchandise in France. And although that this peace and
marriage that he had never given his consent to it: and therefore many that had
dealt in it were suspected, and not favored in Court: and some Captains of the
Netherlands practiced to surprise some places in Arthois and Picardie upon the
French, whereby they might have occasion to break the peace.

The Archduke had in those times for the pleasure of David of Bourgongne Bishop
of Vtrecht, great war against the Traiectins and Cleuois; he besieged
Vtrecht, Vtrecht taken by the Archduke.
battred it, and in the end (after some assaults) forced them to yield by
composition, upon condition (among others) that they should beat down a part
of their wall, The Hollanders put a garrison in Vtrecht.
Katherins Port toward Holland, and placing some men there in garrison. The
1^. of October, the Archduke, having ordered all things in those quarters of
Holland and Vtrecht, returned into Brabant: for that the Bishop of Cambray, the
Prince of Orange, and the Lord of Croye were come thither to advertise him of
the death of King Lewis the 11. who died the 13. of August the same year 1483.
and of what was presently to be done. 1483.


At the reception of the Princess of Austria in the Court of France, the King
desired that Prince Philip of Austria might be put in possession of the Estates
and Seigneuries that were fallen unto him by the death of the Duchess his
Mother. Whereupon those of Gaunt, Bruges, Franc, and Ipre, required the
Archduke to come into Flanders, Adolph of Cleues The Flemings put Philip of
Austria in possession of the Earldome
Lord of Rauesteyn. Ioos of la Vere Lord of Groouelt, and Philip of Bourgongne
Lord of Beueron. Ioos Lord of Lalain having been slain at the siege of
Vtrecht, the Hollanders entreated the Archduke to give them a Governor, who
according to their last privileges, was borne in the Country. According to
the which John of Egmont Magdeline of Wardenburch, daughter to the Earl of
Wardenburch a German.

The Flemings having according to the will of the French King, put young Prince
Philip of Austria in possession of his inheritance, without attending the
Archduke his Father, and having appointed him those four Tutors to govern
both him and his The Archduke deprived of the government of his Son and of
Flanders.
Country, during his minority, did greatly discontent the Archduke therewith;
who seeing himself deprived of his only Son, and of the government of
Flanders, held diverse Councels with his most familiars, to know how he might
bring them unto reason: whereunto the Earl of Nassau, and the Lord of
Goesbeeke town lost their trade, by their means, whereupon the Flemings built
a fort upon A quarrel betwixt the Bu^geois and them of Antwerp.
The outrag^ of the Brugeois.
the Archduke against the Brugeois: whereupon he makes an enterprise to
surprise them, the which being discovered, the Brugeois stood so upon their
guard, as for that time he could not effect any thing, and many Bourgeses of
the said town were Anthony of Bourgongne Earl of Steenberghen, bastard to the
good Duke Philip of Bourgongne, a wise and an ancient knight, governor to
Charles the 8. the French King, sent by the King and his council, to devise of
the means to reconcile all controversies betwixt the Archduke and the
Flemings, but their spleenes were so great on either side, as he prevailed
nothing, either party remaining obstinate in his opinions. A while after the
Archduke seized of the town of Deudermonde by surqrise; and then began
sharp wars betwixt the Archduke and the Flemings, Martin Swart, (a Shomaker
by his trade, whom the Archduke for his prowes had made a knight) entered with
his company into Deudermond Audenarde and Nienhouen surprised for the Archduke.
Flanders, surprised the town of Nienhouen, spoiled the French garrison that
was in it, ransomed the town, and they left it. They of Antwerp beseeged,
battred and forced the fort of Cloppersdyke, nere unto Saffringhen upon the
river of Escault, the

Anthony of Bourgongne Earl of Seuenberghen contynuing still to mediate an
accord betwixt the Archduke and the Flemings, used such good means with them
of Bruges, as they were content to humble themselves unto the Archduke, with
whom he reconciled them in such sort, as the 21. of Iulie he entered the
town, being accompanied by the Earl of Nassau, and the greatest part of his
army: where he punnished some mutinous rebels, and renewed the law, the
Magistrate and the Officers Bruges reconciled to the Archduke and Gand.
of the town at his pleasure. The Ganthois hearing what the Brugeois had done,
were by the intercession of the Earl of Steenbergeen reconciled in like sort,
whether the Archduke went about fifteen days after, with goodly troops of
horse and foot, Philip, whom he had not seen of a long time, and was then
very joyful to behold him. The Archduke entering into the town, pardoned all
that was past: yet at night some unquiet mutiners stirred up some of the
Bourgeses against their Prince, so as the Archduke had been in danger of his
person, if his men had not speedily gone to arms, A new tumult in Gand.
and chased away these rascals, whereof many were committed to prison and
executed: Then had he occasion to take from them their preuiledges and
freedoms, the which he cancelled and disanuilled, and took Prince Philip his
Son, and carried him to Macklyn, to his grandmother in law, the Douager of
Bourgongne. Soon after Adolph of Cleues lord of Rauestein, the Earl of
Romont, the lord of Vere and the lord of Baueren, who soon after married with
the daughter of the said lord of Vere. About that time the Emperor Frederic
came to Cologne, where he stayed eight days, the Archduke Maximilian his
Son went to him to Aix, who had not seen him of a long time, and from thence
they went The Emperor Frederic comes to Cologne.
together about Lent to Cologne. All difficulties and quarrels pacified
betwixt duke John of Cleues and the Diocese of Cologne in the which the
Emperor had invested Herman Landtgraue of Hessen, together with the Duchy of
Westphalen and the county of Arensbourg. The Emperor, the Archduke his Son,
and all the Princes that were with them parted on Saint Agathes day from
Cologne, toward Francfort to choose a King of the Romans, where the 16. of
February by a common consent of all Maximilian made King of the Romans.
the Princes Electors, Maximilian of Austria was chosen and proclaimed King of
Romans. And the Thursday after Easter following, they returned all to Aix,
where he was crowned in our Ladies Church with all the accustomed Ceremonies:
where as the said King did knight many Princes and Noblemen, among the which
were Philippe of Bauaria Palatin of Rhine, Arnold duke of Saxony both Princes
Electors, the duke New knghits made by the King of the Romans.
Gaspar of Bauaria: William duke of Iuliers, William Lantgraue of Hessen.
Albert, Marquis of Baden, William Lord of Egmont and many others to the number
of 200. The feast of his coronation being ended, the Princes retired every one
to his home: the Emperor into Austria and the King of Romans into Brabant.
Before that the Archduke went unto the Emperor his Father, he made Engelbert
Earl of Nassau Governor of all the Netherlands in his absence, by virtue of a
commission given him at Boisleduc in that year 1485. whom we will place for
the first Governor made by 1485.
the Prince.

ENGELBERT EARL OF NASSAV, the first Governor, Lieutenant and Captain
general for the Prince, in the Low Countries.
ENGELBERTVS COMES NASSAVIVS GVBERNAT: BELGII.


I did first Govern of the Nasouien blood,
True to my lord of these Low Countries good.
Where Maximilian of the Romans King,
Of Austria Duke, and the Archduke his son:
Taking fair note of me, did forthwith bring
Me unto place and Eminence, but it was done,
With a prouiso, only for a space:
Through which occasion I did tame the rage,
Of the tumultuous Brugeois, which to my Grace,
Nassau our house at Court, can give good gage.
IN the year 1491. Engelbert Earl of Nassau was by Maximilian the Philip
going into Spain, he was appointed by him governor general of the
Netherlands. All this while the factions of Vetcoopers and Schieringers, raged
in Friseland, one against an other. In the which the Monks and relligious men
dealt, with their thundering excomunications, among others Aggo Albert of Heenlon
did excomunicat Iga Galama and his brethren, which was the cause of great
mischief and ruin. For the said brethren of the faction of Vetcoopers, drew
The (...) in (...) deal (...) factions.
unto their succors John of Egmont governor of Holland, who sent them strange
soldiars, Albert and George dukes of Saxony. Soon after that Maximilian King
of Romans was returned out of German into the Netherlands, the Ganthois and
Brugeois did mutine again: And therefore the King had leauied 20000. horse and
foot for his guard, the which being lodged and disperced in the the country,
The Ganthois and Brugeois mutine again.
them, then by their enemies: being all high Bourguignons or Hanniuers, besides
the country was daily surcharged with new impositions, more then they could
bear: al by the persuasion (said they) of Peter Lanchals knight, his
treasorer, Baylife of Bruges, whom the Ganthois and Brugeois would not obey,
whereupon the King came in February, withal his nobility into the town of
Bruges, leaving the horsemen of his guard without: reserving some which he held
by him with some Landtsknets: he made certain demands unto the Magistrate
which they would not accept. He being displeased at this refusal, by the
advice of the said Lanchals, marched in arms withal his train unto the
market place. The sworn bands not knowing what this might pretend, doubted
Peter Lanchals seeing this disorder, being well acquainted with the
disposition of this people, went and hid himself. The companies which did hate
him to the death, sought him in all places, but not finding him, they promised
a great sum of money to him that should discover him. In the mean time they
put many The Siegnio Lanchals beheaded.
they made a third proclamation, by the which it was said, That if any one had
concealed him till that time, in bringing him forth, they should be pardoned,
if not, all those that had so long kept and concealed him in their houses,
should themselves and all their family be hanged before their doors, the which
did so terrefie them, as he was discovered, and presently led unto a scaffold
that was made ready, whereas after they had tormented them strangely in the
presence of all the people, they caused his head to be cut off.

The King of Romans being thus restrained like a very prisoner in the town
of Bruges: some towns of Flanders, as Alost, Deudermonde, Oudenarde, Hulst and
others, to the knowledge of the Emperor Frederic the Kings father, but he
made his move Herman of Hessen, Archbishop The Emperor g^es with an army
against (...) Flemings.
of Cologne, was employed: to persuade them of Gaunt, Bruges and Ypre, by
threats, and ecclesiastical censures, to set at liberty the King, his
Officers, and household servants, within a certain time limited: or that
otherwise he would proceed against Adolph of Cleues Lord of Rauesteyn, came to
Bruges, to the States of Flanders. The Flemings accorded with the King of the
Romans.
Whereas matters were so handled, as it was concluded, that the King should be
Philip were come to age. But the States of Brabant, Holland, Zeeland and
West-Frisland, would not have nor acknowledge in their Provinces any other
Curator or head, then the King of Romans, father to their Prince: wherein
they had reason. There were also in this conference many points agreed upon,
which seemed to be profitable for the country, the King and their Prince,
according to the which the King was delivered, but not his servants. Yet he
pardoned them all, and took a solemn oath to entertain this accord, for
assurance whereof he left Philip of Cleues, son to the Lord of Rauesteyn in
hostage. In the mean time (the which was cause of great war and miseries The
^mings are (...).
Commission (the Flemings having not enlarged the King by the day limited)
pronounced the sentence of excommunication against the towns of Gaunt, Bruges
and Ypre, the which made them odious to all the world, calling them
excommunicated and damned persons, no man being willing to converse, nor to
have to do with them. Yet afterward by the intercession of the French king,
sovereign Lord of Flanders (held immediately of the Crown of France) they so
purged themselves to the Pope, as he absolved them from the Archbishops curse.

Whilst that matters were thus handled in Flanders, the Emperor Frederic
aduanuanced still with his army, and that of the Princes and Imperial Towns;
until he Maximilian King of the Romans his son, went to meet him, and to
receive him, being accompanied with the Princes, Barons, Noblemen, Knights, and
chief Captains of his train, whom having thanked for the great pains they
had taken to come and succor him, coming before the Emperor his father, he
cast himself upon his knees, beseeching him most humbly to pardon them, as he
had The Emperor ^kes the a^ord made with the ^mings.
done them of Bruges: if it were but in respect of the oath which he had made,
and the faith which he had given them; whereunto the Emperor would by no
means yield: some Prelates persuading the King, that his oath did not bind
him, to people that were excommunicated. The Ganthois knowing that the Emperor
came in Arms against them, entreated Philip of Rauestein to be their general,
as it had been agreed Philip his son.) The Lord of Rauesteyn being in field
with his Ganthois, surprised

The 21. of May thinking to do as much at Gaunt, many of their men being
entered, Maximilian his son, king of Romans, Albert Duke of Saxony,
Landtgraue of Misnia: whom he made Governor of the Netherlands, to make war
as well against the Flemings, as the Frisons, as we will briefly show.

ALBERT DVKE OF SAXONY, LAND^ grave of Misnia, second Governor, Lieutenant and
General for the Prince in his Netherlands.
ALBERTVS DVX SAXONI^ GVBER^ BELGI^


(...) the Flemings and the Frison race,
The which the King of Rom^ins had good cause
Then to supplant, I had the Governors place,
Being also Prince and head over Saxon Laws,
But Freezlands government hariditarie
Was given then to me: he cruel foe^
At Groninghen reached me a deadly blow,
My friends to Misnia-house my corpse did carry.
AFter the Emperors retreat, the Flemings by virtue of their treaty The
Flemings al^e them selus with the Brabansones against the Duke of Saxony.
towns of Brusselles, Lovuaine, Tillemont and other small towns of Brabant,
who had their shares in this war as also they of Arthois, Henanult and Namur
did, by means of the French, who were allied to the Flemings. All this faction
was but a ruin and a general destruction of all the Netherlands, one town
making war against another: some town was taken one day for one party, and
recovered again the next by the other. During this war the Flemings made
themselves strong at sea, employing many banished men of Hollande and other
(that might not drink of all waters) with the which they did Francis Brederod,
brother to the Lord of Brederod did join, with certain banished men of
Rotterdam and of some other towns. This Gentleman was made one of their
Captains at sea, to make war against the Hollanders, who were his own
Countrymen, so as being embarked in Flanders, he landed at Delfshauen, and so
marched to Rotterdam, the which he surprised, (passing over to the ditch upon
the Ice) without striking stroke, which town was at that time full of
merchandise, the which they could not then ship, by reason of the great
abondance, of Ice which floats in winter in that river unto the sea. The
flemings not being contented to set the fire of dessention, by their rebellion
in their own contry, but they presently kindled it in Brabant and Holland
sedusing The King of the Romans comes into Hollands.


In the year 1489. the King of Romans came into Holland, where he went
throughout all the towns, to show them that by reason of the alterations in
Flanders, they should be careful to stand upon their gards; entreating them
to continue in their accustomed loyalty, to the Prince his Son and to him,
and toreceiue no strange forces: doing this, being in the town of Harlem, their
were other towns in Holland, which came to complain of the Harlemois, which
had been the cause of great troubles, if the King had not wisely prevented it.
Yet not with standing there was some war by reason of the surprise of
Rotterdam the which did much anoy their neighbors, having drawn the vicont of
Montfort to their party, who also made violent wars for his Rotterdam yielded
to the King of Romans.
Francis of Brederode, Superintendant in the town of Rotterdam, began to treat
with the Squier of the King of Romans, as in the end an Agreement was made by
the which a Proclamation was made at the town house, that whosoever would
depart the town with the seignior of Brederode, they might freely do it
without any let, and in like sort all that would remain might do it boldly
without fear or search. According to which agreement Francis of Brederode and
the other Captains with their soldiars, departed the town, and the Squier
entered with his men, but all this did not pacific the troubles in Holland, nor
with the Vicont of Montfort.

In November following Albert Duke of Saxony arrived in Holland, he came first
to A peace concluded betwixt the King of Romans and the Flemings.
yielded to a peace submitting themselves to the arbitrament of the French
King, (who should be son in law to the King of Romans) and to his council:
who (after many conferencee and deliberations) gave an arbitracie sentence,
which was very benificiall Philip of Cloves was not comprehended, who kept at
that time in the Castle of Scluse, but afterward he was received into grace.
This peace was proclaimed throughout all the Netherlands, to the incredible joy
of all the The Brugeois (...) again
Engelbert of Nassau was sent, who (as well for this cause, as for that they
kept their Prince prisoner) did so pinch the town, as they continued poor a
long time after, and the Brugeois were constraind by the allowance of the King
of Romans, to build unto the said earl of Nassau, that goodly house which
the Princes of Orange, have at this day in the town of Bruges. Duke Albert of
Saxony being returned out of Brabant into Holland, after the assembly of the
estates held at Leyden, seeing that the Vicont of Montfort did not forbear to
do all the Injuries he could unto the Hollanders, it was resolved by the
Montfort be^ by the Duke of Saxony.
for their army betwixt Worden and Montfort. And about the end of May in the
year 1490. the said Duke, accompanied with John of Egmond Governor of Holland,
and of many other noblemen, went and planted his camp before the town and
castle of Montfort 1490.
the which he did batter furioufly, and overthrew the ports, towers, and walls,
giving many assaults the which were well defended, the besieged making many
brave sallies, in which, and during the siege there died many of either side.
So as in the end the Earl of Nassau and of Chimay arriving in Holland
prevailed so by their good means and perswations, with the Duke of Saxony, to
avoid a greater effusion of blood as there was an accord made betwixt the Duke
and the Hollanders of the one part, and the Vicont of Montfort An accord
betwixt the duke o^ Saxony and (...) Vicont of Montfort.
and castle of Woerden, departing with his family and all that was in it, in
regard whereof the Duke should raise his camp from before Montfort the which
was performed of either side. Then the Vicont took an oath of fealty to the
King of Romans and to Prince Philip his son in the hands of duke Albert: so
the said Nobleman was reconciled, and all the rivers, ways and passages made
free, as before this last war. Francis of Brederode, having left the town of
Rotterdam, to the King of Romans Squire; retired to S^luse, to Philip of
Cleues, to whom there joined many banished men of Holland and other places: the
signior of Naeldwyk having paid his ransom to the Squier, was there also:
whilst that the camp lay before Montfort, these two Noblemen of Brederode and
Naeldw^ke, (...) ^umult (...).
had not bin so agreed upon by the States of the country. Besides in the
payments which they made in France, Spain, Portingall and England, coins were
at a higher rate then in the low contries: So as they feared that the
traffic of their town would fail. On the other side, as they of Scluse did
much harm, by their courses and roads, the duke of Saxony put a good garrison
into the town of Dam, who did no less in Flanders. In the wherein the Artisan
and the Merchant suffered much: as in deed every one complained

At that time the French King made war in Arthois, pretending that it had
been given him in marriage with the Lady Marguerite, sister to Philip of
Austria and daughter The French King makes war in Arthois:
to the King of Romans. In the mean time petty Salezart surprised the town
of Teroane, the which he kept a while for the Bourguignons party. But as the
Earl of Nassau and some other Noblemen went to beseege Bethune, the lord of
Cords, incountring them with all the forces of Piccardie, gave them battle,
in the village of Hinges, and had the victory, whereas the Earl of Nassau and
Charles of Egmont The battile of Hinges.
ransom: but the duke was kept long as a prisoner with the French King. At
this defeat the French recovered Teroane, the which they held since unto the
year 1554. the which the Emperor Charles the fifth took by assault, and caused
it be razed, as it is to this day, the soil remaining to the French. All this
time Holland was much afficted by the extreme dearth, especially of corn:
through the want of money, by new impositions and burdens, and above all,
through the robberies and spoils done both at sea and land by them of S^e,
having surprised the Islands of Tessell and Wyering, where they made their
retreates robbing and spoiling the ships coming out of Ostland. There was a
great tumult twice in the town of Alcmar,

On the other side the Ganthois (having received some small affront from the
King The Ganthois revolt.
of Romans people) revolted again, and joined with them of Scluse. The first
of Iulie they surprised the town of Hulst, although there were a garrison.
Then began all things to decline and go to ruin in Flanders. Many Ganthois
that were well affected to Hulst surprised by the Ganthois.
beseege the town of Dixmuyden (which the Ganthois had taken a little before)
the Dixmuyden taken from the Ganthois.
Charles of Egmont duke of Gelders, son to Prince Adolph (who as we have
said, was slain before Tourney, in service of the Ganthois) was yet prisoner
at the French Kings court, going and coming upon his faith, ever since that
he was taken near unto Bethune, by the Lord of Cords, with the Earl of
Nassau: some of his friends, (among the which was the Earl of Moeurs, and
other Noblemen Geldrois) did work his delivery for money, and conducted him
with a goodly troop of soldiers, French and Germans through the country of
Liege, into his Duchy of Gelders, where he was welcome to all men, and
acknowledged for their Duke and Earl of Zutphen. Charles duke of Gelders
delivered out of prison. 1492.


The 30. of May 1492. the fury of the Pesants in Holland revived again of
those whom they called Kasenbroots-volck, that is to say, men of bread and
cheese: as if one would say, poor men that sought for meat to eat, who went
in great troops before the town of Harlem, where by the help of poor
handy-crafts men they entered and spoiled all the rich men, beating and breaking
down doors, windows, cofers and cubberts; tearing in pieces papers, bonds
and instruments, pulling of the seals, and carrying away what was fittest for
them, and doing other villainies, which did nothing The fury of the Pesants at
Harlem.
avail them, yet could not be appeased. And not content heere-with, thinking
to do as much to Leyden, they advanced even to the gates, but they were chased
away by the Canon, so as every one was glad to get him to his home.

During these alterations, the Duke of Saxony, sent men into Holland to subdue
these Pesants. Those of Harlem, who were not guilty of these troubles smarted
notwithstanding for it, by reason of the spoils which the soldiers committed
in those parts, even at their gates. Soon after the Duke came in person into
Holland, unto whom the Magistrate sent to excuse himself of all that had past,
fearing they should be accused as if they had been culpable: and in the mean
time the troops did the The Duke of Saxony comes into Holland.
worst they could. Duke Abert of Saxony coming to Harlem, the Clergy and the
magistrate went to meet him in form of a procession, and presented the keys
of the town unto him, but the most mutinous fled away: being entered, he caused
a gibbet and a scaffold to be set up, to punish such as remained: many good
Bourgesses, which during the troubles had absented themselves, were called for.
And although that the Magistrate Andrews florins, so as the Inhabitants were
forced to bring their Plate and Jewels to the Towne-house, to furnish the
sum, for that there was not so much coined money in all the town, it had
been so exhauste by the wars and troubles past.

This Duke did also punish the Kennemers by fines and reparations: and not yet
satisfied He punished Harlem and Alcmar.
with them of Harlem, he commanded their Banner to be brought unto his
lodging, and the Charter of their Privilege, the which he declared to be
forfeited: he also built a Block-house in form of a Cittadell, and taxed them
at 3600. Florins of Coppen Gheel (otherwise called Holl) one of their chief
captains, who had in a manner alone governed the whole town, of whom it is
at this day spoken for a common proverb, when as any one presumes over much.
Thou shall be like Coppen Holl, that is to say, thou shall loose thy head.

From thence the duke went before Scluse, the which he beseeged straightly
both by sea and land, during which seege there arrived many ships in the
Low Countries The duke beseeged Scluse.
laden with corn, the which did abate the prices of all things, especially of
bread, the summer season being very fair and temperate promising a
plentiful and rich harvest, the like was never seen in the memory of man. It
seemed that with the season which had been a long time troublesome, men would
also grow more moderate and Gand submits to the duke.
gentle, for in the month of July, those of Gaunt sent their Deputies to
Hulst, to duke Albert to be received into favor, repairing their faults past
with a great sum of money which they promised and paid: by means whereof all
was pardoned, and their fore-passed rebellions forgotten. In the mean time the
duke did furiously batter the Philippe of Cleues Lord of Rauestein. By the
which it was said, that the soldiars that were in the great and little Castle
of Scluse, should depart, that the town and little Castle should be open to
his men. But the lord of Rauestein should remain with his family above in the
great Castle, the which he should keep during his life, for the service of
Prince Philip Archduke of Austria.

The King of Romans visiting the towns of Holland one after an other, being
at Harlem, the five chief towns of the country, that is to say, Dordrecht,
Leyden, Delf; Amsterdam and Goude, came with their complaints unto him, for
that the Harlemois during all the wars against the Flemings would never
assist them, nor contribute any thing to the charges. But they so excused
themselves, as he remained satisfied, so as for a good sum of money which
they did furnish, he gave them an Act of exemption of his hand, for that
which the other towns complained of them, who being discontented with this
grant, bare it patiently until that duke^ Albert came to Harlem, where they
renewed their former complaints, but for that the duke had made an accord with
them and with the town of Alcmar, they prevailed nothing The duke ruins the
factions in Holland and zeeland.
teach them not to be so cruel and, bitter one against an other, nor to
entertain factions and partialities amongst themselves, as they had done
many years under the titles of Hoecks and Cabillaux, the which it was
impossible to root out, but Henryes, so as George his youngest son, was
forced to abandon all, as we shall show in the following course of this
History.

In the mean time there was great heart-burning in Freezeland, betwixt the
Nobles The Duke of Saxony seeks an occasion to oppress the F^sons.
of both factions. Duke Albert to seek some occasion of quarrel against them,
(after he had ended the troubles of the Netherlanders and Kennemers) writ unto
them, commanding them to send him a certain some of money, by way of loan,
exaction, imposition, or how they pleased to call it. Whereupon the Frisons,
having conferred together what were best to be done, and how to answer their
Duke: they writ unto him resolutely; That he had no right nor authority over
them, to make any such demand, the which they were in no sort willing to grant
him: and if any had otherwise informed him they had abused him: Offering, that
if it pleased him to come or to send his Deputies to Staueren or to Workom,
that they should find them to confer with them. And if it were found that
the Emperor or the Earls of Holland, had ever had any such right and power as
he pretended, that they would submit themselves, and do that which belonged to
good subjects and vassals.

About the end of Iaunary in the year 1493. the German troops of Duke
Albert, 1493. The Dukes troops spoil Gelders.
which was called Dye groote gaerde, (that is to say, the great rod, or the
great whippe.) entered into the country of Gelders, spoiling and destroying all
where they past, specially at the Abbie of Marie-wert; then after they had
burnt many villages, in the end of February they came before Vtrecht, lodging
in the suburbs committing a Katherins gate (whereof he was Captain) and
first executed, then quartered some of his men. The Traiectins seeing the great
spoils these German soldiers made about this town, and fearing some
greater inconvenience (by the favor of some friends) they made an Accord for
a good sum of money, with the Lord of Iselstein: upon condition; That they
should take down the quarters and heads from the gates, of those that bad
been executed, and bury them in the Church-yarde. Whereupon the horses
retired.

The Emperor Frederick the third, dyed at Vienna in Austria, the 3. of August,
for The Emperor Frederic dies.
that (as they said) he had eaten too many Melons, after that he had reigned
44. years, Steuens Church in the said Town. To whom his son Maximilian King
of the Romans, Archduke of Austria, succeeded in the Empire: who was borne the
12. of March 1459. He had been crowned King of the Romans the sixth of
February 1486. by the consent of all the Princes Electors. About that time,
and before the death of the Emperor Frederick, the Schyeringers and Vetcoopers
in Friseland tormented one another daily, the Groningeois being joined The
Emperor sends to pacify the troubles of Friseland.
to the Schyeringers, holding the town of Leeuwarden, and all the Country of
Ostergoe, which was the cause of great effusion of blood. So as Duke Albert
seeing some occasion of quarrel against the Frisons, advertised the Emperor
Frederick, who being loath to attempt any thing rashly, sent Otto van Langen,
one of his Counsel, to and could not reconcile them, he returned back to the
Emperor. Afterward the siegnior Douwe Curate of Itens, being returned from the
Emperors court, brought letters of Committimus to Herman Archbishop of
Cologue, and to Henry bishop of Munster, to take information of the attemps of
them of Groninghen, who De facto, (for so the Text said) had without the
Emperors knowledge seized upon, and reduced under their obedience many towns
and baylewicks (which they call Grittemes) in the country of Freezland, to the
prejudice and contempt of the imperial Majesty, and of the whole Empire. with
other Letters of Inhibition to the Groningeois, not to attempt any thing
further: but repair all new attempts and innouations, restoring the said
towns and bayle-wicks, unto their first estate, notwithstanding any voluntary
consent: upon pain of proscription by the Empire, and confiscation of all
their goods; privileges and freedoms. The said Letter dated the 5. of July.
1493. At Lins in Austria,

A while after the Emperor Maximilian the first of that name, sent the same
Commissioner van Langen into Freezland, to reconcile them: who being come to
the town of Sneck, sent to the States of Oster-goe, Wester-goe, and to the
seven forests, which are the three members of Freezland, giving them an
Assignation, to come by the first of The Groningeois sent to the Emperor. The
same Commissioner sent into Friseland by the Emperor Maximilian.
the tenor of his Commission; and that the 18. of the said month, he went to
Groninghen, to acquaint them with the Emperors pleasure, for the better
execution whereof according to his Commission, he made a truce betwixt the
Groningeois and the Frisons unto the first day of May following, hoping in that
time to find some means to reconcile both parties: but he found the
Groningeois too wilful and obstinate, and therefore he returned into Friseland.

The States being assembled in the Emperors name, by the Commissioner Otto
1494. An Assembly of the States of Friseland.
van Langen, the Prelates, Nobles, Towns and commonalties of Wester-goe,
Oster-goe, and the seven Forests, that were not allied to the Groningeois came
thither. There in the presence of them all, the said Commissioner having showed
his Commission, To ratify and confirm their ancient Privileges in paying the
arrerages of the annual tribute due unto the Empire. He did also counsel
them, in the Emperors name, (according to their Privileges and ancient
customs) To choose some one of their own Nation, some worthy man endued with
good parts, and well affected to the good of his Country, to be their
Potestate (as they had been in old time governed) who might be careful and
vigilant to preserve their Liberties and Freedoms. Else the Emperor (without
doubt) would himself make choice of one of these Noblemen. Of Albert Duke of
Saxony, of Philip Lord of Rauesteyn, or of the Earl of Emden. Wherefore he
advised them to follow his counsel, and; That they should do well to choose
one that were not partial: amiable, courteous and tractable, well acquainted
with the humors and disposition of men, and the estate of the Country. The
States having heard this proposition, after some private conference among
themselves, judging that if they did it not, the Emperor might appoint one by
his authority, the which would derogate much from their Privileges: they
resolved therein to follow the Emperors will, and the advice of his
Commissioner. Having therefore appointed certain Prelates and a Notarie, to
set down their suffrages and voices in the election, they went to choose one
of the chief of their Nobility: in the end by the plurality of voices, the
office of Potestate was laid upon Iuwde Roma van Baret, a Gentleman both
virtuous and honorable, that was nothing partial, nor factious, quiet and
gentle, having married A new Potestate chosen in Friseland.
the sister of Iuwe Hero; and Iarich Hottinga, who were the chief of the
faction of Deka^a was pleasing to all the assembly of States. The which did
also wonderfully content the said Commissioner. Then the said States during the
Assembly, made choice of 24. men to be Judges and Assistants to the said
Potestate, wherall together, three or four times in the year should treat of
affairs concerning the Harald Camego: in the year 794. and the other of Wibo
Reynalda of the year 812. the which had bin in their time Potestates of
Friseland. The siegneor Iuw Hottinga did also give him two that were forged at
Franyker, in the year 1419. by Sycko Syaera, which the Commissioner received
thankfully, promising to give them unto the Emperor, the which he knew would
be pleasing unto him. This Election of a Potestate thus made in the Town of
Snecke, where did not assist the Siegneors Iuw Iongama of Bolswaert.
Tyerck-walta, those of Calama of Roarda, of Herema, nor their alleyes: the
Commissioner Here Otto van Langen, is vohyer gevanghen, morgen sal ^y hangen.
That is to say; Otto of Langen is now a prisoner, and to morrow will be hanged.
The Commissioner heard them and understood them well, but dissembling it, he
past on for that he would not discontent any, hoping to do some great good.
Being come to the Franciscans, in the presence of I^w Iangama, Tyarck-wal and
An Assembly at Bolswaert.
Iuw Iangama answering in the name of all his Partisans said; That neither he
nor any of his would hear speak of such a Potestate, until that the They
refuse to allow of the new Potestate.
whole Country of Friseland were united into one body. And as for him that had
bin chosen at Sneck, that they would never consent unto it, for that he was
allied to the Family of Hottinga, which had beenalwayes enemy unto them: and
therefore they would not have any one that was allied to that Family to be
advanced to any command, or to be in greater credit then themselves. Whereunto
Iuw Hero and Iarich Hottinga brethren, hearing that for their causes their
brother in law was rejected. Iuw speaking for the rest of his brethren, said;
That he see well that Iuw Iongama with his friends and Allies, did little
regard the good of their Country, nor the preservation of their Privileges
and Freedoms, but rather through ambition, their own private profits, and to
the suppression of their rights and ancient Statutes. Which words drew them on
to proud and bitter terms: The common people of the party of Iongama and
Walta, (being stronger then the rest) would have taken Arms against the Nobles
of the other party; whereupon some great inconvenience would have grown, if
the Commissioner had not cunningly pacified them entreating them to retire for
that time every man to his lodging, to consider better thereof at leisure:
sommoning them to come thither the next day at two of the clock in the
afternoon, and whosoever did fail to forfeit a quart of wine; the which
pleased all the Peter Camstra and the Hottingas to lodge in the castle of
Iongama, and the next day (early in the morning) they returned to Snecke, being
assured that he should do no good at Bolswaert, and that it was dangerous to
stay there, it might be with effusion of blood, the which he sought to avoid,
for he see in the rest nothing but hatred and spleen.

The next day Iuw Iongama, Tyarck-walta, the Galamas and their Partisans, came
at the appointed hour to the Friars, where finding neither the Commissioner,
nor the other Hottingas and their Allies. And so this Convocation proved
^lesse. The reason why Iongama the Galamas and their Partisans had showed
themselves so obstinate, was; for that they relied much upon the Groningeois,
who through their too great pride and presumption made no account neither of
the Commissioner, nor of Otto of Langen (the Emperors Commissioner) seeing that
by their factions and bitter partialities, and by the instigation of the
Groningeois he should profit nothing, departed from Sneck and went to
Deuenter, whither he sent again for the parties, and them of Groninghen to
come unto him the 4. of February; but being there, they were so incensed one
against another with such bitterness, as they departed without doing any
thing: and the said Commissioner took his way toward the Emperor.
Afterward that which he had foretold them came to pass: That if they would
not consent to the election of a Potestate, within a short time other strangers
would come, and force them unto obedience. The which happened, for they
themselves dug a pi^, into the Iongamas, diverse factions and great effusion
of blood. Those of Harinxima and Galama did no less one unto another. The
Towns, Abbaies and Monasteries did the like, calling in forces and in so great
numbers to their succors, as they could not be freed of them, until they had
paid them the last farthing, to the great oppression of the people. The which
was no sooner dismissed Albert of Saxony entertained them, and came into
Friseland to make them to lay aside their factions, being forced thereunto by
poverty. And these were the fruits of their wilful obstinacy.

PHILIP OF AUSTRIA THE 2. OF that name, the 34. Earl of Holland and Zeeland,
Lord of Friseland: Duke of Bourgongne, etc Earl of Flanders, etc. Marquis of
the holy Empire.
Philippus 2. Austrius.


My fat^er with my goods gave me a wife
A pe^rlesse Princess of the Arrago^ blood,
From her six children, Kings and Queens took life,
By (...) tw^e years Helland from danger stood:
And by my wife I did inherit Spain,
But my death proved my wives, who with grief werryed,
Wa^ng ^y corpse in tears that streamed amain,
My ^s at Burgos in a Tomb interred.
PHILIP the second of that name, Earl of Holland and Zeeland, Lord Maximilian
of Austria (afterward Emperor) and of Mary Duchess of Bourgongne, daughter
to Duke Charles the warlike, was borne in Bruges the 20. day of June in the
year 1470. he was four year old when his mother dyed. Sense whose death the
Archduke, king of Romans, his father, in quality of Regent, Tutor or
Curator, governed his wives Inheritance with great troubles and vexation, by
reason of the great factions and partialities, which reigned then both in
Holland and Flanders unto the year 1494. that 1494.
the King of Romans by the death of the Emperor Frederick his father, was
crowned Philip his son being then 16. years old, was entitled, Archduke
Philip of Austrias titles.
of Austria, Duke of Bourgongne, Lothier, Brabant, Styria, Carinthia, Lembourg,
Luxembourg and Gelders; Earl of Habsbourg, Flanders, Arthois, Bourgongne,
Ferrette, and Kiburch; Palatin of Henault, Holland, Zeeland, Namur and Zuphen.
Marquis of the Holy Empire and of Bourgau: Landtgraue of Elsaten, Lord of
Windismark, Portenau, Salines and Macklyn.

The 16. of March, the same year, the Emperor Maximilian married in the town
of Inspruch, the Lady Blanch Maria, daughter to Galeas Duke of Milan, and
sister to Maxim^lians second marriage.
Duke John Galeas Maria. This marriage discontented some Princes of the Empire,
and many of the Emperors friends, for that she was not of so noble a House as
they desired, Viscontes side (who then governed at Milan) there was little
Nobility, and of the Sforces side less. A while after he brought his wife
into the Low Countries, being accompaned by many Princes of Germany. The
Archduke Philip his son, The Archduke Philip put in possession of the
Netherland^.
and the Lady Marguerite his sister (who had been sent back out of France,
after the marriage of King Charles the 8. (to whom she was promised) with the
Duchess of Britain) went to meet them with the chief Nobility of the
Neitherlands, at Maestricht, from thence they came to Louvain, whereas the
Archduke was with great Ceremonies and pomp put into possession of the Duchy
of Brabant, and soon after in Antwerp of the Marquisate of the holy Empire.
The 12. of December in the Town of S. Gheertrudenbergh of the Earldom of
Holland; and soon after at Romerswael of the County of Zeeland. From thence
he went into ^landers, Arthois

In the same month of December, Charles Duke of Gelders returned out of
Lorraine, whither he was retired for fear of the Emperor Maximilan, who then
held almost all the Duchy of Gelders: who by the intercession of the Empress
and his other good friends, was suffered to remain in Brabant, and to dispute
the right which he pretended to the said duchy, before the 4. Electors of
the Rhine, which were, the Cont Palatin, Vicarie of the Empire, and the
Archbishops of Mentz, Cologne and Treues, whereupon a day was assigned in the
Town of Maestricht, where a sentence was given by the said Princes: That
Charles and his Predecessors from Duke Renold, in the year were fallen from
the Duchy: for that the said Duke Renold dying without heirs A sentence
given by 4. Electors, against Char^es duke of Geld^
male, the race of the Dukes of Gelder dyed with him. Besides that in fifty
years his grandfather Arnold and his father Adolph had neglected to take up
the said Duchy of the Empire and to do their homage, and therefore being now
returned again to the Empire, he could no more pretend any interest unto it,
and that from henceforth he should call himself Charles of Egmont, and not of
Gelders. Notwithstanding this sentence, Charles remained in Gelders, and called
himself Duke; all the Towns acknowledging him so, and loved him better then
the Emperor, or the Archduke his son, who might pretend some interest unto
it, by the transport which Duke Arnold had made (excluding prince Adolph
Charles) to the Duke of Bourgongne, (as we have said before.) To which
Charles the Geldrois inclined the more willingly, for that they demanded a
Prince of the blood of their old Dukes, expelling the Emperors men out of their
Limits: whereupon the Germans and Prince Philips forces went to besiege
Ruremond, but they redeemed themselves from this siege: from thence they went
before (...) by the Archduke (...).
both of horse and foot, that was within it, the which did great spoil unto
the enemies camp, by many brave sallyes, so as in the end seeing they could
prevail nothing: being forced, they raised their camp, leaving part of their
Attilerie, which they could not draw away in time. Soon after the Emperor
returned into Germany, to an imperial diet, which should be held at Worms:
leaving in the mean time in the Country of Gelders, the troops of Duke
Albert of Saxony, (the which were called the great scourge) robbing, burning
and spoiling every where as they went: having seized upon Niekerke, which they
fortified, serving them as a retreat for their thefts and spoils. Charles
Duke of Gelders went and besieged them, and shot fire into

Whilst that the factions of the Scheringers and Vet-coopers in Friseland
(after the reiection of their new chosen Potestate, according to the Emperors
Commission) were in their greatest heat and fury: Goslic Iongama cousin to Iuw
Iongama, and Hero The f^ctions o^ F^seland de^d suc^ of the Du^e of Saxony.
Hottinga were in the Town of Harlem in Holland with duke Albert of Saxony, to
demand succors, who gave them good hope, when he should see how the quarrel
betwixt the Town of Mastricht, and the Lord of Aremberg would be decided,
keeping them with him sometime, and entertaining them with such shows of love
and kindness Goslic Iongama and Hero Hottinga returned into Friseland, with 8.
hundred soldiers with which duke Albert had furnished them, whereof Collonell
Nythrad Fokx was chief commander: who notwithstanding all the opposition of
the Groningeois, of them of Leiu-warden and of Bolswaert, and of all other
Gentlemen and partisans Vetcoopers, they landed, and came to charge them with
such fury (although the other were thrice as many in number) as they made them
recoyle, leave their Artillery, and retire for their safety to Lieu-warden.
Therevppon Goslic Iongama, Hero Hottinga, with these foreign forces and some
gentlemen Schyeringers, went the 4. of October (by the break of day) to
assail the town of Bols^aert. At the first the I^habitants did valiantly
resist them, but in the end they were forced, and the Town taken, with the
loss of twelve Bourgesses only, and of many prisoners, among the which the
chief were Iuw Iongama, Thyark Walta, and Sybrand Roorda, the chief of the
Vetcoopers faction. Iongama made offer unto the soldiers that had taken him of
600. A crue^l murder of a ki^sman.
Florins of gold to save hislife, the which thinking to do, they hid him in a
poor man's house: but Goslic his cousin having discovered him, went thither,
drew him forth, and slew him. He offered 200. florins of gold to the same
soldiers, to have Tyarck walta, but they seeing how he had murdered the other,
deceiving them of the ransom which they expected, they refused him, which
done, the town was abandoned to the spoil. Foc^s. For the effecting whereof,
they charged the quarter of Wester-goe, with a certain imposition, the which
some paid willingly, others by constraint. They borrowed also the chalices and
silver vessel of the town of Bolswaert, and of the Churches in villages
thereabouts so as money being found and the soldiers paid, Colonel Focks
retired with his men out of the country, leading with him Tyack Walta, and
Sybrand Ro^rda prisoners, chief of the faction of the Vetcoopers. In the year
1497. the Lord of Iselsteyn, in the name of 1497.
the Archduke Philip Earl of Holland, was gone to make a road into the
Country of Gelders, about Tyel, where he spoiled and burnt some Villages. The
Geldrois the Geldrois (to have their revenge) surprised the Town and castle of
Leederdam in Albert Duke of Saxony posted thither, to suppress them, putting
good Garrisons into the towns of Henkelon and Aspren (the which with Leederdam
make a Triangle, not above a quarter of a league one from the the other) and so
coopt them up, as of the one side they could neither go in nor out: so as in
the end being reduced to extremity, they were forced to yield up unto the
Duke, to have their lives and goods saved. A while afterward the Geldrois
overrun all the Country of Boisleduke from whence they brought great
spoil, and many prisoners. Duke Albert meaning to do as much in Gelders, cast
a floating bridge over the River of Meuze, whereas ten horse might pass in
Front, and so they had their Baten-burch surpri^d by Duke Albert.
Those within it defending themselves valiantly, were in the end forced to
yield, after that their walls had been beaten down, the which the Duke
caused to be repaired, and placed a garrison there, wherewith he might anoy the
Geldrois. Presently after there was a truce made betwixt the Archduke Philip,
and the duke of Gelders.

Duke Albert of Saxony being at that time at Al^mar in Holland, sent his
Commissioners The Duke of Saxony made here ditarie gouernot of F^iseland.
to Franicker in Friseland, to let the Frisons understand that the Emperor
Maximilian had given him the Government hereditarie of all Friseland. The
States of the country being assembled, having heard the charge of these
Commissioners, and Nythard Focks had done in his behalf, the year before,
being accompanied by Goslick Iongama, and Hero Hottinga, who had put the said
hereditarie government into his head: presuming to put him into peaceable
possession thereof. For the effecting whereof they secretly labored their
friends, and the towns in Wester-goe, to make them yield unto it: thinking it
sufficient to cause him to be received in that quarter, whereof being assured,
the doubted not of Oster-goe, and much less of the seven Forests. But seeing
that in private they profited little, they durst not

But before we proceed, we will first relate for what cause the Emperor did
advance Duke Albert to the hereditarie government of Friseland. You must
understand that Duke Albert was son to the Emperor Fredericks sister, who was
father to Maximilian, and so cousin German to the said Emperor Maximilian,
not that he was Duke of Saxony (for he was a younger brother to Duke Arnold,
Prince Elector and true duke Maximilian (when he was yet but King of Romans,
and Gardien to his son the Archduke Philip) made him his Lieutenant in the
government general of the Neitherlands: where he did many exployts of war,
with his Germans that he had sent for out of his country of Misnia and other
places By reason whereof there was so great sums of money due to him, his
Colonels and Captains for their entertainments, as for the assurance thereof,
there were diverse castles put into his hand^, as Vilvoerden in Brabant, Scluse
in Flanders, Woerden and H^lem in Holland, Louvesteyn in the country of
Arckell, Medemblick Many (...) engaged to the Duke of Saxony for his
ent^taynment.
in west Friseland, and Ziriczee in Zeeland. The engaging of all these castles,
Albert might keep all these Provinces subject and in awe) did in the end
trouble the States of the Neitherlands, who consulted how they might tetire
them out of his hands finding none more expedient nor less chargeable then to
transport unto him the hereditarie government of Friseland, wherein they were
much assisted by the coming of Otto van Langen out of Friseland, during the
time that they Albert for their hereditarie Governor, in consideration whereof
he restored all the castles and other places of the Netherlands which had been
given him in pawn, except the Albert required to be received of the Frisons,
for their Governor, or Potestate hereditarie, writing diverse letters unto them,
to draw them to consent thereunto by mildness, before that he would use any
force; to avoid effusion of blood, and their greater ruin, making many fair
promises to be a good Prince unto them. But they The Frisons refuse Duke
Albert for their governor.
would by no means give ear unto it, always relying upon their Privileges
and Freedoms, the which had been given unto them by the ancient Roman
Emperors; and confirmed by Charlemaine and other Predecessors to the Emperor
Maximilian, the which they might not break; and therefore neither he, nor the
Princes Electors,

Duke Albert having understood by the relation of the Commissioner van Langen,
what the factions of the Schyringers and Vetcoopers in Friseland were, and with
The Duke will make use of the ^ctions (...) ^iseland.
what violence and fury they did massacre and ruin one another: and those of
the faction of the Schyeringers had given him an honorable reception, he
resolved to make use of these partialities, and to show more love to the
Schyeringers (whom he had known better by the means of Goslick Iongama and
Hero Hottinga, who came unto him to Harlem, and who had persuaded him much unto
it) then unto the Vetcoopers, and therefore he began to show them the least
countenance he could possibly. Edsard Earl of Emden came to comfort and
encourage him, promising all favor and succor to reduce them that were
obstinate. The which fell out happily for Edsard to settle his new estate of
the Earldom of East-Friselande, where Vlrick his father had been the first
Earl, by usurpation over many noble men and private gentlemen of the said
Country. On Saint Martins day, the Groningeois with those of Oster-goe and
Wester-goe, held an Assembly of State at Donrip, whereas a truce was

Notwithstanding the truce above mentioned betwixt the Frisons and Gro^eois,
Thyark Walta and other Vetcoopers bannished from Woorckum, and fled into the
town of Suolle, offering to restore and settle them without any charge in
Bolswaert, contenting, themselves only with the hazard of the pillage. This
pleased Thyarck, who without any delaie came with these troops into Thyarcks
followers, until that it appeared otherwise. But good God, what spoils, what
burning, what ruins The Vetcoopers dravve strange (...) ^to Friseland.
of houses and Castells, how many Gentlemen taken prisoners, what ransoming,
what exactions oppressions and violences, did these strange souldiars commit,
not in one quarter only, but over a Friseland? and yet in the mean time
nothing could mollefie the hearts of the factions, to reconcile themselves
together. If at any time they made some small truce or agreement, suddenly the
ouer-weening pride of the one seeking to oppress the other brake it, before
they had seen or tasted the fruies thereof. In the end Bocko Harincxima, Hero
Hottinga, Iuw-decama, Edo Iongama, Epo ^elua Syurdt Beyma, with many other
Gentlemen and the towns of Sneck, Franyker, Thyarck Walta had brought in) had
no end in the quarter of Wester gooe, and that their neighbors of Oster-gooe
and the seven forests, did in no sort aid them; they did certainly believe
that all this was procured by Walta, and that they were his men: in which
opinion they Groningeois did confirm them the more saying, that they had no
fear that Walta would do them any harm. After many conferences together, as
well in the towns of Franiker and Sneck as else where, to advise what were
most expedient and proffitable for them, in the end they resolved, to send and
entreat duke Albert to be their Protector and defender: by whose means and
power, they might once be delivered from these thieves and robbers. They c^l
(...) duke of Saxony into F^sland.
and to acknowledge him for their hereditary Lord, upon the conditions that
were set down in the contract which had past betwixt him and them. The duke to
take possession of that which was offered him, and which he had so much
affected, sent the siegnior Willebrord of Schooneburch a knight, his councellor
and treasorer general, Nythard Focx and Bernard Mets with their Regiments, to
chase away those troops which Thyarck Walta had brought in: with whom the
said councellor and Colonel dealt in such sort (for they were the duke their
Masters men) as they drew them out of Bolsweart: And after that the dukes
commissionars had taken possession in his name of all the quarter of
Wester-gooe, all these troops went together into Oster-gooe, and seized upon
the town of Dockom, robbing and spoiling all the country.

The Groningeois felt of it likewise, who seeing that they meant to set upon
them, agreed in good time with the commissionars* It would be tedious to
describe the war, miseries and desolation which happened in this country of
Friseland, which we leave Henry his Son to Harlinghen, The duke makes an
excessive demand.
and demanded the forth man over all the country of Friseland, or the twelfth
penny of all their goods and revenues: in consideration whereof they should be
free from serving him in the war. This demand was afterward the cause why
the whole Focks went with 350. men to meet with Edsard Earl of Emden, being
in the Town of Dam in the country of Groningen, and to receive the said town
of the Earl ^nell (...) by the (...).
in duke Alberts name. The Groningeois, knowing well of what importance it was
for them, and whereunto the duke pretended, which was to cut off the passage of
the sea behind them; they sent a thousand men, and taking him at an advantage
defeated him, where he was slain, for that he refused to yield: his body was
carried into Groninghe and buried in the Franciscans Church. The Bishop of
Vtrecht labored to make an accord betwixt the duke and the Groningeois, but
nothing succeeded; whervpppon the duke and Cont Edsard went to Emden and from
thence he returned into his Country of Misnia, leaving duke Henry his son
in Friseland for his Lieutenant,

In the year 1500. Duke Henry Lieuetenant to his father in Friseland, seeking
to exact too much upon the Frisons, made them to rise in arms against him, and
to besiege him in Franicker Duke Albert his father came posting out of
Germany, to the Earl of The Duke ty^s over the Frisons.
Emden with a new army to vngage his son, and from thence he went into
Friseland, where he made such a pitiful spoil, as all both noble and base,
rich and poor, Priests, Monks, Nuns and Nou^ces fled out of the Country,
none remaining but the poor pesants of the seven Forests, who would see what
the end might be of all there miseries. Duke Henry would gladly they had
ruined all Friseland, not being satisfied That the Pesants should return
freely every man The fruits of their (...).
to his house, and that for a certain sum of money (which they should
contribute every one according to his ability) he would receive them again
into favor. Whereupon they returned, redeeming themselves of the Duke; some
Village at a 100. 200. 300. 400. 500. florins according to their wealth. Then
commandment was given to bring all their Arms into the Cittadell of Lewarden,
and above all for a reparation, they should come bare-headed and barefooted,
without girdles, to sue for pardon upon their knees, and to promise all future
obedience to him and his heirs. This was in regard of the contrymen and
pesants; as for the Nobility, gentry and Churchmen, Otto van Langen had well
advised them, and that if they had chosen him, the Emperor would never have
been moved to remedy their civil wars by a sovereign authority. And there
would not have been any Prince so presumptuous Albert of Saxony did, remaining
by that means Lord of Friseland.

The Duke foreseeing that if he did not in like sort subject the town of
Groningen and the country there abouts, he should never enjoy Friseland
quietly: he went the last of July 1500. to besiege it, he planted his Camp in
Auwert, Seewert, and of the side of the Port of Bottoringhe, he battered it
furiously, as well the walls and Ramparts with his Cannon, as the houses in
ruin with his great morters. The in habitants wounded with the splinters of
the carriage and the gabions, and was carried to his lodging. He dies at Emden.
having before his retreat from Groningen left Cont Hughe van Lynsenack, to be
his Lieutenant over all Friseland, during his absence and his Sons, giving
charge to Willebrord of Schoonenburch, to enter into Friseland with 2500 men,
and to punnish the rebels which remained, reducing them under his obedience:
who marched with his troops unto the seven Forests and to Schellingwerff, who
never unto that time would acknowledge duke Albert for their Lord, he camped in
Oldebercoop, sending for Henry of Saxony sent his Fathers body into his
country of Misnia, and he himself went to Brusselles to his couzin the
Archduke Philip, Duke Henry leaves Friseland to his younger brother.
never returning more into Friseland: for that (as they said) being besieged in
Franicker, he had vowed unto God, that if he might get safely out, he would
never return. So afterward he resigned all his right to duke George his
younger brother.

GEORGE DVKE OF SAXONY Governor of the Netherlands, for the Archduke Phillip of
Austria Prince and Lord of the said Country.
GEORGIUS DVX SAXONI^ GVBER BELGII,


^,
^;
^
^
The Groningers, and Frisons that to me
He left the place and swaye, but their bold ^ight
Driving to danger and dispense: I f^e
^o Emperor Charles surr^ndred all my Right.
GEORGE duke of Saxony son to duke Albert having by the death Henry his elder
brother, obtained the government of the country of Friseland and Groningen, by
the title of donation which the Emperor had made unto duke Albert: had also
since after the decease of the Archduke Philip of Austria, King of Castille by
his wife, the government of the Netherlands for a time, in the absence of the
Emperor Maximilian, busied in the wars of Italy. He was great grandfather
to Prince Mary of Nassau by the mothers side.

About that time the banished men of Friseland, which could obtain no pardon
from the dukes of Saxony father and son: hearing that about Harderwyke in
Geldres, there were certain troops of soldiars, that were not entertained by
any: some

Afterward all these banished men, with one common consent, sent their
deputies to Antwerp, to the Archduke Philip and to duke Henry of Saxony: for
the Nobles there The Frisons complain to the Archduke Philip.
went Edo Iongama, Edo Gerbranda, Douwe Galama, Tyark Walta, Iuw Roorda, Ian
Roorda, Rienick Campstra, Ritsk Iuckama, Sasker Heringa, Wattie Harinxma, Douwe
Hiddama, and Agge Lankama of Mackom, for the clergy, Herma^ Pastor of Foswaert,
Albert Pastor of Styens, Gello Pastor of Vollega, and some others of their
Clergy. These deputies being in the presence Philip, and of duke Henry,
deploring the miserable estate of their country, made a long speech of the
causes and motives of the alteration which had happened, whereof insued the
siege of Franicker, which had not bin, but through the excessive and
insupportable exactions and taxes, which were daily laid upon them, without
intermission, wherewith the country was not only exhausted of money, but made
poor miserable and desolate: and all through the horse-leeches of governors
and officers which the duke had placed there: the which thrust them into such
despair, as the miseries and calamities which followed, took their spring and
beginning from thence. They therefore beseeched him, that it would please duke
Henry of Saxony, in regard of a certain sum of money (although by reason of
the extorsions past it would be Philip his couzin, their nearest neighbor,
either by sale, transport, or otherwise: to whom they would promise and swear
all fealty, governing them according to their ancient preuiledges, and
preserving them from all wrongs and oppressions of all other fortaine Princes,
or enemies that would invade them: as duke Albert had promised and sworn unto
them at his reception, the which his Lieutenants and officers had broken in
sundry sorts, whereof all their miseries have grown. Answer was made to this
petition, that they would send some of them of quality and Judgment: two of
the quarter of Oster-gooe; two of An answer to the Frisons.
Wester-gooe, and two of the seven Forests; the which should go into the said
quarters, to understand from the Inhabitants, whom they would more willingly
obey, the Archduke Philip or the Duke of Saxony: and by what means for the
greater good of the country, the might be treated of and accorded. According to
the which, there were on the Suppliants behalf, deputed Edo Iongama, and Syurd
Wybes for the quarter of Oster-gooe: Aggo Lanckam^ and Baldwin Lattiens for
Wester-gooe: Syres Hyl^ko and Vlbe Igles for the Seven Forests. These six
being arrived at Cuinder, sent unto Cont Hughe of Linsenach, the duke of
Saxonies lieutenant, to crave a Pasport at his hands, the which he sent them,
but in such obscure and doubtful terms, as they durst not trust unto it. For
in truth this resignation of the siegneury of Friseland unto the Philip, which
was then in question, did nothing please the said Lieutenant, the council, nor
the Nobles of Friseland that were partisans, to the Saxons: whereupon they sent
them this defective pasport, meaning to intrappe them. For contrariwise,
instead of giving ear to this resignation, they forced all the country of
Frieseland, from Staueren unto the river of Lauwers, to swear unto the dukes
Henry George of Saxony Brethren, sons to the deceased duke Albert, exacting
upon all the towns and villages of the country, a years contribution of
advance, except the Clergy whom they did free for that time. Moreover they
raised certain new Impostes upon the Wine, Beer, and Cloth: Whereof they
made an estate, the which they sent unto these two dukes Brethren: that seeing
the great revenues, and the profit which did ariue yearly unto them from those
countries, they should be the less inclined to resign them. But it was not
the profit of these Princes that did so much rule them, as their o^ne private
interest, without any respect to the public good.

We have said before that Ferdinand Prince or Infant of Castille the onelio
son of the King Don Fernand of Arragon and of Queen Isabella, had married
the Lady Marguerite of Austria and sister to the Archduke Philip: which Prince
died within a year after his marriage, leaving his wife with child, who was
delivered of a son, the which lived not long after: so as there was none
nearer to succeed in the realms of Castille, Arragon, Naples, Sicile and
others, then the Lady Isabella, eldest daughter to the King Don Fernando, who
was married to Don Emanuel King of Portugal, and then the Lady Jane wife to the
Archduke Philip: the Lady Isabella Queen of Portugal died, leaving one only
son, named Michel, who lived not long. Al which being dead: that is to say, the
Prince Don Ferdinand, and his son, that was borne after his death, the Queen
of Portugal and Prince Michel her son, there remained only to succeed in the
said Realms, the Lady Jane Archduchesse of Austria, duchess of Bourgongne,
mother to Charles and Ferdinand Emperors in their times. Wherefore the Archduke
and his wife were advised and councelled by the Bishop of Besanson, to go into
Spain, before that the King Don Ferdinando of Arragon, and Queen Isabella of
Castille, father and mother The ^chduke (...) an^ his w^e go^ into Sp^ne.
to the said Lady Jane Archduchesse should die, to prepare themselves to the
sucession of the said Realms: and to take their way through France. And the
rather for that Lewis the twelfth the French King, and the duke of Bourbon
Uncle to the Archduke had a great desire to see him. Coming into France with a
stately train of Princes and Noblemen, as well Germains as Netherlanders, they
were honorably received in all towns by the Kings commandment, with power to
pardon prisoners for They are ho^ (...) enter (...) by the French King
crimes. The King and Queen attended them at Blois, being accompanied by the
Princes of the blood, dukes, Earls, Barons, Cardinals, Archbishops and
Bishops, where The Archduke (...) into Germany.
which cause the Emperor had sent for him. He returned as he went by France
(leaving his wife in Spain) where there fell out a quarrel in Court betwixt
the French and the Spaniards, in the which the duke of Nemours was slain,
whereof the Archduke purged himself unto the King: yet he was so terrified,
as he fell into so violent

All this time the war continued betwixt the duke of Saxony, by the conduct
of Cont Hugh of Lynsenach, and the Groningeois, by many prises and reprises of
either side, as of dam, of Delfziel and other places: The exiled Frisons were
reconciled to the duke of Saxony, who chose rather to receive them into grace,
then to enter into contention with the Archduke his couzin. In the year 1503.
died that virtuous Princess, the Lady Maguerite of York, duchess Douager of
Bourgongne, who was 1503. D^h ^o the D^e Dou^ger of Bourgongne.
buried at the Franciscan friars in Macklyn: she was wonderfully lamented of
the Edward the forth King of England.

The year 1502. and 1503. were spent without any war in the Neitherlands, at
the

In the same year 1503, the Lady Marguerite of Austria, sister to the
Archduke Marguerite of Austria marred to the Duke of Sauoy.
Philip, widow to prince Don Fernando of Castile, married again to Philibert
the 8. duke of Sauoy; a valiant and virtuous Prince, full of such manly
beauty, as he was called Philibert the fair; he was also amiable and
courteous to all men: he succeeded to his father Philip in the said Duchy,
and Principality of Piedmont in the year 1495. After that he had done many
things worthy of memory, he dyed, leaving no issue of his body: Charles his
brother succeeded him. The Lady Marguerite his widow, in testymonie of the love
she bore him (although she were young) would never marry again, but continued
the rest of her life a widow, and was afterward Gouernesse of the
Low Countries, for Prince Charles, son to the Archduke Philip of Austria,
King of Castile, in the right of his wife, and her Nephew.

In the month of May 1504. the Lady Jane of Castile, Arch-dutchesse of
Austria, 1504. The war revived betwixt the Archduke Philip and the duke of
Gelders.
returned out of Spain, and came to the Archduke her husband, who received
her with great joy. Then the Archduke according unto that which he had
promised the Emperor his father, being in Germany, prepared to make hot wars
against the Cornellis of Berghen, lord of Seuenberghen, Floris of Iselsteyn, to
march with the whole army into the country of Gelders, where at the first
they besieged the castle of Hameiden, the which they took, from thence they
went before Midele, where the Bastard of Gelders was, the which after battery
and an assault given, was yielded by accord; he himself remaining The exploi^
of both armies.
prisoner and was sent into Brabant. Then they took the castle of Trecele,
and spoiled the Champion contrie; but winter approaching they retired again to
Bosleduke. The Geldrois (on the other side) lay not idle, making many roades
into Barbant and into other near places, belonging to the enemy, from whence
they also carried great spoil. In the same month duke George of Saxony, made
his first entry into the country of Frise-land, he arrived first at
Harlingen, from thence he came to Franiker to the castle of Syardama, where he
caused all the States of Friseland to be Duke George of Saxony co^s into
Friseland.
the which he would have entertained and kept by them. One among the rest was;
That all Noblemen or Gentlemen that had held any Siegneories or other fees,
should come and take them up of him, as of their Sovereign and absolute
Prince. Whereunto the States would by no means yield, seeming unto them
neither just nor reasonable, to subject themselves unto a thing whereof God and
nature had made them in all ages free, to make themselves slaves, and to
subject them and their children for ever. The duke being fully instructed of
the reasons of their denial, fearing some greater inconvenience, He makes a
composition with the Frisons.
of all their goods, rentes, and revenues, inioying all the surplusage quietly
without any further demaundes, and never to impose any further charges
hereafter upon them. The which was granted by a general consent of all the
Nobles and towns.

This Accord thus made and agreed upon, he also called together all the
Clergy Albert took first possession of the (...) of Friseland, unto the
year. 1505. the contry had bin always governed (...) D^ of (...).
by Licutenants under the authority of the Dukes of Saxony: but this year Duke
George* c^itted six worthy men, both in wealth, wisdom and experience, to the
government of affaiers: three Germains, William Tru^xes and Syurdt Lutsing,
Knights, with Bucho Pastor of Wyrdom, He^el Martu^ and Francis Minnama* over
whom Tru^xes was superintendent; to whom the duke having given their
comissions and instructions how they should govern themselves, after that he
had settled the court or Parliament of Frieseland at Leeuwarden, and built the
Chance^y before the Citadel, the which he did furnish (as he did al other
forts of the contry with good garrisons, and sufficientmunition, he parted out
of Friseland, and went to Emden where before that he returned into his country
of Misnia, he made Edsard Earl of East Friseland, his Lieutenant and captain
General of his army, when he should begin war against them of Groningen,
which done he retired. At that time the war was very violent betwxt the
Bourguignons and Geldrois wasting Maximilian sent the Earl of Anholt with a
1000. foot and 500. horse to succor the Archduke Phillip his son against the
Geldrois. who went to lodge in a cl^ister of regular monks, near unto Bomell,
the which he fortified, from whence he did much anoy the Geldrois within the
circuit of Tyel and Bomel by spoils and ransomes, and among others he ruined
the great village of Dryell. On the other side Robert of Aremberghe being in
garrison at Naerden, as Governor of the contry of Goylandt, did no less upon
the Velawe and contry there abouts. To conclude all this war was nothing but
the ruin of the Contry-man and of some private Gentlemen.

In the year 1505. the truce betwixt the Duke of Saxony and the Groningeois
expired and not being able to agree, the war revived. The Regents (for so we
will call, 1505.
George had lef^ for the Government of the Contry of Fresland, did presently
put 400. men into the fort of Au^ert: The Duke sent them also for a supply the
seignior Vit van (...) with some troops, who did also lodge in Auwert. And
then the Earl of Emden in the Dukes absence, took upon him the charge of
Gene^all of all the army, and of the camp which he planted before Groningen,
willing the Regents to send him 600. men well armed, wherein he was presently
obeyed. He caused a fo^t to be built upon the territor^ o^ Ouerissell, to keep
all succors from entering into Groningen on that side, whereof the towns of the
said Contrie of Ouerissel, which are of the D^ocese of Vtrecht, complained unto
their Bishop, for otherwise they would willingl^ have succored them: but the
Bishop pacified them, and touching W^ert d^n bras, whereby the Groningeois were
frustrate of the succors which they expected from them of Oueryssell. The
Emperor Maximili^ being then in the contry of Gelders, the town of Groningen
and the Towns of Ouerissel, sent their deputies unto him, to make their
complaints of the duke of Saxony, and of the Regents which he had committed for
the government of Frisland, whereupon there was a day appointed in the town of
Hatem in Gelders whether came the sa^d d^puties on the one part, and the Ear^e
of Emden with some of the (...) of (...).
(...) on the other part. Every one delivered his reasons, which were well
heard. B^t the ^mperour favoring the duke more then the rest, the Groningeois
and those of Isabella Queen of Castil^e (...)
(...) to the King Don Fernando of Arragon, mother to the Lady Jane,
Arch-du^hesse of Austria, wife to the Archduke Phillip remaining their only
daughter: so as now she was their only heir, and succeeded in the realms of
Castille, Leon, Granado.

Cont Englebert of Nassau had always dissuaded the Archduke from making of
war against the duke of Gelders* for being a wise Nobleman, and knowing
whereon he grounded his right, he did foresee what the issue would be after
his death. Some of the Archdukes counsel (newly King of Castile) persuaded
him, that before he went into* Spain with his wife to take possession of her
Kingdoms, he should conquer all the Duchy of Gelders, and the County of
Zutphen: where-vppon having (...) b^sieged by the Archduke.
made a great preparation, he went and besieged Bommel, the which he battered
for a time, then having but two Forts to keep them in, he marched with his
army (...) taken in (...).
manner: then the Town and castle of Hattem upon the River of Yssell, (where
as the Earl of Suffolk, an Englishman was taken.) Then the Towns of
Elburch, Doesburch, Dotecom, Grolle, Tyell, Bommel, Lochem, and other small
towns yielded. There was also many Gentlemen Geldrois, which took the
Bourguinons party, (for so the Archdukes men were called) Among others the
siegnior of Bronckhorst, Wisch, Scheeren berghe, Otto Scenck of Wachtendonck, a
brave knight, who did much anoy the Geldrois, with some others who went to
serve the Archduke. The

During the Earl of Emdens siege before Groninghen, there grew some division
betwixt him and the German Colonels, and other chief Officers of the duke
of Division in the Duke of (...) camp before (...)
Saxonies, wherewith the Earl was so discontented as without speaking of any
word, he retired to Dam, the which his men held 3. leagues from Groninghen:
which the Germans did little regard, assuring themselves of the taking of
Groninghen, which was then brought to extremity, and could not long hold out,
having been besieged almost a whole year, so as they not only had need of
victuals, but of all other provisions, and munitions for war. Whereupon the
Groningeois, both gentlemen and Vytt van Draecksdor^, one of the chief
commanders of the duke of Saxonyes army, next unto the Farle of Emden, and to
capitulate alone with him of their redition, hoping that in offering him that
honor, (seeing that he had the chief command over the Saxons and Germans)
they should have the better composition. But as this was thus decre^d, and that
they were ready to send their deputies to him to Auwert; Behold there came into
the town a Bourgeois and his wife (whilst the inhabitants were yet together)
so villanosly Vytt caused their noses and ears to be cut off, sending them
back thus dissigured to the Town, who by their ^ryes and lamentations did move
all the citizens to pity, and fury against Vytt, and all the Germans,
resolving to set fire on the Town, and consume it to ashes, rather then to
veeld to such tyrants: and so they entertained themselves in their poverty for
a while. But hearing afterward of the dislike that was betwixt the Earl of
Emden and Colonel Vytt, the^ writ secretly unto the Earl, to know his mind;
If he would not receive them under his hereditary protection, as well for him as
for The Gr^geois treat with the (...) of ^mden.
his successors. These Letters did wonderfully please the Earl, who sent the
Messenger That they should send their Deputies with full power and ample
commission to treat with him. The which they did, upon condition, that he
should leave them in the same estate, and under the same Privileges that he
should find them at his entry. The which the Earl promised, Groningeois
returned to the Town, having made their report of that which they had treated,
and concluded with the Earl of East-Friseland. The Magistrate and The E^ of
(...) ^de Pr^ of (...).
Counsel did presently remit the Impositions and Customs which they had taken
before, that they might live under the Earl in the like liberty. According to
this Accord, the first of May the Earl entered into Groninghen with 2000. men,
leaving a sufficient garrison in Dam, approaching near the high Bridge they
went to meet him; the Priests and Moncks going in procession with their Crosses
and Banners, receiving him with great triumph and state, and having brought him
to the State-house, they took the oath and did him homage, acknowledging him
for their Lord, Deliverer and Vytts, singing in the streets; Here vyt is
Groningen quyt. Master Vytt has lost Groningen. Behold the fruits of this
Colonels cruelty. But it is no new thing in the Germans, no more then in the
Spaniards to use the like barbarous The Earl of Emden Builds acittadel at
Groninghen.
inhumanitie, if they do but think that they have vanquished their enemies.
Soon after that the Earl was entered into the town, he built a Cittadell on
the South Side at

These news of the yielding up of Groningen into the Earl of West-Freezlands
hand, being come into Misnia to duke Georges ears, he went unto the Earl to
know in whose name he had received the Town of Groningen into his protection:
whereunto he presently answered: That what he had done, was in the name of the
Empire, by reason of the controversy that was betwixt the Duke of Saxony, and
the high Diocese of Vtrecht (which is the country of Oueryssel) for the
jurisdiction of Groningen, which being decided, he would yield it to whom it
should appertain. And although the Dukes deputies knew the contrary, yet they
took these excuses for payment, fearing to incense him more, and that he
should draw in the other troops, the which being joined unto The Earl of
Emden receives entertainment from the duke of Saxony.


In the mean time the six Regents Saxons, during the hard frosts of winter,
did still Saxonies devotion. The duke had a conceit, that during his absence,
the six Regents Henry of Stalburch, a wise The Earl of St^lburche made the
Dukes Lieutenant in F^eland.
and discreet noble man, and one that feared God, to be the Dukes Lieutenant
general throughout all Freezland. Which being done, the Marshall and the Earl
went to Dam, whither they sent for the Commonalties of the country of
Groninghen in the Dukes name, to take the oath of fealty as his Vassals, but
not any one appeared; desiring rather to acknowledge the Earl of
East-Friseland, who the same year caused Edsardus Comes and Senator
Groningensis. In the years 1506. 1507. and 1508. there was no memorable thing
done in Friseland that does merit the writing.

After that the town of Arnhem and other places of the Duchy of Gelders and
county of Zutphen, were thus reduced (as we have said) under the obedience of
the Archduke, King of Castile: he stayed some-time without the said town of
Arnhem in the castle of Roossendael. Thither came the bishop of Vtrecht, the
vicont of Montfort, and many other Noblemen, who labored so unto the King to
reconcile the The Duke of G^ldres reconcil^d to the King of Castille.
duke of Gelders as in the end he was sent for to come unto him, being
accompanied That either of them should hold what they had in the Duchy and
county of Zutphen: and that the Duke should accompany the King in this
voyage: but afterward the duke excused himself with a good and auailable
reasons.

The King having recovered money, made his preparations with his wife to go by
sea (whereof William of Croy Lord of Cheurees had the charge: and before their
The King and Queen of Cast^ g^e into Spain.
departure was made Governor of all the Neitherlands in the Kings absence) and
recommended his sons Charles and Ferdinand, to the Lady Marguerite his
sister, Philip of Cleues, Earl of Neuers and the bishop of Paris unto them in
Embassage: requiring first; That the marriage which had been concluded betwixt
Prince Charles their son, and the Lady Claude of France, An (...) from the
^nch kin^ to the King of Ca^ille.
the Kings daughter, should be diasnulled and made void, for that the Princes
of the blood, and the Parliament did not think it convenient. And for the
second point; That the King of Castile should not attempt any thing upon the
Sovereign jurisdiction of Flanders in civil causes, and in Arthois touching
Appellations, both in Civil and Cryminall causes. The which was wholly granted.
These Ambassadors dispatched away, King Philip and Queen Jane of Castile his
wife, accompanied with a 1506.
rise a great tempest of wind, snow, and such mists, as being long before
they knew The King and Queen of Castill in (...) at Sea go^ into ^aine.
what course they went, they were hourly in great danger to perrish in the
Sea. Every man wondered that in the depth of winter, they would commit
themselves to the danger and perrill of the Sea, GOD letting them for to
understand that the greatest Kings and Princes, are subject unto these dangers,
as well as the poorest, England, all the rest of the fleet was so dispersed, as
they knew not what was become of them, whereof some ships were cast away.
Henry the seventh King of They put to land in England.
England, hearing of their being in the Harbor, sent some of his Princes to
receive them in his name, and to entreat them to come on land and refresh
themselves: whether Henry entreated King Philip, that he would deliver him the
Earl of Suffolk, who (as we have said,) was taken with the bastard of Geldres
in the Castle of Hattem. King Philip after great importunity, upon promise
that King Henry should not touch his life, consented that the Earl of Suffolk
should be brought into England: the which did much discontent many good men. He
was kept in the Castle of Namur, from whence he was brought and delivered to
the King of England, who caused him to be lodged in the Tower of London. After
that King Philip and the Queen his wife had stayed for a fair season, from
their landing which was in January, unto the 24. of March, they put to sea, and
having a prosperous wind, The duke of Gelders begins wa^re.
no sooner left the Netherlands, but the Geldrois went to horsbacke against the
treaty made at Roosendael, falling upon those towns and places, which by the
said treaty remained to the King of Castille, among the rest, upon Groll and
Waganengen, the which they took: running from them into Holland and Brabant.
The lord of Cheures, having leauied an army, went and besieged the said town
of Wagenengen, but it was furnished with such good men, which made continual
sallies upon his camp,

In August the same year 1506. there appeared a Comete which did rise at the A
Comete.
North-east, and did set in the North-west, drawing the tail (which was great
and large in form of a rod) toward the West, the which was seen eighteen
days together. In the same month there was a poor woman in Holland, betwixt
the villages of Beuerwic and Vyc upon the sea, great with child and ready to
be delivered. Fifteen days before her lying down the fruit that was in her
won be, ^as heard almost continually to cry and lament. The which many worthy
men, for a greater approbation of the A child in Holland crying in the mothers
be^y.
truth went daily to hear it, and since have certified it. Whereof some
learned men in Philosophy and the Mathematiks have diversely written, inferring
that the crying of this child with the Comete did pronosticate the death of the
^ing of Castille Prince Don Fernando of Arragon father to the Q^eene offered to
King Philip 500000. ducates a year, to remain in the low countries, and not
to come into Spain, yet he and his wife would go, and themselves in person
end the controversy that was (by reason of the succession of the deceased
Queen Isabella) betwixt them and the King Don Ferdinando their father. The
which they did, and Philip in the right of his wife, was Philip King o^
C^stille dies suddenly.
acknowledged King of Castille, Leon, Grenado etc. But he enjoyed it not long,
for the Ames^ur, upon a mountain, without the city of Bourgos. The Lady Jane
his widoe was with child of a daughter, whereof she was afterward delivered.
The news of the death of this Prince, caused great mourning and heaviness
throughout all the Netherlands, fearing other troubles and reuolts, by reason
of the war betwixt the duke of Geldres and them. Those which at that time
pretended to know the affairs of Philip made with the Lady Jane of Castille,
was unhappy for the Netherlands, not for the miseries which the Spaniards have
of late years brought in, and which the countries have suffered (for they could
not foresee these things so long before) but for the great charges wherewith
they (^eredere fas^est) was nailed unto the cross, and the great Besome of
Flanders. To conclude, she left not any thing, causing all to be packt up, all
which was in those days esteemed at nine Millions of gold. After the death of
The Earl of N^u brings some ^vvels out of Spains
^ing Philip, all the Noblemen of the Netherlands were sent out of Spain,
neither were they very welcome there: so as the greatest part of these rich
moueables, plate and John Earl of Nassau Lord of Breda, recovered with great
diligence and care, and brought them with him into the Lowe-countries.

In the year 1507. the Duchess of Burbon Ante to the Duke of Gelders by the
1507.
mothers side, sent (as it was reported) certain troops of Frenchmen unto her
Nephew, The Duke of Gelders (...) into Brabant.
the which being come to Ruremonde, the Duke lead them (being joined wi^h his
own forces) to Tournhoult in Brabant, to spoil it: then he went before
Dyest, pretending to surprise it; but Cont John of Nassau made such resistance
as he got nothing but blower. From thence the Duke went to Tillemont, which he
took by assault, where he lost a German Earl, the which (having spoiled and
taken many good prisoners) John Despontin their Captain, came early in a
morning to wake them; they first slew their Sentinels and corpse de guard, then
entered into their quarter and surprised them in bed, whereof there were many
slain: who thought (but too late) to take arms; there were many prisoners,
especially of Gentlemen; to conclude, all were defeated, and happy was he that
loosing his horse, arms, and baggage, could sane himself John of Egmont
Governor of Holland, to be revenged of the Geldrois, we^ at the Hollanders
charge and of them of Boisleduc, to besiege the strong pla^e and Castle of
Puydroyen, whereas then the Seignior of Seewint Marshall of Gelders did much
harm unto the Merchants, to whom the said Marshall was a capital enemy. But
the Duke of Gelders came himself in person, forcing the Lord of Egmont to
dislodge. After the death of the King of Castile, the Emperor Maximilian took
upon him Charles and Ferdinand his Grandchildren: and by the means of the
French King, and the King of Arragon, a peace was concluded at Cambray, betwixt
the Emperor in quality of gardien, and the Duke of Gelders, the which was of
no long continuance: the war kindling again soon after, by some occasions
offered by the Lord of ^selsteyn.

CAROLVS 5 IMPERATOR
CHARLES OF AUSTRIA THE 2, of that name, the 35. Earl of Holland and Zeeland,
the first Temporal Lord of the Town and Diocese of Vtrecht, of Friseland,
Oueryseel and Groninghen. The fifth Emperor of that name.
England, France, Afrique, Turkey, Germany,
Have felt my spirit to their several losses,
Beyond Gibralter are my pillars planted,
My wife a Portugaise, and Philips daughter
Through my victorious powers fair Italy
Has seemd to tremble, when n^re Pauia
I plotted against the French, and took as Captive,
Francis the first, their famous warre-like King.
Then with fresh Soldiers being from Spain supplyde,
I quite did tame the haughty Germans pride;
I call to witness prisoners that were Princes,
As Saxony and the Lans-graue: the rich Ransomes,
Engines of war, with which (as gifts constrainde)
They made peace with my fury; great and small
Were ransomde as I pleased, my Spanish Forces
Took holy Rome, the Italians greatest Terror,
There three days was their Pillage, in no place
The Pope found succor, but his powers and he
Lay in their Forts besiegde, not Issuing forth
Until their Ransomes bought them a free way,
From which the Almaine army received pay:
Was it not I with blows as quick as lightning,
Conquered Golletto, Tunis, and Argier?
And made the famous Pyrate Barbarosa,
At Ariaden shrinck under my Sinewe?
Who bade farewell to Africa by flight,
Which also stoopt and sunk under my might?
Did not I Muly-assen then erect,
When I Barbarians and the Moors had tamed?
Was it not I that with my Camp of Almaynes
From Austria chasde the great Turk Solomon?
With which the noble conquests that I held
In the West-Indyes, may be paraleld.
Were not my men the first that did find out,
Those mines of Peru-gold? and made bold way
Through sandy bounds of rich America?
Under the obedience of the Spanish laws
Bringing their Kings? what though at first afront
They Kingly strove, being vanquished, there my slaves;
Nor ought the world forget my soldiers deeds
That two and twenty millions put to sword
Of rebel Indians, forcing the remaynes
Like brutish beasts to undergo base pains?
Am not I CHARLES fifth Emperor of that name,
Throughout the universal Globe the Terror?
But when I thought me firme-vnder my stroke
The Spaniard touched, the Almaines left my yoke,
And a new Trouble nere conceiude before
Did unawares beset me, German Princes,
Confederates came unexpected Foes
And forest me fly from Inspruck all unfurnished:
I that was wont Foes with a whip to chase,
Was forced to work my safety by my flight,
Death to my pride, and fury of my Sword;
Yet all I wrought either by force or Law,
When I to narrow straights the Cleuoys forest
That Gelders, Freezeland, Vtrecht, in the end
And beyond Island all the wealth was mine:
Under my Laws stoopt Groninghen and Cambray:
Fifty two years I Holland did possess
Then to my Son all titles I resignde,
My flesh lies at Granado, my soul fares
Like her eternal self, from human ears.

The Argument of the sixth Book.
THe birth of the Emperor Charles the fifth: war betwixt the Esterlings,
Danes, and Hollanders. The Duke of Geldres makes war against the Bishop of
Vtrecht and the Hollanders. The state of Friseland A quarrel betwixt the Duke
of Saxony and the Earl of Emden for the siegmory of Groningen. Henry Duke of
Brunswyke slain there. The Groningeois give themselves to the Duke of Geldres.
Prince Charles of Austria takes possession of the Netherlands. George duke of
Saxony resignes his interest of Friseland to Prince Charles: He holds the
feast of the golden s^ce at Brusselles. Philip Bastard of Bougongne Bishop of
Vtrecht: Ma^ten van Rossen, Governor in Friseland, Prince Charles crowned King
of Spain: the death of the Emperor Maximilian. Charles the ^ift chosen
Emperor: the Lady Marguerite Duchess of (...) Gouernesse of the Netherlands.
Troubles in Spain the King being absent: war in Friseland: war betwixt the
French and the Bourguignons: the Peasants war in Germany: the Groningeois
re^ing the Duke of Geldres give themsselues to the Emperor: the second bloody
Ed^ made by the Emperor a^st the Protestants of the Netherlands. A tumult at
Vtrecht, who call in the Geldrois against their Bishop. William van Enke^oort
59. Bishop of Vtrecht: the Coronation of the Emperor Charles by the Pope. An
Imp^iall diet at Ausbourg, whereas the Protestant Princes present a confession
of their faith: A wonderful deuo^ rin^ Inundation in the Netherlands: Mary of
Austria Queen Douager of Hongarie succeeds in the government of the
Netherlands after the death of the Lady Marguerite her Aun^: war betwixt
them of Lub^c and Holland: An Imperial diet held at Ratisbone concerning
religion. A pea^ betwixt the Emperor and the Duke of Geldres: war betwixt the
French and the Bourguignons. The towns of Geldres mutine against their duke:
the Emperor comes out of Spain through France, to punish the Ganthois: war
betwixt the Emperor and the French King. A peace concluded.

CHARLES the second of that name, the 35. Earl of Holland and Zeeland, Lord of
Friseland, eldest son to the Archduke Philip of Austria, and of Lady Jane
Queen of Castile, was borne at Gand in Flanders the 24 of February 1500. After
the death of his Father, he Charles his Inheritance.
did inherit over and above the counties of Holland, Zeeland and West-frisland,
the Dutchies of Bourgongne, Brabant, Styria, Carinthia, Carniola, Lembourg,
Luxembourg and Geldres. The counties of Flanders, Arthois, Henault, Bourgongne,
Ferrete, Kyburg, Namur and Zutphen, the Landtgraueship of Elsaten, the
Marquisate of Burgau, and of the holy Empire, the Principality of Suaue, and
the Seigneuries of Windismark, Portenau, Salins and Macklin. Afterward he
conquered the Duchy of Milan, and did incorporate the country of Friseland,
Vtrecht, Oueryssel, Groningen, Cambray and Cambresis, all holding of the
Empire. The Emperor Maximilian having (as we have said) taken upon him the
gardianship of his Nephews and Neeces, retiring out of the Netherlands to go
into Germany about the affairs of the Empire, he appointed his daughter, the
Lady Marguerite 1508.
Douager of Sauoy, Aunt to the Princes Charles and Ferdinand, Regent of the
low countries, The duchess of Sauoy gouerne^e of the Netherlands.
in the name of the Prince her Nephewe, who meaning to come out of Flanders
into Zeeland, she embarked at Nyeuwerhauen, right against Flesingue: Philip of
Bourgongne, lord of Somersdike, Admiral, and Adolphe of Bourgongne lord of
Beueren, with the Noblemen and deputies of the states of Zeland, went with a
good number of flie-boates, shaloups, and other light boats to receive her at
the said place of Nyeuwerhauen. Whilst that the said Noblemen were gone to
land to entertain the said Princess, the ships of war lying before the haven
shoting off their great Ordinance in sign of honor, it happened that fire
fell into the poulder of the Admiral, so as many were slain, drowned and
wounded: but there were not any of these Noblemen in her, al being gone to land
in their long boats to salute the Gouernesse. At that time died the virtuous
Lady Anne bastard of Bourgongne, Lady of Rauestein (of whom we have formerly
spoken) after that she had recovered and walled in many Islands that were The
death of A^ (...) Bourgong^.
drowned in Zeeland. To whose goods succeeded Baldwyn and Philip of Bourgongne,
her brethren, except the Island of Duyueland, the which returned to them of the
house of Borssele, from whence it first came.

William of Egmont Lord of Iselstein, with the consent and commission of the
Emperor Maximillan and of his council, went to take and ransom some
Inhabitants about

In the same year 1508. Raoul Prince of Anhault, of the noble and ancient
house of Ascag^e, chief of Maximilian the Emperors Army in the Netherlands
^nt again to beseege the castle of Puydroyen in the month of March, from
whence the duke of Geldres had forced John of Egmont to raise his seege, who
having battred Puydroien tatak^ and raz^d.
In the mean time the duke of Geldres thought to surprise the town of
Harderwick which the Bourguignons held yet, but he failed, from thence the
Prince of Anhalt went to beseege the town of Wesep and the Castle of Muyden
both together, being but a quarter of a League one from an other. The French
king sent an ambassador to the Princes camp who did mediate the yielding up of
the said two places by some good

In the year, 1509. there died in the city of Cologne Cont Henry of Stolburch
1509.
Governor for the Duke of Saxony in the contry of Freeseland; he was much
lamented The governor of Fre^eland dies.
of the Frisons for his mild government being a good Iusticer, an upright man,
and fearing God, after whose death, Duke Georges Mareshall came into Friseland
bringing with him Euerwin earl of Benthem, with the dukes Commission to be
governor of the said contry. In the year 1510. there fell out great war
betwixt the King of Denmark and the towns of the East contries as Lubeck,
Wismare. Rostwicke and others: Theyof Lubeck did write into Holland, Zeeland
and Freeseland for-bidding them to sail into Denmark, The Duke of Gelders
makes war against them of Ouery^sel.
the which did land at Geelmuyden, with an intent to do some exployt upon the
town of Campen, and other places in the contry of Oueryssel, but his
enterprise War betwixt the Duke of Gelders and the Bishop of Vtrecht.
Goer Dyepenheus and Oldenseel: the which Frederic of Baden bishop of Vtrecht
(of whose iurisdict^n they are) recovered soon after, and in reueng thereof
spoiled the dukes country about the Velawe under the conduct of the Lord of
Iselstein General of his army, taking many forts and castells from him in the
conty of Zutphen, and after the said Lord of Iselsteyn (meaning to be revenged)
went with some troops to spoil (...) ^n.
to beseege it. The Lord of it with the help of his cousin the Governor of
Holland, and of many other Noblemen and Knights, caused them to rise from
thence after they had camped before it almost three months: forcing them to
save themselves in the town of Iselstein, so as in the end after all their
fighting they made an agreement. During this (...) ^f (...)
time the Geldrois recovered the town of Bommel, which was held by the
Bourguig^on Phillip van Zemeren did also yield unto the duke the castle of
Hattem and Greb^, then he took the town of Vandrichom. The remaynder of this
year and the next following, by reason of the truce and peace of either part,
past without any memorable 1512.
the war betwixt the duke of Gelders, the Hollanders, and those of Boisleduc
began again. The Earl of Serberen Colonel in the dukes service, on Candlemas
day early in the morning, took the sort of Tuylle. Those of Boisleduc meaning
to spoil the Island of Bommel were woore beaten by the said Earl, and by
captain Michel van Pomeren, where they took many prisoners. They would have
had their revenge, going to beseege Bommell but they were forced to rise, and
leave it. The Lord of I selstein entered into Gelders and took the fort of
Roodentoren, where he slew all he found within it, and then razed the place.
The like he did to Persicke and Hoeman: ten days after the town of

In the year 1513. the Geldrois went and burnt certain houses before
Schoonehouen 1513.
John van Delfe seeking to hinder, he was well beaten, from thence they entered
into the circuit of Dordrecht, Alblas and Alblasserdam, from whence they
carried a great booty and many prisoners. Duke George of Saxony (finding well
that the Earl A (...) (...) the (...) ^or (...)
of Emden kept the town and contry of Groninghen, although in the beginning he
took upon him but the title of his Leiutenant); sought all means he could to
have the Earl relinquish that Seigneurie, and to deliver it into his hands,
but the Earl (who found it pleasing as well as the Duke) would not harken to
it, whereof the Duke complained to the En^erour, who deputed the Bishop of
Cologne and the Duke of Cleues to reconcile them: but seeing they could not
prevail, they remitted the business again to the will of his Imperial
Majesty, and of his council, who sent a commandment to the George by the 17.
day of January in the year 1514. The Earl received many other charges and
threats from the Imperial chamber and there were diverse conferences betwixt
the deputies of these two Noblemen; But they could never agree so as there were
great likelehood^s of war. The which notwithstanding the Saxons feared much
knowing what friends the Earl had in Freesland, among the gentlemen of the
Ve^coopers saction, of the which he was, whom they had incensed, by the death
of the two gentlem^n of their party, whom the year before they had executed at
Leeuwarden. The ^7. day of January 1514. being come and past the Earl of East
Frislande having not (...) D^ of (...).
George came in person to Leuwarden, where he wintred, the dukes Erick and
Henry of Brunswick brethren, came to succor the Saxon with 1200. horse and
3000. foot, the which came also into The duke of Saxony mak^s an unreasonable
d^mand of the F^ons.
of him only that was the owner of the land, which demand the Nobility found
very unreasonable, for that the winter before they had camped before Auwert at
their own charge, and therefore nothing was concluded. In the mean time the
duke of Brunswick was spoiling of East Friseland, (which is the country of
Emden) where he took the castle of Knysohousen, belonging to a gentleman of
the country: from thence he went to Merhuysen, the which he assaulted four
times with great loss of his men. The Earl of Emden came and succored it, and
defeated 600. of the dukes men, yet being to weak, he was forced to retire.
He being gone, the duke besieged this castle afresh, so as in the end he forced
it, killing all that he found armed, being not above 80. men. Then he went to
Henry of Brunswick was then before the sort of Dam, called Oordt: the Earls
men were on the other side of the river of Eems, in a small fort which played
upon the dukes men when they went to the assault, Henry duke of B^ sl^ne at an
assault.
so as at the last which they gave, the duke of Brunswicke being there in
person, a Gonners boy but 15. or. 16. years old, discharged a culuerine, with
the which he took away half the dukes head, whereupon Duke Erike his
brother raised his Camp, and retired to Auwert. Duke Henry's son, called
also Henry, took up his fathers body, the which he kept until that his
mother came to fetch it, and that this death was revenged. During these
attempts, the Earl of Emden went to the duke of Geldres to Zutphen, to crave
succors of him: from whom he carried 400. horse and 300 foot, George of
Saxony having well fortified Selwert, Auwert, Winsom and Weerdenbras, with the
rest of his camp about Groninghen, he went the two and twenty of the said
month with the dukes of Brunswick before Dam which was then held by the Earl
of Emdens garrisons, the which after they had battered, in the end they sorced
it with a furious Dam taken by assault.
and continual assault, killing all they met, except Churchmen, women and
children: the which the duke of Brunswicke (to satisfy his revenge) would also
have had

Notwithstanding the cruelty was exceeding great, and there was much blood
spilt, even with in the churches, and upon the Altars. Wherewith the duke of
Brunswicks Uncle and Nephew, thinking themselves well revenged, retired into
their country, and Will^, and some others to treat with him in the town of
Leeuwarden, upon certain Articles which they propounded, among others, to
beat down and raze the Cittadell which the Earl of Emden had built. The Duke
accepted of these conditions, and making good cheer unto the Pastor and to his
companions, he sent them back to their lodging, saying, that the next day he:
would dispatch them. But the next day the Pastor going to receive his answer,
he found the Duke of an other mind, and that his Counce^l had dissuaded him
from this accord, unless the Cittadell might remain The Groning^ois (...) to
the Duke of G^ldres.
sent; offering themselves upon the same conditions, which they had presented
unto the Duke of Saxony, and to take upon him their protection and government:
whereunto he yielded presently; being glad to enlarge his estate by that
means: and thereupon he sent them 4000. men for a supply, under the command of
his Marshall William van Ogen and Werner Spi^ghel. Euerwin Earl of Benthem
would gladly have charged these Nicholas day. In his retreat the Duke of Saxony
with the Frisons, and this black troop fell upon the Geldrois rear; but not
without loss of either side. This done the Frisons returned home, and the Duke
to his camp before Groningen. The Duke of Saxony growing bare of money, had
not so many voluntary soldiers as he was accustomed, (for money only works
with the Germaine^ The duke of (...) plexed for (...) of money.
and there was no means to get any Frisons, for they were too much wasted and
consumed: neither would they contribute any thing, whereupon he was forced to
borrow much money of Abbeys, yea of private persons, whom he knew to have money.
The Geld^ois enter (...) with an army.
and Oonseradel: So as the dukes demand was made frustrate: and afterward the
Frisons paid him no impositions whatsoever, beginning to lean to the Geld^ois
party, who promised them liberty and freedoms which wo^ds the Frisons do
willingly give ear unto. Notwithstanding the Saxons did still hold D^m,
Leeuwarden, Dockom, Franicker and Harlingen, whereby they did for a long time
torment the Frisons.

Without doubt Frisland was at that time wonderfully tormented, with the
Geldrois on the one side, and the black troop on the other: by the taking of
towns, burning of villages and mills, ruining of castles, murders, thefts and
robberies of either side. If the (...) o^ (...).
thieves and robbers which hindered the trade and comerce of merchandise and
navigations

In the year 1515. Prince Charles of Austria, having taken possession of his
contries of 1515.
Brabant, Flanders, Arthois, Henault, Namur, Lembourg, Luxembourg. etc. fallen
unto Prince Charles of Austria takes possession of the Netherlands.
him by the death of King Phillip his father: he arrived at Midelbourg in
Zeeland, and from thence went to Ziricxee, in which 2. towns he took
possession of the country of Zeeland, where he was honorably entertained by the
noblemen of the contry, from thence he went into Holland, where he did
likewise inherit the same County and west Friseland. The 16. of January in the
year 1515. died Don Fernando king of Arragon, who was Isabella his wise King
of Castille, Leon, Granado. etc. in whom failed the race of the Kings of
Arragon desended from the Berengers Earls of Barcellona which The Death of the
King of Arragon.
race reigned in Spain 470. years and in Sicile, 230. He had for his heir
Prince Charles of Austria, son to the Lady Jane of Arragon and Castill, his
daughter and only heir: Duke George of Saxony seeing that it was impossible
for him to maintain himself any longer in Freeseland, where he had wasted so
much of his own and of other men's; and that the end was worse the^ the
beginning, having this word ordinary in his mouth, that he called the contry of
Friseland, in steed of Fryeslandt, Freslandt that is to say, a devouring
contry: for that it had devoured most of his means but he did not confess
that he Charles of Austria Prince of Spain: and this resignation was concluded
Duke George of Saxony resignes Freeseland, to Prince Charles.
in manner as follows. That Prince Charles should pay presently unto the Duke
of Saxony, 70000. Florins: fifty thousand in ready money, and 20000. in cloth
for his soldiars: and besides that the sum of 30000. Florins at three
paiements in consideration whereof the duke should pay his soldiars and retier
them all out of the contry of Henry his eldest brother should also ratefie, and
renounce all the right which he might pretend to the said contry of Freeseland,
for the assurance of which resignation, to be made by the said duke Henry, the
contries of Misnia and Turingen should stand bound. And in this manner the rule
of the Saxons ended in Freeseland. This resignation made and concluded, the
Burguignons (that is to say the subjects of Prince Charles) made a truce for
four months with the Geldrois: the Saxons notwithstanding houlding the towns
and fortresses, until they were delivered into the Princes power. For the
performance whereof Floris of Iselsteyn arrived the 3. of June, 1515. The Lord
of Iselsteyn takes possession of Freeseland for prince Charles.
with the Duke of Saxons commissioners in the town of Harlingen, whereas the
fort was delivered him, and he received it in his Princes name, taking an oath
of the Bourgeses. Charles his name. In whose name he made some Gentlemen
Frisons Knights, promising to suffer them to enjoy all their Preuiledges such
as they had had in the times of the dukes of Saxony. This was the forth time
that the Frisons in less one of his Colonels, who led them out of Friseland,
the which by this means was happily Bernard B^chodita, Hessel Martua, Doctor
Kempo Martua, Goslic Iongama, Tyard Bourinania, T^llinck Botin^, Reinick
Camminga, Reinick Campstra and Gerold Herama. To The gouern^nt of (...)
committed (...).
whom in Prince Charles his name he did commit the government of Justice, for
the which they took an oath. He did also write unto the Earl of Emden, being
at Dockom, that he should leave the said town, and retier with all his men out
of the country of Friseland, whereunto he obeyed, fearing the power of this
Prince more then the dukes of Saxony. The country of Friseland, being
delivered into the hands of the Lord of Iselstein, all the Artillery, which
belonged to the duke of Saxony, remained one whole year in the castells and
forts, the which was delivered by Inuentary, with a condition Medemblyck in
West-Friseland: then all the dukes officers went out of Friseland, the which
remained for a while in some rest, by reason of the truce which was betwixt
Prince Charles and the duke of Geldres, which was prolonged for three years,
but twice broken by the Geldrois. In the beginning of the year 1516. Prince
Charles being in Holland, Ambassadors came unto him from Francis the first the
French King, to wit, the duke of Vendosme and the bishop of Paris, well
accompanied, to congratulate his coming to the crown of the realms of
Spain: and to so many goodly estates which he did inherit by the death of his
Grandfather Don Ferdinando of (...) (...) Ch^les.
Arragon. The Prince being at the Hage, there was speech of a marriage betwixt
Prince Ferdinand of Austria, brother to Prince Charles, with the sister of
Lewis King of Hungary, wherein there was great diversity of opinions. There was
also concluded by the advice of the Emperor Maximilian, the marriage of
Christerne the 2. King of Denmark, and Lady Isabella, sister to the Princess
of Austria. For which effect the Bishop of Dronten was sent Ambassador for the
King of Denmark into Holland, with a great conuoy of ships, being accompanied
with the chief Nobility of the Realm, to receive the said Princess in their
name, according to the treaty of marriage, and to conduct her to the King her
spouse. And to attend on her, there were appointed on the behalf of Prince
Charles, the Lady of Chymay with a goodly train of ladies and gentlewomen: and
for their conuoy at sea, Philip of Bourgongne Admiral of the Netherlands, the
Lords of Faleze, Cortgeene and Chasteau, and other noblemen and gentlemen, with
a great number Charles desirous to imitate the ancient custom of his
Predecessors dukes of Bourgongne in the convocation of a general chapter of
the order of the golden fleece, wherewith the greatest Kings and Princes of
Christendom are commonly honored, (if they be obseruers of the relligious
ceremonies thereof) and the most worthy and valiant noblemen, as well vassals of
the house of Bourgongne as others. And to hold a sollemne feast of the order in
the same manner that the good duke Philip of Bourgongne his great great
grandfather had instituted it, continued by his other Predecessors unto his
time. He began to hold this feast the 26. of October in his Frederic of Baden
The bishop of Vtrecht (...) his (...).
bishop of Vtrecht finding himself sick, and very weak of al his members so
as he could no more govern his estate, nor defend his subjects from the
Invasions of their enemies the Geldrois and others, after that he had governed
his bishoprike about 20. years. He was persuaded to resign it, (as well by the
motion of the Emperor Maximilion, as of Prince Charles his council) to some
one of the house of Bourgongne, pretending in time to make the temporal
Jurisdiction of Vtrecht to fall into the house of Austria, as it did. The which
he did unto Phillippe of Bourgongne, bastard Son to the good duke Philippe
of Bourgongne, and brother unto David, who had been Bishop of Vtrecht before
Frederic of Baden. He was now grown so old being Admiral at the sea, as
he left it to be admitted in the said Bishoprike, whereof peaceable
government, he like unto his brother David, very curious to adorn the Temles

The truce being broken by the Geldrois, the spoils of the Bourguignons were
not less in those times in the country of Geldros, then those of the Geldrois
in Freezland, 1527.
doing what mischief they could. But soon after the Geldrois found themselves
The Duke of Gelde^s besieged in (...).
so oppressed in their own country, even the town of Arnhem the
Metropolitaine of the Duchy. In the which the Duke was straightly besieged,
and so tormented by the Bourguignons, as they could not long have subsisted, if
the French King had not been a mediator and procured them a ^ce, the which was
granted for six months, but it A truc^ concluded.
lasted no^ long for when as they (...) to proclaim it in such places as the
Duke held in Freezland, the Captains Geldrois, did not only reject it but
committed strange Arkelens chief of the men of war Outrages done by the
Geldrois to break the truce.
in the town of S^ke, cast the ^essenger in prison that came unto him, and
would have entreated him in this same manner, if his father had not been a
dweller in Sneeke, and if the inhabitants ^d not s^ed for him, Goldsteyn
captain of the town of Dockom forced the messenger to eat and swallow down
the writing of the accord of this truce, the which contained above six sheets
of paper, the which the said Captains did, for that they would not yield to
any peace no^ truce. The Geldrois having absolutely refused the truce; employed
all their best means, to draw the Frisons to the obedience of the Duke of
Geldres. And thereupon Arkelens the Dukes Lieutenant caused the deputies The
Duke writes unto the Frisons.
his intention to abandon the country of Freezland, nor the good inhabitans
thereof; neither at the instant would he lea^e them, but rather hazard body and
goods to mantaine and preserve them; and that whatsoever concerning them had
been given out, and affirmed by the Bourguignons was a mere lie to distract
his good subjects by such false practices; and that so long as they should
remain faithful unto him, they should find him well affected unto them. The
Citizens, answered that so the^e would, and desired to live his most faithful
subjects even unto the last breath. The Lieutenant was exceeding glad of this
answer; and that he had persuaded them thereunto: for that he did greatly
doubt, that the commons would join with the Bourguignon party. Charles, both
by sea and land, without any respect; who durst not revenge themselves in
Freezeland. Those that held the Princes party, were forced to send for
deputies to Vtrecht, to an assembly that was held there, Doctor Kempo Martua,
and Thyart Bo^ma made knights and councelors to Prince Charles, to show unto
the ambassadors Deputies of the ^risons of the Bourgongne party ^ent ^o
Vtrecht.
and deputies of princes, the rebellion and obstinacy of the Geldrois
persidious br^akers of the truce. Entreating that noble assembly, to take some
course in that behalf that the Geldrois might obey, or else that order might
be taken, such as they should think fittest for their better security. In the
mean time Arkelens went into Geldres to the Duke his master where having
stayed sometime, he was dismissed from Martin van Rosse^ Seignior of Puydroyen
being substituted in his place. They came both together into Freezeland, being
arrived there, Rosse^ called an assembly in the town of Sneeke, of the states
which held the duke of Geldres party; to appear there the second of August,
where among other points he propounded, that the imposts of wine, beer* and
such other like things should be taken away, as they were already in those
towns which h^ld the Bourguignon party: for that the commodities which did pay
a custom to the Geldrois, were transported into the towns of the Bourguignon
faction, to be freed, to the great prejudice of the duke and the towns under
his Demands of the Duke of Gelders to the Frisons.
obedience. That the said imposts being taken away, they should find some
means, to the said states, which they required to have confirmed by the Duke;
the which Arkelens

There was a certain Pirate at sea called Grand-Pierre or great Peter, with
the Duke A notable (...).
of Geldres commission who made as great spoils at sea as the Geldrois did at
land, for there were not any ships which past him, from North or South,
Esterlins or others, but they were all good prize. But above all, he did seek
to ruin the Hollanders; for as many as he took he threw them ouer-boord with
out pity or mercy. The 28 of September, after many great spoils which this
Grand-Pierre had done at sea, being 25. ships strong; in the which he had 1200.
men, giving it out that he went to Harderwycke to the duke, he directed his
course toward Horn, having landed his men covertly Ho^ne surprised by a Pitat
and spoiled.
met with a ship of Enchuysen, the which he borded himself, and cast the
master and his servant over into the sea, for that they were Hollanders. After
the death of Don Fernando of Arragon King of Spain, Prince Charles of Austria,
Duke of Bourgongne etc. Earl of Holland, Zeeland etc. received letters from
Pope Leo the 10. and the Emperor Maximillian his grandfather. With others
written unto Cardinal Pimero, and the Council of Spain; by the which they
required them to receive and inuest Prince Charles in the realms of Castille,
Leon, Arragon etc. These letters being red in Spain, some would have apposed;
and among others Don Piedro Giron eldest son Prince Charles sent for to
receive the Crown of Castile, Ar^agon. etc.
Jane, who was ben^med of her members) to the crown of the said realms;
thinking this occasion to be happily fallen out for him, by the death of Don
Fernando father to Jane. Cardinal Pimero seeing this beginning of an
alteration (which might have turned into a civil war) by the advice of the
deceased Kings Council, sent presently for Prince Charles: who was then in the
Netherlands; to come with all speed and receive the possession of the said
realms. These letters being come to the Court at Brusselles it was decreed,
that before his departure out of the said country he should make choice of
some one to govern those countries in his absence. For the which the Emperor
Maximillian his Grandfather, was appointed as Curator, but for that he was for
the most part absent out of those Countries, Charles to be Regent and
Gouernesse of the Netherlands, as she had been in the year 1508. The Lord of
Cheures his governor, remaining near his person. The which being thus
appointed and all his equipage ready, the Prince accompanied with the knights
of the order and the states of the Netherlands, with many Princes, Ba rons
Knights and Prince Charles goes into Spain.
gentlemen, parted from Brabant and arrived in June, 1517. at Middelbourg in
Zeeland, where he stayed till the twelfe of August, and then with a prosperous
wind he had a short and happy passage, coming to the coaste of Spain about
the town of Tassone in the country of Asturia. The countrymen of the quarter
seeing so great an army Charles reioiced to see them, and having commanded to
put forth their standards, ensigns, banderolls and flags with his arms, he
caused Prince Charles arriues in Spain.
them to cry Spain Spain, where-at casting down their arms, they fell upon
their knees, receiving him with great joy: being landed in Spain, he marched
by land from one town to an other, where he was honorably received by the
chief nobillity of the realm, having attended his coming at Valiodolit;
where he made his entry with a royal and stately pomp.

The Prince having stayed there about six months, in February, 1518. They
Paul's Church. To this solemnity came many great 1518
Princes strangers: the Ambassadors of Kings, Princes, and Christian
Potentates; The Coronation of the King of Spa^ne.
the c^iefe officers of the crown of Castile, the Princes, Dukes, Earls,
Barons, and the greatest of all Spain were there, every man in his rank and
degree. The chief Noblemen

On the 7. of February Prince Charles was crowned with the solemnities and
ceremonies accustomed at the coronation of the Kings of Castile. This done, the
King and the Queen his Mother, sitting in their Throne, Don Garcia did read
the oath with a loud voice (the which was great and sollemne) the which the
Prelates, Princes, Ferdinand the Kings Brother, then the Lady Elenor his
sister, and after came the Prelates, as Archbishops, Bishops, and other
Clergy men. This oath being taken, Don Garcia did read with a loud voice, the
homage of a loyal vassal, the which the Princes and Noblemen were to do: The
first of the which also was Prince Ferdinand and his Sister, who did their
homage, in the hands of William of Croy, Lord of Cheures, Governor to the
King: either of them putting their hands joined into the said Lords hands, who
received them in the Kings Ferdinand to sit down by him, in a seat appointed
for that purpose, where sitting bare-headed, he received (in the King his
Brothers name) the homages of all the Princes and Noblemen of the realm, who
after they had delivered their hands into Prince Ferdinands, kissed the Kings
hands: This ceremony being ended, Te deum was song, and the Trumpets and
clarions sounded. Then the King retired to his Palace, being always
accompanied by the Princes and Noblemen on foot, none being on horseback but
Prince Ferdinand, and the Ambassadors to the Emperor, Pope, Kings of France,
England, and of Portugal, and of the Seigneurie of Venice. The remainder of
the days of this feast were spent in Tylt, Tourney, Dancing and other sports,
and so the feast ended

We have before made mention of that Black troop, which (the Duke of Saxony
having paid) were sent out of Friseland, and that a French Colonel had
entertained them; but having neither money nor means to employ them, they
continued eating and spoiling in the high diocese of Vtrecht, about Deuenter;
from thence they went into the country of Geldres, from whence the Duke caused
them to dislodge, whereupon they thrust themselves into the country of Cleues.
These gallants without care or fear of any man, continued there so long,
until that the Dukes of Cleues and Geldres, the Bishop of Cologne, and the
Earl of Nassau, (having The black troop defeated.
seek them. They had made some accord with the Earl of Nassau; but the
Wallons having defeated 1200. at one charge, the commons seeing this, fell upon
the great troop, being yet in their trenches, who were so amazed, as
abandoning arms and all, every man sought how to save himself, and so these
insolent soldiars which had done so much mischief, were defeated and
dispersed: a great number of them were slain by the peasants, and afterward
many of them were taken and executed by the hand of Justice: especially all
those that were known to have been at the sack of the town of Aspren; the
blood of Innocents crying up to heaven for vengeance against those execrable
murderers.

The Emperor Maximilian being discharged of the Gardienship of Prince Charles
his grandchild; he took his leave of him and of the Noblemen of the
Netherlands, taking his way toward Germany, where after that he had disposed
of his affairs, returning from an Imperial diet at Ausbourg, he fell sick
a^ Inspruck

There he made his last will and testament: by the which among other things
he did expressly forbid them to imbalme his body, but they should find out a
coffin of oak, in the which he would be buried, saying, that therein they
should find all things necessary for a dead body, which was a course canuase
sheet, wherein his body should be sowed: ordayning that they should fill his
ears, eyes and mouth full of lime, and so put his body into this coffin of
oak, and cause it to be interred. Above three years before his death he had
always carried this coffin about with The Empero^s will for the b^rying of his
body.
him, wheresoever he went, locked up in an other cofer of iron, whereof he
himself had The death of the Emperor Maximilian.
burried by his mother the Lady Elenor daughter of Portugal. He was a Prince
endued 1519.
men: with whom he discoursed familiarly of divinity; of all parts of
Philosophy, but especially of Physic, of the Mathematikes and of the Histories
of all ages: quickening his wit daily with the reading and meditation of these
things: so as by his example; his exhortations, and the recompenses which he
promised, the knowledge His course and life.
of histories in Germany was revived, being then buried in Barbarism, and
ignorant of the pinciples of true and sollide learning, so as before him there
was not any Prince, that either privately or publickely did enrich Germany with
more excellent guiftes then he did. He was a great lover of Physic. And for
that he was very curious in the search of Antiquities, he caused Cuspinian,
Nauclerus, Conrade Putinger and James Manlius to write general histories from
the beg^nning of Ladislas, Suntheius and Stabius to search out and write without
flattery or corruption, the ancient familes of Germany, the Nobility
whereof he knew in old time to have been very great, wherein he spent
great sums of money. The other Noble Princes of Germany moved by the example
of this Emperor, began to show themselves in the like zeal and affection to
the knowledge of histories and learning. And then they began to erect many
universities.

After the death of this Emperor, they found that the Assembly of the seven
Princes Electors of Germany did avail much for the quiet of all Europe for
matters inclyning to some great alteration, the dignity of the Empire and the
form of public government was maintained by the wisdom, constancy, union
and fidelity of the Albert of Brandebourg Archbishop of Mentz, Prince
Elector, and Chancellor of the Empire throughout all Germany, having news of
An assembly at Fr^cfort for (...) choosing of a new Emperor.
this death, gave notice thereof (according to his charge) to the Princes
Electors, and called them all to Francfort upon the river of Mayn, to proceed
unto the election of a new Emperor: whether they came all, Videlicet. Albert
himself, Herman Earl of Weda, Archbishop of Cologne, Richard Archbishop
of Treues. Ladislas of Sterneberg Ambassador to Lewis King of Bohemia, Lewis
Count Palatin of Rhine, Frederic duke of Saxony and Ioachin Marquis of
Brandebourg.

The seauenteene day of June in the same year 1519. they assembled all in
Saint Bartlemewes of the election contained in the golden Bull of Charles the
fourth, the which to that Lewis the gentle, Henry the first, the Ottons, Henry
the fourth, Conrard of Suabe, Lothaire of Saxony, and others: where by the
discord of Electors infinite miseries have fallen upon the Empire. He added
more-ouer, that this discord had

After many other speeches to the same purpose, the Electors having had some
short conference together, they commended the Elector of Mentz for his zeal
and affection A commendable thing in the Electors.
to the public state, protesting that they would therein endeavor to follow
his advice, and to be of one mind and consent if it were possible. This was
spoken in the name and behalf of them all, by the Marquis of Brandebourg, to
whom his companions Ambassadors from Prince Charles to the Electors.
until the next day. In the mean time the Ambassadors of Prince Charles
Archduke of Austria, Duke of Bourgongne, Earl of Holland, etc. and King of
Castile, etc. arrived Charles in their election; adding something of his
virtues: they did also put them in mind, that the Emperor Maximilian had
recommended his grandchild unto them, the which he would not have done,
being so good and so wise a Prince, if he had not known it to be for the good
of the Empire.

In the mean time the Ambassadors of Francis the first the French King were at
Coblents on Conflans, from whence they did solicit for their Master, who
Ambassadors from the French King.
had some Electors favorable to his party: the which as some Histories say,
had given King Francis encouragement to affect it. These Ambassadors did extol
their Princes virtues all they could, pretending many reasons why he should be
chosen before any That they were exceeding glad of the good affection The
electors answer to the Ambassadors.
which both Kings carried unto the Empire: But as for the election, they did
hope that GOD would give them the grace, to carry themselves faithfully, and as
they were bound by oath, and by the laws and ordinances of their Predecessors
When they came to consult touching the election: the Archbishop of Mentz,
having conferred privately with Frederick Duke of Saxony, (who was in great
credit and authority among them all) The Elector of Mentz his speech.
began his Oration, utterly rejecting the French King, for the advancement of
King Charles, describing and setting down his good disposition, his great
means, the benefit which the Empire might hope for and expect, and with-all
his beginning, Charles. After that he had ended his speech, he persuaded, the
other Electors to deliver Richard The Elector of Treues speech.
Archbishop of Treuer, Prince Elector, to speak, for he was much esteemed
for his judgment and experience in affairs of State: who contrary to the
opinion of him of Mentz, maintained, that the King of Spain was no more to be
admitted, then he of France: in whose honor he spoke very highly: saying
that the same reason, that he of Mentz had objected against him, were liable
also against the King of Spain: and therefore he concluded that the French
King for the ripeness of his age, for his valor and experience in war
(Germany having great need of such a Captain against the Turk) should be
preferred before the King of Spain being young and without experience. And if
the law did forbid them to choose a Frenchman, that it was of the same force
against a Spaniard. Or else if Saying that the means were easy to find, by
the which an Emperor chosen out of their own Nation might maintain his
authority and that of the Empire, both at home and a broad and so he ended
his speech.

Frederic duke of Saxony spoke next: who having showed that the French King was
excluded by the law, and that Charles was a German Prince, having lived in
Germany and spoke the language; he concluded that the commonweal had need
The Elector of Saxonies speech.
Charles. Therefore it was most convenient to choose him Emperor, but with
certain laws and conditions; so as Germany might remain at liberty, and
that they might anoyde those dangers which the two Archbships said were to be
feared. After that the rest had approved his speech the Archbishop of Treues
said, I foresee the destiny of Germany, and an alteration at hand, yet
seeing it pleases you, I must yield unto your wills. And for that it was then
late they retired themselves,

Pope Leo the tenth was much troubled, and in a word, feared the election of
one of these two Princes, for both were alike suspect unto him. To the end
that he might prevent both of them, he labored to have a third man chosen.
Wherein he Frederic duke of Saxony, a fauorer of Martin Luther, who was his
mortal enemy: yet all these devises and practices turned to smoke: and so did
all the solicitings, guiftes, Charles King of Spain chosen Emperor.
presents and promises, made by the French King: the election of Charles
remaining firm and constant.

The next day after the said election: the Princes Electors being assembled,
they began to treat of the conditions they should give and prescribe unto
Charles, the which was debated some days together; and in the end all being
concluded, they Charles his Ambassadors remaining at Mentz. After they had
received them, they put in writing the voices of every Elector, according to
the custom with his hand and seal. The day before the said Election, they had
presented the Empire to Frederic duke of Saxony, but he refuzed it, with a
Noble resolution; excusing himself upon his age, having (as we have said)
already given his voice unto Charles. This done the Noblemen were called, and
admitted in, then the Bishop of Mentz going up into the pulpit in Saint
Bartlemewes Church, declared that Charles the fifth of that name, Archduke of
Austria, duke of Bourgongue etc. Earl of Flanders, Holland, Zeeland etc. and
King of Spain, was chosen King of Romans, in the place of the Emperor
Maximilian deceased. Then the Ambassadors which were come within a league, were
sent for. Being come, Casimir to leauie men, and to put them in garrison, for
fear of some Innovation. The Electors did write unto Prince Charles and sent
an Embassage unto him, to certify him of all that had been done; the chief
of which Embassage was the Pallatin Frederic, who arrived in Spain in the end
of November Charles having settled his affairs Charles King of Spain comes
into England.
in Spain, he gathered together a great fleet of ships and gallyes, and
taking leave of his Princes and Cities, he embarked and landed in England,
where he was joyfully entertained with great state, by King Henry the eight,
and by the Queen his Aunte, and by the French Queen (married to the Duke of
Suffolk) the Kings sister; who had been promised to him in marriage, she gave
him a very kind and lovely welcome. He was very honorably entreated there
for some days; then being embarked again with a prosperous wind, he past
soon over to Flessinghe, and from thence into Brabant, where he was joyfully
received by all his subjects. The Princes Electors hearing

MARGVERITE OF AUSTRIA, Princess widow of Castille, Dowager of Sauoy, Aunte to
the Emperor Charles the 5. Gouernesse of the Netherlands.
MARGARITA AVSTRIACA DVCISSA SABAV. GVB. BELGICAE.


From Daughter to an Archduke, I became
An Emperors Daughter: to King Lewis son
I first was promised with pomp and Fame,
But my place in his bed another won:
The Prince of Arragon was my first Pheere,
But being left a widow, I did wed
For second, Duke of Sauoy, he being dead,
I from my Nephew did the government bear.
THe Lady Marguerite of Austria, daughter to the Emperor Maximilian, Mary of
Bourgongne, was first married to the Prince Don Fernando of Arragon, the only
son of Don Fernando King of Arragon, and of Isabella Queen of Castile, which
Prince died soon after, leaving no children. Afterward the said Lady was
married again to the Duke of Sauoy, with whom she lived not long before he
dyed. Returning into the Netherlands after the death of her brother Philip King
of Castile, in the year 1508. she was by provision admitted by the Emperor her
father, during his absence in Germany, and the wars in Italy, to the
government of the Netherlands, with George Duke of Saxony. So as this year
1520. King Charles her

The Emperor elect parted from Brussells with a great and honorable train, and
came 1520.
the 20. of October to Cologne, where the Princes Electors did attend him, and
from The Emperors entry into Aix.
thence they came to Aix la Chapelle: At his entry into the town, the Knights
of the order of the Golden-fleece marched first, every one in his rank,
according to his antiquity in the said order. After followed the Princes
Electors: first the King of Bohemias Ambassador, the Archibishop of Ments,
either of them with 700. horse: The Archbishops of Cologne and Treues, either
of them with 600. horse; the Cont Pallatin of Rhine, the Duke of Saxony, and
the Marquis of Brandebourg, every one of them with George Duke of Saxony, the
Marquis of Baden, the Dukes Henry and Erick of Brunswick, brethren, every one
of them with 600. horse: the Bishop of Leege, the Duke of Lunebourg, father to
the Duchess of Geldre, the Earl of Emden, and his son the Lord of
East-Friseland, the young Prince of Cleues, who was always with the Emperor,
the Earl of Saint Pol, and many others with a stately train. Then the
Ambassadors of the Kings of England, Poland, Hongarie, and Denmark, of the
Venetians, the Dukes of Sauoy, of the Knights of Rhodes, and of the great
Master of Prussia. The Lady Marguerit his Aunte was in the train with a
goodly company of Princesses, Countesses, Ladies and Gentlewomen, every one
with her attendance Charlemagnes Chapel, where in two days he was
anointed, sacred and crowned with the first Imperial Crown, the which was of
Iron, with all the ancient ceremonies and solemnities accustomed; the which are
particularly described in my great Chronicle. He remained five days in the
city of Aix, after his coronation, sending back many Noblemen

About that time certain ships (which they called Busses) being fishing for
Hearing, were taken at sea by the commandment of the King of Denmark, and
carried to Coppenhagen. Ships of Holland taken by the Danes.
Adolph of Bourgongne Lord of Beueren, high Admiral to the Emperor, sent
certain deputies in his Majesty's name unto the King. In this prise of ships
there was one of La Vere in Zeeland, the which being seized on by the Danes, a
storm coming, the Mariners of Zeeland became masters of them, whom they
kept close under hatches, until they had brought them to la Vere; where they
were kept prisoners, until that the deputies had obtained a discharge for
their ships from the King of Denmark: fell out great troubles, for that Don
Piedro Giron and others, did rise in arms, by reason Jane the Emperors Mother,
and all the Council prisoners to Tordesillas, distant but eight leagues from
thence. The which Cardinal Adrian (borne at Vtrecht, who had sometimes been
the Emperors Scholemaster) seeing, having been appointed governor with the
Admiral of Castille, did leauy men also, to make head against them, having
first sommoned them by deputies, to submit them Philip^ and mother to the
Emperor, to the duke of Calabria, son to King Frederic expelled from Naples,
to make him King of Castille. But being obstinate, and not willing to yield to
any reason, they were surprised in Tordesillas, and the Queen delivered out of
their hands: so as some were punished with death, others banished.

When as Martin van Rossein Lord of Puydroien had discharged for a time the
Office of governor of Friseland for the duke of Geldre, finding that the
private governors, captains, and other Officers, sought more their own
private prosit, then the service The Earl of Maeurs sent governor into
Frisland.
the which he would give over his place. Whereupon their was a new governor
sent into Friseland in his place, which was Christopher Earl of Maeurs, a man
of great respect and authority. In the mean time the prolongation of the truce
for a year began to wear away, whereupon it was continued again for two
years more. During the which the Geldrois did not forbear to rob and steal
both by sea and land: the which the poor souls of the Bourguignon were feign
to bear, being forced to observe the Articles of the contract, so as in
suffering they had nothing left them but that goodly virtue patience.

About the time of the Emperors coronation the Geldrois did carry themselves so
Nicuport by Schoonhouen taken.
Nicuport, right against Schoonhouen in Holland, the which they did spoil and
burn. The Bourguignons vanquished with impatience, pursued them, so as they
took some prisoners, and among the rest some gentlemen of good houses, who
were executed and laid upon wheels, as thieves and robbers. The Frisons of
the Bourguignon party hearing that the Emperor should hold an Imperial diet at
Worms in Germany, sent The Frisons send to the Imperial diet.
their deputies thither, Kempo Martua a knight of the council of Friseland,
and Sybrand Roorda, to beseech his Imperial Majesty and the Princes of the
Empire, that they might be once freed and delivered from the oppressions, and
outrages, which the Geldrois did them. To which petition they had a favorable
answer, the Emperor excussing himself for that he had no sooner provided for
it: with promise to redress it speedily. William of Rogendorf the Emperors
Lieutenant in Friseland, was called away and discharged from his government,
and in his place was appointed George Schenck Baron of Tautenburch, who before
had been Drossart of Vollenhof, who came the 24. day of March to Leuwarden
with ample commission. The said Lord of Rogendorf was made general of the
army which Philip of Bourgongne Bishop of Vtrecht, sent to pass the
Zuyderzee, and entered into Cuyndert, where having stayed some-time and made
war against the Geldrois, Frisons, they went on and came to Lemmer: whether
the Earl of Maeurs the duke of Geldres lieutenant had before sent some men, to
stop his passage, if happily Rogendorf should offer it. Yet notwithstanding
Rogendorf having thus past his troops into Friseland, he left Nicholas
Wilderstroff to command in his place, and went to the Court at Brusselles.
All this was done to vanquish and tire the Frison Leo to suppress the doctrine
of Martin Luther, published in the same year 1521. his first bloody Edict
against them of the Protestants relligion, whom then by 1521.
a general term they called Lutherans, which continued in the Netherlands
unto the The first Edict against them of the religion.
year 1566. since which time unto this day they have called them Gueux, as in
France Huguenots, as we shall hereafter see, but the Spaniards yet call them
by the name of Lutherans.

All this time the war continued in Friseland, betwixt the Bourguignons under
the command of the Baron of Tautenburche, in the name of the Emperor, having
joined with the Bishop of Vtrechts forces under Nicholas of Wilderstorffe,
against the The miserable estate of Friseland.
Martin van Rossen, and Captain Grand Pierre for the Duke of Geldres, unto the
year 1526. During the which there were many towns and castles taken and
recovered again on either side; diverse incounters, skirmishes, and sieges
raised; wherewith the whole country was miserably afflicted and ruined, for if
the poor countrymen of either side would keep any thing, they must of
necessity carry it into the towns, from whence they might not retire it,
when they would. Some writers speak diversely of the causes and motives of the
war betwixt the Emperor and the French King. But all concur that the
election of Charles, revived the old quarrels and bred new. The French King had
always an eye to the realm of Naples, having treated with Pope Leo for the
recovery thereof. He desired also to restore the King of Navarre Maximilian
his grandfather, for the rights pretended by the French king upon Naples; He
did also bear the loss of the Duchy of Bourgongne impatiently, seized upon
by king Lewis the eleventh, after the death of Duke Charles his great
Grandfather by the Mother side, slain before Nancy: There wanted no quarrel
also, touching the Duchy of Milan. As they were about to seek occasions to
assail one another, there was one offered, small in show at the beginning, but
it was the firebrand to kindle this flame; the which afterward did

There was a suit betwixt the Lord of Aymerie and the Prince of Chimay of the
The first cause of the war.
house of Croy, for a Town in the forest of Ardennes, called Hierges; and a
sentence given in favor of Chimay, by the Peers of the Duchy of Bouillon;
who do judge soueraignely without any appeal from their sentences: yet the
Lord of Aimery (who had great credit with the Emperor Charles, and the chief
in Court) prevailed so, as he obtained letters from the Chancerie of Brabant,
to call in the heirs of the Prince of Chimay, to appear at a certain day,
and to hear the reasons of Aimery if need Robert of Marcke Duke of Bouillon,
as to their Lord and Protector, that he might defend the liberties and
privileges of his Duchy, being withal Tutor unto Chimays children, having
married their Aunte. Whereupon the Duke did what he could possible to maintain
his rights: but seeing that they meant to deprive him, he addressed himself to
the French king, with whom he found means to make his peace (being before in
some disgrace with him) putting into his hands, both his person and his places,
craving favor and support, that he might have Justice of the wrong done unto
his sovereignty. Having thus provided for his affairs, he sent to defy the
Emperor (the which was a great presumption for him, and he bought The Duke of
Bouillon desies the Emperor.
Heerevpon the King of England having persuaded the French King, not to enter
into The Emperors (...) inuades the duke of Bou^lons country.
which he took Longues, Meusancourt, Fleuranges, Sanchy and Bouillon:
whereupon the Duke finding himself too weak, obtained a truce of the Emperor,
for six weeks only.

The French King considering that the granting of this truce, was a secret
declaration of war against him (for that if the Emperor had had no other
desseigne but against the Duke of Bouillon, there had been no need of any
truce, having means to ruin him within six weeks) he began in like sort to
raise an Army; soliciting The French king^ (...).
the King of England to join with him. The Emperor on the other side, having
this Tournay besieged by the Emperors men
private quarrels. But the King seeing that the Imperial Army (under color
that the truce with the Duke of Bouillon grew to an end) approached near
Mouson, he sent some troops thither, and so the war began betwixt these two
great Princes, both in Champaigne, Picardie, and elsewhere; all which I will
forbear to write of in this work, both for that they do not properly concern
this subject, as also being set down at large in the History of France.
George Schenck Governor of Friseland, with the Lords of Wastenare and Castre,
having taken the fort of Warckom, and Mackom; the Towns of Dockom and
Bolswaert, with some other forts holding the Sloten besieged by the Bou^gnons
Lemmer yielded.
Lemmer, those within it dispairing of succors, yielded it also, and the
Castle was presently razed. Doctor Hubert Chancellor for the Duke of Gelders
in Friseland, and Wyard of Bolswaert captain of a ship, who had bin shut up in
Sloten, having their Marguerite Gouernesse, who lodged him in perpetual prison
at Rippelmonde, where he dyed.

This being thus performed by the Lords of Schenck, Wassenare and Castre, they
went to besiege Steenwyck, which they took without any resistance: the
soldiers that were there in garrison for the Duke of Geldres; having abandoned
it, as soon as the Earl ^wicke taken without any resistance.
of Maeurs was departed; not daring to attend the Bourguignons, whom they did
see which the Frisons did mourn greatly. He was buried with a great funeral
pomp, after 1523.
Charles hearing the bad news of the alteration that was in Spain, against
the Governors which he had left there; after that he had consulted with the
Princes Electors, and taken his leave of The emperors second voyage into Spain.
them, and of the Noblemen Netherlanders, having disposed of his affairs
there, he parted toward the Island of Walchren, being accompanied with a great
number of Noblemen, Knights of the Order, and others: where finding a
prosperous wind, he set sail, and touched first in England; where he concluded
an alliance with Henry the 8. King of England, to marry with Mary his Daughter
(being then but seven years old) when she should come to age; but it
succeeded not, as we shall see: from thence Philip the second, father to Philip
the third now reigning.

The Emperor being parted for Spain, there fell out great troubles in Germany,
the Pesants rising against the Nobility, abused with gross errors: who being
assembled The peasants war in Germany.
in great numbers, did spoil many Abbayes, Cloisters, and religious houses:
stealing all they could lay hand of, and committing a thousand outrages and
insolences, without 1524.
unto the duke of Geldres. They of Boisleduke were not in the mean time idle:
The Geldrois begin war against the Emperor.
Shenck, although he had but newly dismissed his troops, taking some number of
Pesants, who were presently in arms, he cut off their passage, and forced them
to retire without any exploite doing. After that the Geldrois had thus played
the gallants in the Mairie of Boisleduke, and they on the other side for their
revenge in the Island of Bomell, there was a truce made betwixt the Emperor
Earl of Holland, and Charles of Egmont Duke of Gelders: upon condition that
the money promised for contribution unto the Duke, should be paid in the

In the year 1526. Collonell Martin van Rossein, made war for the duke of
Geldres 1526.
in Rydderlandt against the Earl of Emden, and began to fortify Iemmingen:
the That the Earl of Emden was their very good friend, and had not deserved
any such usage. So as for want of succors from the Groningeois, the Geldro is
were forced to make an accord with the East-Frisons; by the which the Duke of
Geldres did

The Duke of Geldres did not easily forget the succors which the Groningeois
had The duke of Gelders seeks to be revenged of the Groningeois.
refused him; but sought some occasion to be revenged. About April, in the
year 1526. he sent one of his Captains called Meynard van Ham, a lame man,
toward Dam, with some soldiars, commanding the peasants there-abouts, to come
and to help to fortify it. The Duke had drawn these soldiers out of the
country of Holsteyn, to the end it might seem, that it was not his action; but
the Duke of Holsteyns. Whereupon the Groningeois made a Proclamation;
forbidding the peasants upon pain of fiering their villages and houses, not to
aid nor work at this fortification in Meynard van Ham caused all the The
suburbs of Groningen burnt,
suburbs of the town of Groningen to be burnt: whereof the Inhabitants never
drempt: there was great slaughter done, and many men made poor: there were 30.
ships also burnt, the fire whereof flew over the Rampart, and burnt five houses
in the Town. Some days after he returned, and burnt in like sort the
suburbs of the ports Ebbing and Boteringe, who having committed all the
outrage they could, they retired to Dam. The Groningeois not knowing what to
do to this troop of soldiers, nor well whose they were; writ unto the Duke
of Geldres, that there were enemies entered into their country, the which did
pitifully spoil and burn them: wherefore they desired to know if it were
done with his priuitie and consent, as some did boldly say, the which
not-with-standing (they said) they could not believe. To which letters
Ommelandes) writ unto the Lady Marguerite, Duchess Dowager of Sauoy, Aunte
to the Emperor, and Gouernesse of the Netherlands; showing unto her the great
wrong and violence that was done unto them by the Duke of Geldres men; offering
to submit themselves to the Emperors obedience, The Groningeois give
themselves unto the Em^or.
and to pay unto him such yearly tribute as they were accustomed to pay unto
the Schenck Baron of Tautenbourg, governor of the country, to use all care in
that action: marching presently to Groningen, and there to receive an oath of
the Bourgesies, and swearing likewise unto them in the Emperors name. Schenck
according to his Colonel Schenck re^ Groninghen for the Emperor.
Walburges church the 7. of June, whereof he took possession, and received
their homages. This done Schenke made have to besiege Delfzeel, which the
Geldrois held and had half fortified. The Duke of Holsteyn (with whom the Duke
of Gelders had made a league) sent two thousand foot to succor it, and to
raise the siege. Schenck having provided for the guard of his camp, the
Inhabitants of Groningen The Duke of Holsteynes troops defeated.
and some peasants; went to encounter the troops in Westerwollingerlandt,
whom the third day following, on Saint James day, he quite defeated, George
van Manster, Drossart of Wedden was taken, and many gentlemen with him. The
Drossart was carried to Leewarden, and the rest of the prisoners to Groninghen.

The Geldrois that were in Dam seeing Delfzyel yielded, and the succors which
they expected from the Duke of Holsteyn defeated; began to parle, demanding a
safe retreat; the which was granted them by the Governor Schenck; upon
condition that Dam yielded by the Geldrois.
they should depart with white wands in their hands, and deliver their
Captains Meinard van Hem and Bernard van Hackfort, the which they did
willingly, and departed Schenck, Wedden yielded.
upon condition to have their lives and goods saved; the besieged being out of
all hope of succors, from thence he returned to Groninghen, to see his wife and
Lady Jane of Egmont, who attended him there: having sent his troops in the
mean time to besiege the Town and Castle of Coeuoerden and Kinckhost whether
he himself went Coeuoerden yielded.
after some days, having lain about two months before Coeuoerden, the
Drossart Selbach yielded it, upon condition to depart with their Arms and
baggage, where having placed a good garrison; the said Governor Schenck hearing
that there were some Magreheyn was taken prisoner. The Duke of Gelders seeing
that all things succeeded all for him in Freezeland, and that the town and
country of Groninghen, A peace betwixt the house of Bourgongue and the Duke of
Gelders.
the Drent and Dwent were in the Emperors hands, he began to grow weary of his
toil and charge, knowing well that the more he made war, the more he lost.
He resolved therefore (and wisely for himself) to make an hereditary accord
with the house of Bourgongne, the which was done, and proclaimed in Groninghen,
before the Statehouse the 17. of December in the year 1326. to the great
content of the whole country, The second bloody Edict against the Protestants,
religion, which they called Lutherans, by virtue whereof many were burnt or
otherwise executed in the Netherlands.

In the year 1527. there fell out a great tumult in the Town of Vtrecht, the
inhabitants and men of trade having taken arms: would needs know the reason
why they A great Tumult in Vtrecht
had banished some, and wherefore they had forbidden handicrafts men to use
their trades, the privileges which he had given them, and then to retire to
his Castle of Wyck, They of Vtrecht call the duke of Ge^dres to be their
protector.
with a good number of horse and foot: where having taken some order for his
safety and for theirs that had called him; he left the Earl of Maeurs there
for his Lieutenant, with a good number of men: and then all the Bishops
Clergy, and those that held his party, were chased out of the Town, and most
of their goods spoiled. Those that remained newters, and meddled with neither
party, lived quietly in their houses. The Bishop seeing this, built a Fort at
Vaert upon the bank of the river of Leck, right against the town of Vianen,
the which he did man with a good garrison, as also the

The Geldrois being thus in Vtrecht would not live idly, but went in the
night and Harderwyck taken by the Geldrois.
surprised the Town of Harderwyck held by the Hollanders, the which the Duke
thinking to keep (for it was belonging unto the Duchy of Geldres) he manned
with a good garrison, from whence they made ordinary roades into Holland, both
by sea and The Hage spoiled by the Geldrois.
Geldre, Geldre, where with the inhabitants were so amazed, as (fearing no
enemy) every man fought to save himself: the soldiers spoiling them all,
carried their booty unto

The Duke of Geldres did also take Rhenen, belonging to the bishop of Vtrecht:
and there caused a Castle to be built: he did in like sort seize upon the
castle of Horst, into the which he put good garrisons, thinking to make them
his own hereditarily. He did also much harm to the countries of Oueryssel,
with the forts which he caused to be built by the towns of Campen, Deuenter,
and Swolle, whom the soldiers did afflict daily with their spoils and burning;
So as in the end these towns with the consent of their Bishop, demanded
succors from the Emperor, who accepted them, George Schenck Baron of
Tautenbourg, came into the quarter of Oueryssell, and besieged the town of
Hasselt, whereas the Earl of Emden was also in the Emperors service, who did
so batter this town with this Canon, as there was scarce a house left whole.
The besieged having long held out, and done their parts in the defense thereof,
seeing that the Duke sent them no succors, they yielded it up, to have their
lives and goods saved. The Duke had promised to free them from this siege, and
went and showed himself before Hasselt; but hearing that it was yielded, he
retired himself: from thence the Earl of Buren and the Baron Schenck went and
camped before the town and castle of Hattem, in the country of Gelders,
Hattem in Gelders yielded.
which the Geldrois had abandoned, flying away, and therefore they did no harm
unto

This done, they seized upon many places, castells and forts, to the number of
one Many towns and castells yielded to the Emperor.
and twenty. Among others of the fort of Koeborch, whereas all were put to the
sword, the castle of Hulckensteyn, the Block-house which was upon the black
water near unto Hasselt, and the castle of Amerongen betwixt Vtrecht and
Rhenen, the castle of Ham near to Vtrecht, the castle of Droern, with diverse
other castells. The towns of Hasselt, Rhenen, Hattem, Eleburch and Harderwyke,
the duke of Geldres hunting house, Leuendale and Altena and others were burnt:
the castle of Deyn near to Amersfort and Puy droyen were burnt and ruined, of
the which Martin van Rossen was Lord. This done the Emperors army stayed a
while in the Veluwe, and from thence went to besiege the town of Tyel; whether
the duke of Geldres had Companions remember Koeborch, where our men were all
murdered or hanged, which they hearing, fell upon

In the same year 1528. in September, some Colonels brought two thousand
Spanish 1528.
souldiars out of Spain, who through contrary winds and great tempests were
2000. soldiar^ come out of Spain.
almost six months at sea: having refresht themselves a while, they were
sent for a supply to the Emperors men which made war in Geldres. At the same
time the duke of Geldres gathered together certain men at Ruremonde, Venloo,
and the Villages there abouts; making five companies, of the which Henry van
Wyssche was Collonell, sending them into the Mairie of Boisleduke to wast it.
T^yerry Barron of Batenbourg was then in Boisleduke, Lieutenant to the Earl of
Buren, who hearing that the Geldrois were so near him, gathered together some
foot men out of

At the same time that the Emperors army did rise from before Tyel, the Barron
Schenck having surprised the town of Zutphen: some Geldrois that were there in
arms to repulse him, were slain. The souldiars that were within Tyel, during
the siege, had been before in the castle of Hattem when it was yielded by
composition, and had sworn not to carry arms for one month against the
Emperor: these soldiars came to Megen and made a fort within the town: whilst
that the garrison was Megen taken and abandoned again by the Geld^ois.
gone forth to conuoy certain wagons laden with wine, which the Geldrois had
appointed to go to Os and Nieulant: those of Boisleduke sent the Earl of
Burens troop, with a hundred horse, to cut them off, and withal to dislodge
them from Megen;

In the same year those of Franc and Bruges set out some ships of war
against the William Turc with his company, and part of the garrison of Vaert:
being in all four enseignes the which all together made a stand upon the
Black water, until they had news of the Intelligences which they had within
The Geldrois of Vtrecht defeated.
the town of Vtrecht: most of the garrison being then run for the pillage
into the quarter of Goyland, where they took great spoils. At their return,
the Bishops

The next morning at the opening of the port a woman went forth with a basket
on her arm, who gave notice unto the Bishops men, that the soldiars of the
town had most of them left the guard, and were gone to sleep, and therefore
when as Saint James his clock did strike, they might approach boldly, and that
they should find all things prepared to give them entry unto the town. So
the second of Iulie in the year 1528. the Bishops men came to the port, which
they found wide open, so as Vtrecht surprised by the Bishops men.
let down the Portcullies: but presently five or six men of Vaert with Axes
and Hatchets, cut in sunder the beams; so as the soldiars entered with the
Horsemen, and marched into the town without any Encounter or let, until they
came to the Friars: where some Geldrois soldiars being gathered together,
thought to repulse them: but it was in vain, for the Bishops men were to
strong for them, who slew four and twenty of those Geldrois, and took three
hundred and fifty prisoners. The Earl of Maeurs (who was returned the day
before) was taken prisoner, with some others, who by the treaty of peace, were
afterward set free. The soldiars which Executions at Vtrecht.
town executed by Justice, and two Chanoins put into a sack and cast into the
river. The Bishop had put more to death, if the Earl of Hochstraten, who came
that day from Vianen, had not prevented the mischief. The soldiars spoiled all the houses of the Geldrois partisans, breaking open doors and windoes, and
taking up the flowers and planchers of houses, to see if there were no money
hidden, where they found much, doing moreover great outrages unto the Burgeses.
Notwithstanding the town of Vtrecht was thus happily delivered from the
oppressions and extorsions of the Geldrois soldiars. For if they had continued
there longer; it was to be feared that the town had

The town of Vtrecht being by this means come into the Emperors hands
(according to the accord made the Bishop for the temporal Jurisdiction of
the said Country) Katherines port, which was called Veredenbourg, that is to
say the Castle of peace, the which from that time continued unto the year.
1577. that many Cittadells and Castells in diverse parts of the Netherlands were
ruined, as we shall heareafter show. The Emperors army being returned from
Ties: there was a meeting appointed in the Town of Gorrichom, betwixt the Duke
of Gelders and the Bishop of Vtrecht, whether came commissioners on the
Emperors behalf and for the Duke of Gelders: for the Emperor came the Earls
of Buren and Hochstraten, the Bishop of Palermo Chancellor, and the Audiencier
or Secretary: Henry Kiespennick, Rolland Kerckelandt and Veressen, who A peace
betwixt the duke of Gelders the Bishop and the Emperor.
after much debate, in the end concluded a good peace, betwixt the Duke of
Gelders on the one part, and the Bishop of Vtrecht on the other, and the
Emperor being joined to the said Bishop: and also for his own particular,
touching the temporal Jurisdiction of Vtrecht, which accord contained many
articles, the which we omit to avoid tediousnes. By the which the Earl of
Maeurs and Doctor Wynant were delivered without ransom, being taken prisoners
at Vtrecht and a time lymited for the banished men of Vtrecht and Swoll to
return home to their houses, for the confirmation of which accord and peace,
there went to Brusselles the Earls of Buren and Hochstraten, and the Baron
Schencke for the Emperor and the Bishop of Vtrecht: and for the Duke of
Gelders, John van rossem Lord of Brouchuysen, Doctor Erckelens Marguerite
Douager of Sauoy, the Emperors sister and gouernesse of the Netherlands at
Brusselles, theie went unto her to Macklyn: whereas the said Ladies Council in
the Emperors name, and the Dukes Council in their masters name did swear the
said peace in Saint Peeters Church. The Queen used the Dukes Comissioners
very honorably, giving to every one of them a fair Cup full of golden
Carolus, who returning by Antwerp, went to make report unto their Prince,
whereof he was exceeding joyful. A while after the Duke sent Martin van
Rossem Lord of Puydroyen to the French King, to advertise him of the peace he
had made with the Emperor, wherewith the King was well pleased.

In the year 1529. Henry of Bauaria Bishop of Vtrecht, discontented with the
1529
wars, and seeing himself thus deprived of the temporal Jurisdiction of the
said Bishopric, which the Emperor had gotten into his possession, resigned
his Bishoppricke in July, into the hands of Pope Clement the 7. going to
govern the Bishopric of Worms, after they had been at Vtrecht five years,
to which Bishopric there was advanced an ancient man called William van
Engueuoort, borne in Brabant, Cardinal and Bishop of Tortona in Spain, who
being at Rome, took posession of the said Bishopric of Vtrecht, by his
Atorney: leaving John Vtenengen his vicegerent to govern The Emperor comes
unto Italy.
it, whether he never went, but died four years after in Rome in the year
1533. A Peace being concluded betwixt the Emperor and the French King in

The Emperor Charles the fifth went toward Bologna la grassa, whereas Pope
His stately entry into Bolognala grasta
Clement was then resident; being near the City, five and twenty Cardinals
went to meet his Majesty, coming near him, they all lighted to do their
duties unto him; then they took their moyles again, conducting him into the
City, having of either side of him the Cardinals of Ancona and Farneze,
entering into the City, Don Anthonio de Leua followed with some field pieces,
being carried in a Carosse trimmed with tawney velvet, having with him
fourteen enseignes of German foot: after

The Emperor being entered into that city, they brought him a cross of gold,
the which he kissed. The Pope was carried out of his Palace unto Saint
Petronelles Church, The Emperor Charles kisseth the Popes feet.
who made three courtesies unto the Emperor, and he kneeling down kissed the
Popes feet, and then rising he kissed his hand and his face: then all the
Noblemen followed and kissed the Popes feet: which done, he rose out of his
chair, and kissed the Emperor three times of the cheek: saying. I cry you
mercy, and yield my self unto you, it was not my desire that you should kiss
my feet, but to observe the accustomed ceremonies at the coronation of
Emperors.

The two and twenty of February in the year 1530. the Emperor having stayed
almost three months in Bolognia, all things being prepared and made ready,
after many 1530.
crown upon his head, which they call the crown of steel. The two and twenty
day The Emperors coronation by the Pope.
of the same month, the Pope being in the Church, the Emperor was conducted
thither, with great pomp and state. First marched the pages and gentlemen of
his household and of his chamber: Earls, Marquises, Dukes and Princes, every
one in his degree; then the Officers of his house. The Kings at arms and
Heralds of the Emperor of France, England and Sauoy. Then the Stewards of his
house with their staves. The Marquis of Montferrat followed, sumptously
apparelled, carrying the scepter. The duke of Vrbin carried the sword in a
sheath of pure gold, inritched with precious stones. The Count Palatin carried
the Globe, and the Duke of Sauoy carried the Imperial crown.

The Emperor marched after, carrying upon his head the crown of Lombardie,
being followed by all the Ambassadors of Kings and Princes: After whom came
the Counselors and Secretaries of State. Before that the Emperor entered into
the Church, he was received and led into a Chapel by the Deane and Chanoins
of Saint Peeters Church at Rome, being come expressly thither: where the
Emperor took the accustomed oath in the hands of a Cardinal. Then after many
other ceremonies, and change of Ornements, after that he had been anointed,
he was led before the Pope sitting in his pontifical seat, doing a great
obeisance unto him, whereupon the Pope came down in his coape, and went
toward the Alter

Then the Emperor was brought before the Pope, where he kneeled down. The
Pope drawing forth the Imperial sword, said unto him, Accipe gladrum etc. The
deacon

The Emperor Charles being thus crowned, having settled the affairs of Italy,
parted An Imperial diet at Ausbourg.
two and twenty days after his coronation, to go to an Imperial diet
appointed at Ausbourg, the first of May, whether came the Prince Electors and
many other Princes of the Empire, Earls, Barons, Bishops and Prelates. Where
the Emperor arrived with the King of Hungary his brother, and the Cardinal
Campege on the Popes behalf the thirteenth of June. And as it seemed that this
diet was principally held for matters of relligion, after that Cardinal
Campege had made his oration, and the Ambassadors of Austria laid open their
greuances; the Prince Elector of Saxony, George of Brandenbourg, the duke of
Lunebourg and the Landgraue of Hessen, as well in their own names, as of other
Earls, Noblemen and Imperial towns, besought the Emperor to hear the
confession of their doctrine, but he on the other side, commanded them to
deliver it up in writing: and they still pressed to have audience, The protestant
Princes desire to have their confession heard.
the which being denied them, they still insisted, for that it touched their
honors, lives and goods, yea the health of their souls wherein it may be they
had otherwise informed him then was true. Whereupon the Emperor commanded
them to come the next day to his lodging: but he would needs have the
writing delivered, the which was done the next day both in Lattin and Dutch,
offering to expound it, if there were any thing either to obscurely, or too
breefly set down, Faber and Eckius were the chief, who writ against, and
confuted the said confession.

Upon this confession of their faith, there were diverse disputations, betwixt
the doctors of the Protestant Princes, and many towns which did adhere unto
them, Conferences betwixt the Protestants and Papists.
and the Popish deuines. The Emperor in many things would interpose his
authority and absolute power, whereunto the Protestant Princes did oppose. Many
conferences were held betwixt the doctors of both relligions, the which did not
pass

In the said year 1530. the first of November, there was so great a Tempest at
sea, (...) de^ (...)* (...).
Philippe of Hohenlo, husband to the Lady Marguerite of Nassau, recovered them
and walled them, in the name of his wife. The Island of ^houwe was also peerst
through in diverse places. The wall was broken in three or four places about
Bordendam, Tongue,

By reason of these tempests and unreasonable tides, there was so great a
desolation throughout all the country of Zeeland, and else where, as it can
hardly be described: for there was an incredible number of al sorts of
cattle, as Horses, Oxen, Kyne, Sheep, Swine and other beasts swalloed up in
the sea: many fair country houses, and farms with their barnes full of
corn, were overthrown and carried away with the violence of the water. But
that which was most lamentable, many men women and children were drowned, and
could by no means be relieved. Many rich men keeping good houses, and
possessing great lands, were utterly ruined by these inundations; and who
before were accustomed to be served, were now forced to go and serve, and to
labor drowned, and so remained unto the year 1597. that Nortbeueland was
recovered, of Anno terdeno post sesquimille Nouembris,
Quinta, stat salsis Zeelandia tota sub vndis.


The 27. of November the same year the Lady Marguerite of Austria, Douager of
The death of Lady Marguerite of Austria.
Sauoy, Aunt to the Emperor, Gouernesse of the Netherland, died at Macklyn: she
desired to be intretred at Bruges, by the Lady Marie Duchess of Bourgongne,
Countess of Holland, Zeeland etc. her mother. In December the same year 1530.
the Emperor parted out of Germany with King Ferdinand his brother, and the
Princes Ferdinand 1531.
his brother was chosen King of the Romans, by all the Princes Electors,
except him Ferdinand the ^mperors brothe^ made King of Romans.
of Saxony. After the election, the Emperor and his brother, accompained with
all these Princes and Noblemen, entered into Aix la Chapelle, the tenth of the
said month, where he was the next day crowned with all the sollemnities
required for a King of Romans. This done Ferdinand returned with the Princes
into Germany, and the Emperor came to Brusselles the 24. of the month, where
soon after he went to see the Lady Mary, Queen Douager of Hungary, his
sister, whom he made Gouernesse in his name of all the Netherlands, by the
death of the Lady Marguerite their Aunt.

MARY OF AUSTRIA, QVEENE DOWager of Hongary, sister to the Emperor Charles the
5. Gouernesse of the Netherlands.
MARIA REGINA HONG. GVB BELGII. SOROR IMPERAT. CAROLI QVINTI.


To Lewis Kin^ of Hungary I was wife,
King to my Father, Emperor to my Brother:
Amongst the Turks my husband lost his life,
And ever since I lived without another.
Not unto second marriage ha^ (...) ^art,
But kept my state o^ widdow-hood to the end,
My Broth^r unto m^ ^re his depart,
The rule of the Low Countries did commend.
Mary of Austria, second daughter to the Archduke Phillip and the Lady Jane
King and Queen of Castile, sister to the Emperors Charles the 5. and Ferdinand
the 1. was married to Lewis King of Hongarie, who was slain in battle by the
great Turk Solliman, and remained a widow. By the death of the Lady
Marguerite, Dowager of Sauoy, she was by the Emperor Charles the fifth her
brother, appointed-Gouernesse of all the Netherlands. During the Emperors
abode at Brusselles, the inhabitants of The beginning of the channel which goes
from Brusselles to Antwerp.
the Town obtained of his Majesty, a confirmation of the grant which they had
obtained long before of the Lady Mary Duchess of Bourgongne, and of the
Emperor Maximillian her husband, for the making of a (...) river or channel
betwixt Brussells and Antwerp, in the which after that time they began to
labor, until it was fully ended, and that ships came unto it in the year
1560. The Anabaptists which began in those Anabaptists in Holland.
at one time, whereby a sentence given by the Emperor they lost their heads.
All this year 1531. that the Emperor stayed in the Netherlands, there past
nothing that was memorable; only the 3. of December he renewed the order of
the golden Fleece, in the City of Tournay, then he made his preparations to
return into Germany, to an Imperial Diet which should be held at Ratisbone,
to conclude the controversies in relligion, and the Turkish wars. The Count
Palatin came to Brussells to fetch him, with whom he parted the 17. of
January 1532. This year was published in Holland, Zeeland, and other Provinces
of the Netherlands, the The (...) blou^y Edict against the Protestants.


The Hollanders having by the Emperors commandment delivered certain ships
unto Christierne the 2. King of Denmark, being exiled, to carry him back
into his Kingdom with the which he past into Norway: those of Lubeck and
their Allies being much incensed thereat, rigged forth many ships of war,
which they War betwixt them of Lubeck and Hollanders.
sent to Sea: causing them to keep the Sound in such sort, as no Hollanders
ships could pass, which was the cause of great poverty and want among their
mariners, and such as get their living by the navigations of the Sea. Corn
grew exceeding dear there, and had been deerer if those of Breme had not sent
in a great quantity of

Soon after the return of the Deputies, some ships of war of Lubeck came
running along the Coast of Zeeland, where they took a ship of Edam laden
with salt, coming from Lisborne beelonging to them of Amsterdam. Whereupon
the Court (at the suit of the Hollanders) caused all the ships, goods,
merchandise, and generally what-soeuer did belong to them of Lubeck and
Hambrough, to be stayed and arrested, in recompense of this ship that was
taken by them. The 10. of June Ioos Ameson Vander-Burch, and Gerard Mullart van
Campen, with Cornell^ Bennick of Amsterdam parted out of Holland to this
assembly at Copenhagen. The King of Denmark and Prince Christierne his son
(who afterward was King, called Christierne the 3.) received these Deputies
honorably. Those of Lubeck propounded many complaints (...) ma^e (...) ^ror
(...) Hollande^ with* the King of Denm^.
with the Towns of the Easterlins of the one party, and the Emperor with the
Hollande^s of the other, whereunto the Lubeckers were forced to consent with
the other Towns, and to set their sign and seal to the treaty of Peace: so
as all ships and goods that had been stayed on either side, were discharged,
the Sound remaining open and free. The news of this peace did greatly rejoice
them of Amsterdam, and did bring down the price of pitche, rozen tar, corn,
and of all other commodities that came out of the East Countries by the Sound.

In the beginning of January 1532. the Emperor being as we have said, parted
out of the Netherlands, and came with his Brother King Ferdinand to Ratisbone
to hold a Diet, whither came all the Princes, except the Duke of Saxony, and
the A Diet at Ratisbone touching relligio^.
Landtgraue of Hessen. The Emperor being come to Ments the first of February,
the Arch-bishoppe of that place and the Count Palatin did solicit him again
for peace, and having warrant from him to deal in it, they did admonish and
advise the Princes of Saxony and Hessen to harken to it. So as after many
letters sent on either side; in the end they met in the beginning of April
at Schuynfort. There a proposition was made to live in peace until a Council
were called, and some points were propounded by the Emperors commandment,
touching the which Articles propounded to the P^otestants.


As well those that have presented the confession of their Doctrine at
Ausbourg, and the defense thereof: as those which shall hereafter join unto
that relligion, A form of the conditions of peace in Germany.
shall conteyne themselves within these limit^s without any Innovation until
a Council, ^ee called. They shall not converse with those that teach the
Sacraments of the Lords supper, and of Baptism, other-wise ^hen is se^te down
in their declaration at Ausbourg. Touching that which concearnes matters of
Doctrine, they shall not suborne nor defend any one of a strange ^urisdiction,
under coullor of relligion. CHRIST. They shall avoid injuries; and the
Ministers o^ the Church shall according to their duties, reprehend errors and
vice modestly, and teach the truth. They of their relligion shall not be
excluded from the Imperial Chamber. The Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction

According to these Articles, the Protestants for their parts being seven
Princes 1532
and twenty four Towns offered obedience to the Emperor, and promised him A
(...) betw^xt the Emperor and the (...).
succors against the Turk. The Noblemen that had been mediators, concluded
this treaty of peace the 23. of June. 1532. and the Emperor ratified it the 2.
of August, and by a public Edict did authorize it, commanding the Imperial
Chamber and all other A new Haven at Middlebou^g.
for the war. The same year the 8. of April was begun the new haven of
Middelbourg in Zeeland, in the Island of Walcren, passing in a straight line
from the town unto the bank of the Island, where it falls into the sea, the
which was finished in two years, a very commodious and profitable work, seeing
that before their haven was near unto the salt marshes of Armuyden, having a
crooked course unto the town, and therefore very discomodious.

George of Egmont the 60. Bishop of Vtrecht, son to John the first Earl of
Egmont succeeded William van Enkeuoort, who (as we have said) died at Rome. He
was before Philip of Bourgonge was Bishop) seized upon the revenues and
^emporall jurisdiction, under color, that the Bishops were not powerful
enough to defend it against the Duke of Gelders and other ennemies: and also by
reason of their ordinary mutinies, tumults and civil wars, against the Bishops,
yet notwithstanding George of Egmont did govern the said Bishopric with
great magnificence, the space of 25. years.

The 3. of May in the year 1536. about three of the clock in the afternoon,
there fell a great and fearful fire at Delfe in Holland, so as in a short
time the whole town 1536.
Two French ships cun^ngly taken by them of Dordrecht.
same year, the wars being kindled again betwixt the Emperor and the French
King, two ships of war Frenchmen, ran along the coast of Holland, who
with their long boats went sometimes to land, to surprise some of the
Countrymen, if

The French seeing it pursued him with full sails, and coming near cried
unto him to strike sail, and that he should come aboard: then he drew nearer,
entreating them to suffer him to depart, and that he was a poor man, who
sought only to get his living, and that if they took away his boat he must go
beg his bread. Then the French cried out the more to have him approach and come
a board, or else the would sink him. Being come close unto them and the French
entered, beginning to handle those sackes, he good cheap, the which they
carried unto their Town, not without joy and admiration Charles Duke of
Geldres was much discontented, to see himself so deprived of the town of
Groningen, the which was yielded unto the Emperor, as we have said. Being
desirous to have his revenge, he studied how he^ The duke of G^dres ente^prise
upon Amers^ort.
might surprise some Town. He had a certain enterprise upon the town of
Amersfort, the which some traitors within it should deliver unto him the 13.
day of September the same year. But a woman having discovered the treason of
the Bourgmaster of the town, the enterprise failed, and he returned as he
came. The traitors were quartered, and their heads set upon the gates of the
town. The second day of November, there was a meeting appointed in the town
of Grave, betwixt the Deputies for the Em^or and the Duke of Geldres, touching
the difference that was betwixt

In April 1537. the French King entered with a mighty Army, in the which were
three Kings; himself, James King of Scotland the fifth of that name, and the
Hesdin taken by the french.
King of Navarre, into the Country of Arthois, where he besieged Hesdin a
frontier town, the which he won, the Inhabitants being retired with all
their chief S^int Pol taken by the Imperial^.
to the house of Longueuille, manned with a good garrison of French. Sending to
sommon it, the Governor in despite of the Emperor, caused the Trumpet to be
hanged that did this message, wherewith the Earl with all the Commanders of
the Emperors Army were much incensed: after that they had battered the town
with great fury, and made a sufficient breach, the Earl at dinner time, when
as the Governor and Captains were at meat, caused a furious assault to be
given, and in the end forced the town, killing and massacring all that they
met in the heat of their fury, not sparing any, yea the blood was mingled
with the wine upon the

The Duke of Geldres not content with the peace which he had made with the
Emperor, practiced means to surprise the Town of Enchuysen in Holland,
thereby The duke of Geldres ent^ise upon ^uchuysen.
to make himself master of the Zuyderzee, to which end he furnished out five
ships

The Duke seeing his enterprise miscarried, feared least the Hollanders should
complain 1537.
Mary, the Gouernesse; he therefore excused himself unto them (...) duke ex^
(...) this ^rise.
of Amsterdam: how that his Nephew the Cardinal of Bourbon, desiring to see
him once before he dyed, had requested him to send these ships for his
guard: but they had been forced by the tide to enter into the haven of
Enchuysen: entreating

They of Amsterdam having red this letter, did wonder at the dukes subtle and
sudden invention, for they had certain intelligence that he himself had
been in person within Harderwick, and had kept the town gates shut two days
together, to the end that no man should go forth, to advertise them of
Enchuysen, and other sea towns of his coming: that he had struck up the drum
to call soldiars together and had made a proclamation, that all such as had
sworn to the King of France, should imbarke presently, and do whatsoever their
captains should command them, upon pain of death. Although they of Amsterdam
were well advertised of all this by some of their Burgeses that were shut up at
that time in Harderwyck, yet they would make no mention Marie, Gouernesse for
the Emperor. The Earl of Buren, after the winnyng of Saint Poll, took
Monstruiel, and then he went and besieged Teroane, a town situated in the
midest of the country of Arthois, two leagues and a half from Air, and as
much from Saint Omer. During which siege the Marshall of Annebaut came with an
army to raise his camp, or to victual the town. The Earl of Buren being
advertised thereof, he sent the Earl of Roeux, the Lord of Brederode and
other Noblemen, with troops of horse and foot, to cut off their passage, the
which they could not do, being to far advanced, even just to the town, but
attending them in their return,

The Marshall of Annebaut chief of this army, the Lord of Chastillon, the Lord
of Sercis son, George Capusman captain of the Albanois and about 1500. horse
were prisoners The French defeated at the battle of Saguelet^.
besides those that were slain upon the place. This encounter was called the
battle of Saguelets, for that every one of the French horsemen carried a
bag of poulder. But presently after a truce was concluded for six months
betwixt the Emperor and the French King, so as Teroane was freed from siege.
Although that the year before 1536. there had been a firm peace concluded
betwixt the Emperor and the duke of Geldres, yet the duke practiced all the
means he could to surprise sometownes in Holland: as he had failed first at
Enchuysen, then at Gorrichom The town (...)* of Geldres mutine against the duke
and (...) their caste^.
unto the French King. The towns of the Duchy of Geldres and county

Those of Nemegen, Zutphen, Ruremonde and Venlo, four of the chief towns,
resolved by practices or force to seize upon their Castles, the which they did
presently

These Towns having been long thus in bad terms with their Prince and that
sometimes their soldiars fell upon the Dukes men, who ouerunne the Veluwe, ill
entreating the poor countrymen, in the end by the means of some Noblemen an
Accord was made, about the end of December, betwixt the Duke and the Towns:
after the which the Country of Gelders and the Country of Zutphen were at rest
until the Dukes death. About the end of this year, the Lady Issabella
Empress, The Empress brought in bed o^ 2. son.
was delivered of a second son in Spain called John, whereof there was great
joy in the Netherlands, hoping to have a particular Prince, but he died in
April following. 1538
Charles of Egmont Duke of Gelders died being 71. years old, having governed
and molested his Country for the space of The death of the Duke of Gelders.
thirty six years. He was the cause (through his violence) that the Province
of Friseland, the Diocese of Vtrecht, the Town of Groninghen, and the
Ommelands came under the Emperors obedience; the which he might easily have
preserved for himself, if he had not continually ouercharged the people with
new exactions, by the which he lost the hearts of men. This prince was of a
turbulent spirit, and a great lover of Innouations. Being dead, William duke of
Cleues came into Gelders, where he was honoubly received, and sollemnly put in
possession of the said Duchy, and of the Country of Henry Earl of Nassau
father The death of the E^rle of N^u.
to William prince of Orange, died in his Castle of Breda, eight days after
he had feasted the Queen of Hongarie, Gouernesse of the Netherlands, with
great Pomp. 1539
In February 1539. died John Duke of Cleues, to women William his son
succeeded, The death of the Duke of ^ues.
who was Duke of Cleues, Iulliers and Bergh, Earl of La Marck and Rauensbourg,
Lord of Rauensteyn etc. and hei^e to the Ducthy of Gelders, by the death of
Duke Charles of Egmont.

The 17. of August the Ganthois began to mutine, the companies of trades and
(...) of the ^ois.
occupations assembled together in their several halles, and then they went to
arms, seeking to extort many things from the great Bayliffe, and from the
Magistrate of the Town. They committed many of the Court of Flanders to
prison, and among Lieuin Pin, whom upon their own motion and authority,
they caused to be publicly beheaded. The 25. of September the Bayliffe,
Bourgmaister and the Secretary of the town of Maestricht, in a great popular
tumult were all three massackred.

The 24. of October died Floris of Egmont the first Earl of Buren, in his
castle of Buren: Maximilian his son Lord of Iselstein, succeeded him, whose
daughter and William of Nassau Prince of Orange took to his first wife: of
which marriage are issued Philip of Nassau, at this day Prince of Orange and
the Lady Mary of Nassau, widow to Count Philip of Hohenlo. The thirty of the
said month the Earl of Roeux, entered into Gant, having given them to
understand in the Emperors name, that they should hold their laws, rights and
accustomed preuiledges. And the tenth The Emperor passe^h through France to
com^ to Gant.
of December the Emperor trusting to the French Kings word and safe-conduit,
parted from Spain to come by land into the Netherlands, through France. The
Prince Daulphin and the duke of Orleans the Kings sons, were to receive him
at the foot of the Pyrenee Mountains: who conducted him to Paris. He was
received with great State in all towns where he passed, with acclamations and
great shows of ^oye, Mary Queen of Hungary went to receive him, from whence
they went to Brusselles, where he arrived the nineteen of February 1540.

In the beginning of the said month of ^ebruary died that valiant captain
George 1540.
Schenck Baron of Tautenbourg, knight of the order of the golden fleece,
Governor of The death of George Schenck.
the countries of Friseland and Groningen, in whose place, succeeded to the
same Government, Maximilian of Egmont, Earl of Buren Lord of Iselsteyn. The
second day of April died in the city of Gant Anthony of Lalain Earl^ of
Hoochstraten, after that he had been eighteen years Governor of Holland,
Zeeland etc. to whom succeeded Rene of Chalons Prince of Orange, Earl of
Nassau and Lord of Breda. The The death of the 1. Earl of Hoochstrat^.
Emperor being arrived at Brusselles, hearing the many complaints that were
made unto him of the rebellion of the Ganthois, he parted from Busselles with
four thousand men toward Gant, coming near the town, the Magistrates went
to meet him, and brought him into the town with great honor. During his
abode, having The Emperor does punish the rebellion of the Ganthois.
of them were broken, and then to keep the town in better order then it had
been, the Emperor caused a great and strong Cittadell to be built, in the
place whereas the Abbaie of Saint Bauon was wont to stand: into the which he
put a good governor, and a sufficient garrison, to hold them in subjection,
that they might never rebel any more. Moreover the town paid 50000. florins
unto the Emperor, besides their Annual duties. All the preuiledges which they
had enjoyed for so many

On Saint Mathews day, Ferdinand King of Romans arrived at Brusselles with a
small train, whereof the Emperor being advertised the same night, he took post
with four horse only, whereof the Earl of Buren was one, and the Lord of
Conde an other, it was very dark before they arrived at Brusselles, whereas
he was welcome to his The 4. bloody Edict against the Protestants.
brother King Ferdinand, and to his sister the Queen of Hungary. This same
year was Philip his son, being called the great Edict of the year ^540. the
which is yet daily objected against them of the relligion inthe A d^ ^t Hag^u.
them all he could, vpbraiding them with all the opprobrious terms that might
be, terming them worse then Turks, and proclayming war against them,
charging them with heresy and rebellion. The Emperor following his accustomed
course, without aduertising of the Legate, appointed a diet at Haguenau; where
King Ferdinand was president for the Emperor, and as King of Romans: where
after some conferences, The conclusi^n of Hag* uenau
it was said, that matters were in that estate, as they could not determine any
thing: especially through the absence of the Elector of Saxony, and the
Landtgraue of Hessen, and therefore they must refer the business unto an
other day, when as the Ambassadors

The diet was referred to Worms, and in the mean time the Emperor writ his
letters, confirming the former conclusion, promising an Imperial diet, whereas
he An Imperial d^t ^t Worms.
would be himself in person, whither that should be brought that should be
treated at Worms. He sent his Ambassador Granuelle to Worms, with his son
Anthony Perrenot Bishop of Arras, and some Spanish divines. Granuelle in the
Emperors name exorted them that were there present to study for peace and
union. The next day Campege, the Popes Ambassador made his speech, to this
effect, that the Pope would for his part do all that was possible, excepting
relligion. But nothing was done in this assembly, for that matters inclyned in
favor of the Protestants, who desired nothing more then to enter into
conference, having brought many learned men to that end: among others
Melancton, Bucer and Calvin. After many remises for a countenance only, there
were some public disputations betwixt Melancton and Eckius, touching
original sin. But the third day Granuelle and the other Ambassadors
received letters from the Emperor, by the which he referred the business unto
the diet at Ratisbone, commanding the Protestants to be there also, and
Granuelle to return unto him. In the beginning of February 1541. the Emperor
leaving the Netherlands, An Imperial diet at Ra^sbone.
at Nuremberg with great state: In March many Princes and the states of
Germany, came to Ratisbone, where he attended them: who on the day of the
assembly begun the 25. of April, propounded many excuses why matters had been
so long delaied, yet prefering the quiet of Germany, before all other things,
yea before his own health, he was come thither to entreat them to advise of
some good agreement: and to the end that every one might know how much he
desired peace, his opinion was, if they found no better expedient, that there
should be some learned and quiet minded Germains chosen out to confer
friendly together of all differences, and report as well to the Emperor,
William duke of Ferdinand King of Romans, went unto the Emperor, to see if
they might agree touching the duchy of Geldres, but he could never obtain a
confirmation from the Emperor. As for his proximitie and neerenesse to the
succession, there was no doubt of it. But the Emperor pretended the
Inuestiture which his Grandfather the Emperor Maximillian had Arnhold: and
lastly the acco^d made betwixt him and Charles of Egmont, the last Duke of
Gelders. With which allegations and pretensions the Duke of Cleues could not be
satisfied, maintayning all these sales, seazures, and accords to be void and of
no force, for that they could not be made to prejudice the next heir apparent
with out his consent. The French King hearing of the Du^e of Cleues
coffeehouse, resolved to make an alliance with him, that by his means and
others, he might make war in the Netherlands: The Duke of Cleues allies ^m
self to ^he French King.
and there-vpon offered not only to take him and his countries into his
protection, but also to give him all assistance and aid to enlarge his limits:
with a good annual The Duke of Cleues (...) the King (...) Na^es daughter.
Duke returned into his country, leaving his spouse in France, for that the
mother would keep her, until she were ripe of age. Martin van Rossem Marshall
of Gelder^, had then some troops of foot, the which he said belonged unto
the French King, wherewith having passed the Rhind, and joined with the French
troops of the Duke Rene of Chalons Prince of Orange The French (...) unto Bra
(...).
being advertised, he gathered to gether some men, and sent word to them of the
town, that at a certain hour assigned, they should issue for^h in arms,
with all the forces they could make; to the end whilst that he should charge
the Geldrois on the one side, they might set upon them on the other. But the
messenger that was sent was taken by Rossems men, for as they of the Town
wanted this aduertsment, the Geldrois knowing the Princes desseine who
approached, and he seeing them in arms, thought they had been the Citizens
of Antwerp, and went into the midst of them; who having compassed them in,
defeated them quite, where there died above 1000. men. The Prince of Orange
defeated.
James day in the year 1542. After the defeat of the Princes 1542
men in this manner, the Geldrois remained still about Antwerp, for that there
were some of their faction that should yield it up unto them, firing it in
diverse places, and breaking or filing a so^der the chains of the wells, to the
end they might not draw any water to quench it. But as God would have it, those
that were about the ^iling of the chains, were taken in their work, and
discovered all the actors and factors of this Treason, who were executed.

Martin van Rossem seeing this enterprise discovered, burning some of the
subburbs, milles, and houses of pleasure in Antwerp, marched toward Louvaine
M^in van Rossem repul^ by ^e (...) of (...).
Martin van Rossem, who was forced to fly speedily into the Town the which
other-wise he was resolved to have yielded, had not the Scholars and some
Bourgesses opposed themselves, tiring his camp with their sallies and
skirmishes; so as they forced Martin to retier toward Waueren, and from thence
into Luxembourg, where he besieged the town of Yuois, the which yielded unto
him upon Martin van Rossem having taken Yuois, the French king commanded them
to enter into his country, to help to chase away the Spaniards, the Yuois
taken by the Geldrois.
which they did after they had taken Danuilliers, Virreton and Luxembourg, the
chief town of the Country, and so forcing themselves a passage, they joined
with the Army of the Duke of Orleans the Kings son, who being retired with
his army, the Emperors men recovered all those places again, except Yuois.

The 7. of August there was a great tumult at Brussels betwixt the Wallons and
Spanish soldiers, who put themselves in arms, either of them striving to get
the market A tumult at Brussels.
place: but the Lord of Molenbais and others, made them retire toward the Port
Frederick Bastard of Meleun, master of the Ordinance, caused two Culuerins to
be brought, the which he discharged against the Spaniards, shooting over them
of purpose, only to fear them, and to have them retire, as they did. This
year those of Middelbourg in Zeeland had a great suit against them of
Ziricxee, touching the lading of Salt, whether ships of those two towns should
lade first: wherein those of Ziricxee did yield; by reason whereof they would
no more come to Arnemuyden, nor to Middelbourg to lade any Salt; but made the
Brittons ships and others laden with Salt, to come before La Vere, and to
anchor near unto Northbeuelandt, where it was sold, and there they went to
lade, which course continued almost

Whilst that Martin van Rossem lead the Duke of Cleues army into France: the
Prince of Orange, the Earl of Bossu, and the Earl of Buren Governor of
Friseland, The Emperors armic enters into Iuilliers
entered with 20000. foot, and 4000. horse, into the country of Iuilliers,
whereof they made themselves masters in a short time, finding no resistance,
for that all the Dukes forces were out of the country. Winter being come, this
army was dismissed; the which was no sooner gone out of the country of
Iuilliers, but Martin van Rossem returned with his troops, and recovered all
in a short time which the others had taken; except the town of Heynsbergh,
which he went to besiege, having put good garrisons Rossem having gathered
together what was left, and what soldiers he could otherwise raise, with a good
number of peasants, made a new army, with the which he went to besiege the
town of Amersfort in the Diocese of Vtrecht: the inhabitants Amersfort
yielded to Martin van Rollem.
were much amazed to see themselves so suddenly invested of all sides: and upon
the goodly words and fair promises which Rossem made unto them to maintain
them free from all impositions, paying him only seven thousand Florins, they
yielded the town. But as soon as he was assured thereof, he would not be
satisfied with 7000. Florins, but would have the inhabitants bring in all their
gold and silver, Rossem understanding, he dislodged speedily from Amersfort,
carrying the richest Bourgesses of the town with him into the country of
Geldres, the which he did afterward ransom, leaving only three companies of
foot for the guard of the said town.

The 14. of March 1543. there was a battle betwixt the Cleuois and the
Imperialists, 1543.
in the which the Cleuois had the victory, winning the Artillery with all the
carriages The Cleuois (...) the (...).
and baggage of the Emperors camp, the which they carried into Ruremond, yet
The same year the first day of May. Maximilian of Bourgongne, Marquis of la
Vere The Hollanders zeelanders make war at sea aginst the Freuch.


The 23. of May, the Emperor having been absent three years, arrived at
Genoa. They had for a time accoumpted him dead in this last voyage of Affrike;
therefore all his affaiers in the Netherlands succeeded ill, by reason of the
war with the French, The Emperor arriues at Geuoa.
Cleuois and Geldrois his contries lamenting him much; the which did greatly
rejoice, hearing that he was safe and arrived at Genoa. He was a good space
before he could come into the Netherlands by reason of an Imperial Diet which
was held at Spier touching the Turkish affaiers. In August following he came to
Nuys of the diocese of Cologne with goodly troops af horse, which he brought
into the Netherlands. At the same time the French King thinking to join with
the Duke of Cleues forces entered into Henault, where he took Landercie,
fortefied it, and put in a good garrison: then hearing of the Emperors
returned, and that it was two Late to join with the

The 27. of July, the Earl of Bossu having given the States to understand in
the Emperors name, of the great toil and charge his majesty had been at, to
come and succor those Contries in this war of the French Cleuois and
Geldrois. The said Sates made Presents given to the Emperor by the Netherlanders
apresent unto him of 15000. slorins of gold. The other Provinces presented him
in like sort, every one according to their power and abilities. The Emperor
returning out of Germay brought with him his Spaniards and Italiens, to employ
them in the wars of the Netherlands. Bein at Bonne he made agnerall muster of
his army, in the Camillo Collonna and Anthoine Doria were clolonells, 4000.
Spaniards, having for Colonels Don Aluaro de The Emperors Army.
Sands, and Don Louis Perez de Vergas, 4000. German horses and Bourguignons,
and 600. light horses Italiens and Albanois: besides this army the Prince of
Orange arrived with 12000. foot, and 2000, Lances; The General of this Army
was Don Fernand of Gonsague, the Marshall of the Camp Stephano Collonna the
Marquis of Marignan Master of the Ordynance, and Francisco la Este general of
the light horse, with this goodly army, being 34000. foot, and 6000. horse the
Emperor went and planted himself before Duren, sometimes an Imperial town
situated in the midest Duren beseeged by the Emperor.
of the Country of Iuilliers, and sense usurped by the Dukes, one of the
strongest places Flatien was Governor for the Duke, besides the inhabitants were
for the most part trained up in arms and well affected to the Duke of Cleues
their Prince. The 22, of August he sent a trompet to sommon it; and they
answered in skorne (the which afterward cost them full dear) that they had no
e fear of him whom the Cods in the sea had dcuoured: for it was generally
bruted, that after the defeat of Algier, the Emperor putting to sea to return
into Italy, had been drowned: which opinion had taken such an impression in
the hearts of the people of Cleues, as they would not believe them, that not
only said they had seen him but that had spoken with him: The Duke of Cleues
was of the same opinion, the which but the Spaniards and Italians, who had the
point, where repulst and many slain and Flatten was slain with the ruins of
a tower that was battered down by the Emperors Canon: at whose death the
Inhabitants were much amazed. Another sufficient breach being made, the Emperor
caused Duren taken by a^ult.
a resolute Assault to be given and well seconded, encouraging his men himself
in person, so as in the end the town was taken by force, the soldiers putting
all the incountred to the sword. There died at this assault of the Emperors
side six hundred men. The town being taken, a house was set on fire (no man
knew whether it were accidental, or done on purpose.) the which burnt almost
the whole town. The Emperor seeing it, said, that it was well employed:
wishing that it might so happen to all those that should rebel against him;
the which he said to terrify the rest, who seeing

For the effecting whereof, he went accompanied with the Duke of Brunswyk and
the Elector of Cologne, and cast himself at the Emperors feet: delivering into
his The Duke of (...) himsel^e v^o the Emp^ror.
hands all the towns and fortresses of the Duchy of Geldres and Conty of
Zutphen, confessing that he had held them wrongfully, and craving pardon for
all. The Emperor Ferdinand King of Romans. Afterward he remained a good
servant to the Emperor, although his mother did not much love him for this
marriage but died afterward of grief.

The Emperors affairs succeeding well in this war of Cleues, being loath to
Martin van Rossem was commander, whom the Emperor had in like sort receued into
grace) toward the fronters of France, to recover that which the Duke of
Orleans had won in Luxembourg and Arthois and namely Landercye, which the
Seignor of la Land the Kings Lieutenant, had wonderfully fortefied and manned
with a good garrison and all other things requisite for such a place: which
garrison did greatly afflict the contries of Arthois and Henalt who besought
the Emperor to go thither.

According to which resolution, he marced with his army through the country
of Landr^cy besieged.
Cambresis, into Vermandois. Don Fernando of Gonzague General of the said
army, propounded to beseege Guise first, which is not far from Landrecy, and
planted his Peter Strossy (a banished man of Florence) was taken of the french
party, and of the Emperors side Don Francisco d'Este General of the light
horse, his horse being slain under him: hearing that the Earl of Roeux was
already planted before Landrecy, with some Netherlanders, and four thousand
Spaniards, that were newly arrived, under the command of Don Pedro de Toledo,
with two thousand Germains: the Emperor (who was ill disposed at Quesnoy le
Conte in Henalt) commanded Gonzague to go and join with the rest before
Landrecy, where being arrived, he separated his Camp from the Netherlanders,
and the English, having every one his Camp a part. These three Camps began
every one to batter the town: but Gonzague la Land the governor made many
sallies, now upon one Camp, then on another, still taking some thing. The
french King came with all his power and vitualed the town: then winter being
near, the Emperor raised the seege and dismissed his army.

Landrecy being thus victualled, the Emperor came to Cambray, where he put some
bands of Ordynance in garrison, for that he doubted this town was to much
affected A Cittadell built at Cambray.
all the blame upon their Bishop, whom the Emperor did pardon: then he caused
a strong and mighty Cittadell to be built to the end the city might no more
bandy against him, nor stand as Neuter, as they would do, (the city holding
of the Empire) but that as unto Charles of Austria, Earl of Arthois and Henalt
his successors and not as Emperor, it should be sub iect unto him and the
Burgeses forced to hold his party. Wherein he himself did impugn and break
the preuiledges of that city, given by former Emperors, the constitutions of
the Empire, and his own oath.

The last day of September Rene of Chalons Prince of Orange, after that the
soldiars were fled out of the town of Amersfort, took possession of the said
town in the Emperors name, and then of all the towns of the Duchy of Geldres,
whereby there was peace and quietness in all those quarters of Iuilliers,
Cleues and Geldres. The second of January. 1544. the Emperor parted from
Brussels to go to an Imperial diet 1544.
at Spyre, which should be held the 22. of February following, during the which
the Admiral of Egmont, son to the Earl of Egmont, married with Sabina of
Bauaria Palatine, at which marriage the Emperor assisted in person. About that
time was proclaimed throughout all the Netherlands the fifth rigorous and bloody
Edict, which they called Lutherien, against them of the religion. The wars
grew hot betwixt the French King and the Emperor, who entered into Champaigne
with a great army and Francis had leauied a goodly army to encounter him, and A
peace b^twixt, the Emperor and French King.
was ready to give him battle, yet by the mediation of some good men, lovers
of peace, and to avoid the effusion of so much Christian blood, a peace was
concluded betwixt these two great Princes, and the Emperor retired from
Soissons to Brusselles. The Emperor being returned to Brusselles, the second
of October the peace was proclaimed. And the 22. of the same month arrived in
the same town the lady Elenor the French Kings wife, and the Emperors sister,
accompanied* with the duke of Orleans, Queen Elenor of France comes to the
Emperor her: brother.
who entering into the town, marched betwixt the two Princes of Hungary, sons
to King Ferdinand, being followed by the Prince of Piedmont, the duke of
Camerino and many Princes and Noblemen. There was nothing omitted that might
give delight d' Estampes the Kings Mistres. The Emperor sitting down at the
table, took Madame d' Estampes on his right hand, and the French Queen his
sister on the left, being followed by the Queen of Hungary, and so of the
rest: thirteen days were spent in feasts, bankets, maskes, turneys, and all
other sports: during the Queens aboade there, who took her leave of the
Emperor, and departed from Brusselles with the duke of Orleans the third of
November. Then began things in Germany to incline to war. The Pope was
exceeding glad of the peace concluded betwixt the Emperor, and the French King:
and renewed the assignation of a council to the 15. of March 1545. Herman
Archbishop of Cologne, according to that which had been decreed at the
Imperial Diet at Ratisbone, Bucer and other ministers to that end, his Clergy
banded against him, and appealed to the Pope and the Emperor. The Pope did
excomunicate him, and a while after he was deprived of his Archbishoprike, and
all other dignities.

The Argument of the seventh Book.
THE Emperor returns into Germany and treates of religion, Herman Archbishop
of Collogn^ seeks to reform his diotese: the Pope and Emperor oppose
themselves. The Protestants assemble at Francfort. The Emperor gives them good
words whilst that he prepar^ to arms. A conference of Divines at Ratisbone.
The Emperor and Pope make a league against the Protestants, who arm also, and
make a league, printing their Iustifications and go to field: the Emperor
banisheth the duke of Saxony and the Landtgraue of Hessen, who defy him: the
Emperor in danger at Inghelstade, whereas the Earl of Buren ioynes with him:
the Protestants army disbandes: Duke Maurice troubles the Duke of Saxonies
state: the Duke of Wirtemberg and the Imperial towns reconciled to the
Emperor, who sends to succor Maurice. A battle betwixt the Emperor and the
duke of Saxony, whereas the Duke is taken prisoner. Suit to the Emperor for the
Landtgraue of Hessen, who comes to make his peace, and is detayned prisoner.
Magdebourg a Protest^nt town holds only against the Emperor: Maurice made
Elector: Prince Philip the Emperors son comes out of Spain into the
Netherlands. A bloody Edict against the Protestants: the Emperor affects the
Empire for Prince Philip his Son: which breeds a quarrel betwixt the
Emperor, and his brother Ferdinand King of Hungary: the Protestants refuze to
come to the council of Trent. The constancy of them of Magdebourg, who are
freed from siege: the Landtgraues restraint is prejudicial to the Emperors
affairs in Germany: Duke Maurice, takes arms against the Emperor: the French
King coming with a great army to succor Maurice, takes Metz, ^houl and
Verduen, Martin van Rossem makes war in France: the Emperor flies hastily
from Inspruch through the mountains. An ass^mbly at Passau to treat a peace.
Albert of Brandebourg makes war a part: the Emperors fruitless siege before
Metz: the taking and razing of the town of Teroane. A battle betwixt duke
Maurice and Albert of Brandebourg: the siege and taking of Hesdin: the battle
of Talma. Philip King of Spain marries Marie Queen of England: the French
besieges Renty, the Emperor releeues it in person. An Imperial Diet at
Ausbourg. A defeat of the Arreer-ban of the French: the Emperor resignes his
countries to his son: the resolution of the Imperial Diet at Ausbourg. The
Emperor resignes the Empire to his brother Ferdinand. His departure out of the
Netherlands with his two Sisters.

THE 3. of April the Emperor parted out of the Netherlands to go to an
Imperial Diet which was to be 1545.
held at Worms, where he arrived the 16. of May. A Diet held at Worms.
Being there, he writ to the King of Poland to incense him against the
Protestants. The Pope was wonderfully desirous to have war attempted against
them, and notwitstanding the council which he had published, he promised the
Emperor 12000. foot and five hundred men at arms for that war. In January
1546. the Protestants assembled at Francfort, where as they consulted what was
to be done 1546.
touching the counsel of Trent, to continue the league The Protestants assemble
at Francfort.
for the charges of the war against Henry of Brunswick, a great persecutor of
the Protestants. Not to abandon the Archbishop of Cologne. To solicit the
Emperor to give peace, unto relligion: and to rule the Imperial chamber. In
this assembly the Ambassadors Herman, Elector of Collogne made their complaints
of the wrongs his Clergy did him, and of the commandments and Citations sent
from the Emperor and Pope. In the mean time Frederic Count Pallatin, Prince
Elector appointed Ministers and Preachers of the Gospel throughout all his
country, suffering them to receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper in both
kinds, and in the vulgar tongue, and that Preests might marry.

The Emperor being arrived at Worms the sixteen of May, his counselors
treated The Emperor arriues at Worms.
with the Protestants, touching the general council and other things,
laboring to persuade them to yield to that which should be resolved on at
Trent, and to come thither to propound their causes of recusation, to the which
regard should be had: whereunto they replied as before, so as after a long
consultation, the affairs were referred Gerard Veltwycke a learned man, and
who spoke many languages, to the Turk, to make a truce, desyring rather to
make war, against Christians, his own subjects then against the Turk.

Some days after it was bruted, that the Emperor made secret preparation to
war, and they could not conjecture that it was against any other then the
Protestants, for he was at peace with the French King, and was assured to have
a truce with the Turk. Whereupon the Landtgraue of Hessen did write unto
Granuelle to prevent Granuelle did what he could to lull him a sleep. And in
the mean time there were flatterers which informed the Emperor that the
Protestants had conspired against him at Francfort: so as matters began then to
grow more bitter, and in the The Emperor seeks to abuse the Protestants
whilst that he prepares to arms.
mean time they sought to blind the Protestants until the Emperor had his
army ready, to work what he pretended. Then began the council of Trent,
where the Pope did preside by his legates, the Emperor having vowed to make the
decrees thereof to be received by the point of the sword. Whereof the
Landtgraue told the Emperor openly in the town of Spier, and he sought to
excuse himself, saying that he demanded nothing more then the quiet of
Germany. In December during the diet of Ratisbone, A conference of diuin^s at
Ratisbone.
side, for the Emperor were sent Peeter Maluenda a Spaniard, Euerard Billic a
Carmelite, John Hofmeister an Augustine Friar and John Cocleus all four
divines. George Loxan Gaspar Caltental, George Islinger, Bartlemew Latome
Auditors, for the Protestants came Bueer, Brencius, George Mayor, Erard
Schnepf, diuins. Volrad Earl of Walder, Balthazar Gutling, Laurence Zoch a
lawier and George Woltmer Auditors: Maurice Bishop of Eister and Frederic of
Furstenberch, were above them all. There they disputed upon the Articles of the
confession of Ausbourg: The Emperor would have all kept secret, and the
Protestants would have the contrary. So as after some conference, not able to
agree; Adrian of Croy, Earl of Roeux, Maximilian of Bourgongne, Admiral of
the sea, and Cornellis Schepper Seignior of Eyken, were appointed by Queen
Mary, Gouernesse of the Netherlands, in the Emperors name, to build a fort or
castle in the The castle of Ramekens built.
Island of Walchren: and then was that mighty fort of Blau hoek made, which now
they call the castle of Rameken in Zeebourg, the which was finished in March
1547.

During the conference at Ratisbone, it was generally spoken, that the
Emperor, Ferdinand his brother, and the Pope, made great preparations for
war: for at the same instant he sent the Cardinal of Trent in post to the
Pope, with instructions to leauy men: and two days after he delivered money
to his Colonels and captains. He had before sent to Maximilian Earl of
Buren, to leauy all the horse and foot he could in the Netherlands. He
commanded Albert and John of Brandenbourg, and Wolfgang master of the German
order, to inroule all the soldiars they could, John of the same league; yet
upon the Emperors false pretexts, that they took not arms for relligion,
but to punnish the rebellion of some, that put themselves into his service.
The Cardinal A (...) betw^t the Emperor and the Po^e ag^st relligion.
of Trent, being sent to the Pope, made a league betwixt them upon certain
conditions, binding them respectively for the managing of this war. After
this the Pope writ unto the Swisses, justifying the Emperor, and accusing the
Protestants, against whom he required their assistance. The Ambassadors of
the Protestants being at this Assembly at Ratisbone, moved with this news, as
careful of the quiet of Germany, they entreated the other States of the
Empire, to be joint suitors with them unto the Emperor, not to attempt any
war, the which

The Duke of Saxony and the Landtgraue writ unto the Emperor, to justify
their, The Duke of Saxony and Landtgraue write unto the Emperor.
innocence against all slanders: adding in the end of their letter these words.
All the world knows that lastly at Spyer, you were agreed with us two, and
five years before at Ratisbone: so as there is no reason to accuse us of
rebellion or any trespass whatsoever: you may not forget the oath which you
made unto the Empire, when as you were chosen at Francfort; and how that you
must proceed Iudicially and according

There-vppon the Emperor made a long declaration of his intention to the peace
and quiet of Germany, but that he was forced to use his prerogative and
authority, against such as should oppose themselves. He did also write unto
many The Emperor writes to the Protestant towns.
Towns of the Protestant league, namely to Strausbourg, Nurembourg, Ausbourg
and Vlme; where after that he had blamed and disgraced the Protestants, he
Therefore I may no longer endure this; and if I would, I were no more to be
excused. To the end therefore that my dignity, the public peace, and right
may be maintained, and that the Empire and every one of you may be freed from
danger, I have resolved to punnish the perturbers of the common weal, and to
restore Germany to her first Beauty and liberty. Whereof I thought to
advertise you, that you might not give credit to them who it may be, will
report otherwise of our enterprise: for I may relligiously protest unto you,
that I have no other Disseine then this. Hoping that you will not fail me
herein, to the end that their presumption may be bridled, and you recover your
ancient liberty: if you do it, you may be assured of my grace and favor, as I
will make known unto you, a letter of the like tenor; and at the same instant
the seignior of Granuelle and Naues, his chief counselors called the
Ambassadors of the towns that were at the Diet at Ratisbone, and conferred
with them, giving them to understand that this war was not prepared against the
towns but (as it had been before said) with many other sweet The answer of
them of Strausbourg to the Emperors letter.
John of Brandebourg. The Protestant towns and the Dukes of Wirtemberg, being
advertised by Granuell The Duke of Wittemberg and the town army.
offering them al succors and fidelity, leuying presently, all the men they
could, so as they were first in arms. The Prince Elector Palatin, demanded
privately of the Emperor the cause of this war, and against whom he intended
it: Granuelle answered him in the Emperors name in the same substance as he
had done the Ambassadors of the towns. In the mean time the Prince of Saxony
and the Landtgraue being assured of the Emperors resolution to make war
against them, and the preparations that were made, did spedely levy men, and
sent unto their companions to do the like, and not to suffer themselves to be
divided by the cunning counsels of some men: And after they were A book of
the Protestants Iustifications.
Emperors other pretexts to punish some rebels, was but to divide the
confederats, and so to ruin them one after an other to settle the Popes
doctrine. They also published an other Book against John of Brandenbourg who
being of their League and confession had taken arms against them. And although
the Emperor thought to surprise them, yet they used such diligence, and found
so many resolute men to carry Arms in this war, as the 16. of July in the
year 1546. the Landtgraue went to field with his army, and presently after
began open war betwixt them and the Emperor.

The 20. of July the Emperor published his leters pattents, in the which after
that he had made a long complaint against John Frederic Prince Elector of
Saxony and Phillip Landtgraue of Hessen, he banished them as perjured, reb^les,
seditious, guilty of high The Emperor banisheth the Duke of Saxony ^d the
Landtgraue.
treason both against GOD and man and perturbers of the public quiet, meaning
to punish them according to their deserts that he might after-wards provide
for the affaiers of State and do that which should belong unto his duty, for
bidding all men to succor them or to join with them, upon pain of forfeiture
both of body and goods: dissoluing all Leagues and compositions, and absoluing
the Nobility and subjects from the faith and oath which they ought unto these
Princes: to whom he gave the public assurance if they did obey: adding that
such as did refuse should be punished like unto (...) and (...) taken by the
Protestants
situated upon a mountain, which stopped the passage from Trent for Italy to
Enepont, and withal the town of Fiesse belonging to the Bishop of Ausbourg,
and passing on, they took Dilline and Donavert. The Emperor was then at
Ratisbone, ill prepared to make head against them: So as if their affaiers had
been governed by one only commander, the Emperor had been in great danger.
The 7. of August in the Ma^klin burn^ by lightning.
Necbecspoel, the which at first overthrew both the Tower and the gate; then it
took hold of the buildings both within and without the Town, and above 500.
paces

Then grew the wars hot in Germany betwixt the Protestants and the
Emperor. The Protestant Princes defy the Emperor.
his duty, and how he was bound to them and the Empire by his oath; and that
it was for relligions cause that he made this war against them: they
concluded with these words. Matters standing in this sort, and seeing wear
allied, to the end that it may be lawful for us to persevere in this relligion
(though some would surmize other causes of coffeehouse against us) we have
been forced to put our selves in defense, the which we may lawfully do, both
by the laws of GOD and nature. And although that through thy pernicious
desseines we are not in any sort bound unto thee: and

This letter was sent by a young Gentleman and a trumpet according to the
custom, to the Emperors camp near unto Land shupt; but he was so far
from receiving it, as he commanded them upon pain of their heads to return
them back again to their people. He said moreover that if hereafter any one
came unto him from The Emperor r^useth to receive a letter.
them, in steed of a chain of gold, he would present him a halter: then he
gave them the proclamation of their banishment, charging them expressly to
deliver it unto their Maurice of Saxony, cousin to John Frederick Prince
Elector, persuading him to seize upon his country, before that an other laid
hold of it. To the accusations and criminations contained in the said
proclamation of banishment, the Protestant Princes published an ample answer in
print, the contents whereof was that the intention of the Pope and Emperor was
to root out all them of the relligion, the which he had declared unto the
French Kings Ambassador (from whose mouth all was known) and vanquish
Germany, as he had long before disseigned etc. But from words and writings
they fell to blows. The two armies being near one unto the other, the
Landtgraue was of an opinion to charge The two arm^ near one to an other.
The ^aile of (...) enjoynes with the Emperor.
as the Emperor having all his forces together, those of the Protestants began
by little and little to disband: and in the mean time Duke Maurice (according
to the Emperors advise) molested the Prince Elector of Saxony in his Country.
Where-vppon the Protestants army being divided, the Prince Elector went with
his troops against (...).
Maurice, and recovered all that he had taken from him.

The Emperor seeing the Protestants army thus dispearsed upon no occasion,
and that the Landtgraue was retired to his own home, he writ letters full of
threats to the duke of Wirtembourg, who sent to sue for pardon by his
Ambassadors, Maurice was, he sent Albert of Brandebourg unto him with some
troops, who was taken at Rochlick and brought unto the Prince Elector, and
soon after the town was also taken. Ferdinand the Emperors brother, King of
Hungary and Bohemia, by the Lady Anne A bert of (...) Brandebourg taken
prisoner by the Prince Elector.
his wife, would have forced the Bohemians to serve against the Prince Elector
of Saxony, the which they refuzed to do, by reason of the old leagues betwixt
the Saxons and Bohemians, and seeking to force them they rise in arms against
him. The Protestants had sent their Ambassadors to the French King and to the
King of England, to show the equity of their cause: and that they had taken
arms against the Emperor, Henry the eight very sick, so as he died in the
end of January 1547. The French King had sent by these Ambassadors two hundred
thousand crowns in lone to the Protestant Princes, to aid them in this war.
And as the King of England died whilst the Ambassadors were there: so at their
return into France, they found King Francis extremely sick, who died at
Rambouillet. It was a happy chance for the Emperor (among many other good
fortunes) that two so great and mighty Princes, which had the means, and (as
many thought) a desire to cross the Emperor in his enterprises and high
disseignes, died both in a manner at one time.

In the same year 1547. Adolph of Bourgongne Seignior of Chappelle and
Wackene, 1547.
Ierosme Sandelin Seignior of Herentont, Receiuor of Bewesterscheldt in
Zeeland, Countr^s recovered from the sea in zeeland.
and some private gentlemen, did recover and wall in about Sheerenskerke and
Heinkensandt in the country of Zuydbeuelandt (otherwise called the I Will of
Ter-Goes) the old enclosure or Polder, (which is a land won from the sea) the
which before the Inundation was usually called Zeeshuys, so as it remained a
long time unprofitable: but since that it was recovered they call it Cray, at
this present a most fertile country, whereby those that have thus defended it
from the Sea with their banks have made great profit. The Emperor having an
intent to ruin John Frederick Prince Elector, past the river of Elbe with all
speed, to fight with him on the other Ernest of Brunswyck was taken with him.
The Emperor and King Ferdinand used the Prince Elector very roughly in words,
giving sentence of death against him, the which he bare very patiently but
the Emperor durst not proceed to the execution thereof: yet he propounded
heavy and rigorous conditions unto him: taking from him the greatest part of
his Seigneuries, the which he gave to Maurice his couzine, with the dignity of
the Electorship.

As for the Landtgraue of Hessen, upon the assurances which the duke Maurice
and The Landtgraue submits himself unto the Emperor.
the Marquis Albert of Brandenbourg his sons in law gave him: he presented
himself upon his knees unto the Emperor, craving pardon for all that was past,
whereunto answer was made him in obscure terms, which did not show an
absolute pardon. Yet this Nobleman (thinking that all went well with him)
thanked the Emperor, and for that he suffered him to kneel too long, he rose of
himself. He was led to supper with the duke of Alua, when after supper thinking
to retire with the two Noblemen his sons in law, he was stayed prisoner, the
which ministered great matter of discontent, who (not-with-standing all the
Protestation which duke Maurice and Brandebourg could make) was detained and
put into the guard of Spaniardes. The two Noblemen 1548.
The Lan^graue put in prison contrary to promise.
his answer was that he had promised not to keep him there in perpetual
prison, whereupon the Duke of Alua said unto them, that if in steed of
fourteen days the Emperor, should restrain him 14. years he should not
break his word: So

The 23. of December in the said year 1548. died that valiant Captain
Maximilian of Egmont Earl of Buren, (after that he had arrived so happily to
serve the Emperor The death of the Earl of Buren.
in his war of Germany) of an extraordinary death, for being four days
before his death abandoned by all his Physicians, who had foretold him the day
of his death, having called all his household servants, and made them goodly
exhortations, giving to every one some thing by his testament, he died
speaking, and appareled in his chaier. Maximilian of Austria, eldest son to
Ferdinand having married the Lady Mary, eldest Phillip 21. years old, being
sent for by his father, began Prince phillip comes out of Spain into the
Netherlands.
his journey to come into the Netherlands, leaving his cousin and Brother in law
Maximilian to be Governor of Spain in his absence, and having set sail the
25. of November with a goodly fleet of ships and Galleis commanded by Andrew
Doria, he landed at Genoa accompanied with many Princes of Spain, among others
by the Duke of Alua and the Cardinal of Trent: from thence he came to Milan
and passing by Mantoua and Trent he came to Ausbourg and Spyer, so crossing
the Country of Luxembourg, he arrived at the Emperor his fathers court at
Bruslelles, Duke Maurice went to He arrived the 1. of April, 1549. at
Brusselles.
meet him entreating him to move the Emperor for the Landtgraue of Hessen his
Father in law, who was Prisoner, the which he did. It were tedious to make
particular Elenor the French Queen and the Lady Mary Queen of Hongary his
Aunts received him, and conducted him to the Emperor his father.

The fourth of July the Emperor with his two sisters and the Prince his son,
went to Louuaine, the most ancient and chief town of the Duchy of Brabant to
put his son (according to the ancient customs and preuiledges of that town)
in possession The Prince takes possession of the Duchy of Brabant.
of the said Duchy: and to take the oath required in that case: the which he
did in the Emperors hands, as the like was done afterward in the town of
Brusselles. The thirteen of the said month it was done in Gand for the
Country of Flanders: then in the city of Arras for the Earldom of Arthois:
and after that at Mons for the Conty

The last of May, 1550. the Emperor parted from Bruselles with the Prince his
son, The Emperor returns into Germanyto ^ke the Empier for his Son.
to return into Germany, to an Imperial Diet which should be held at
Ausbourg, leading the duke of Saxony prisoner with him, and leaving the
Landtgraue in prison at Macklin. The chief intent of his going was to labor
to make his son Emperor after him as A bloody Edict against them of the
relligion.
publicatio^ of this Edict many were much amazed, especially the merchants of
Germany and England which did traficke ordinarily in those Provinces especially
at Antwerp, whose resolution was, that either they must moderate the said
Edict, or else they would seek some other abode: and many to avoid the danger,
had resolved to shut up their shoppes, and to depart. The Senate of Antwerp,
and especialy the Bourgeses, seeing the loss and prejudice that would come
unto them, were in great perplexity. And therefore when the Inquisitors were
arrived, they opposed themselves with all their They murmu^ at Antwerp against
it.
over all Judges and Magistrates what-soeuer. Where-vppon she caused the
execution Maurice of Saxony to besiege them. And for that the Princes of the
Empire sought to make their peace, he prescribed them such hard conditions, as
they would by Magdebourg valiantly defended.
no means yield unto them: but maintained this siege valiantly, even unto the
end being forced by a composition to suffer them in peace.

The Archduke Maximillian of Austria son to King Ferdinand, and son in law
to the Emperor, being chosen in his absence King of Bohemia, came at that time
out of Spain to Ausbourg, being called by his father; who had then a great A
controversy betwixt the two brethren for the Empire.
controversy with the Emperor touching the succession of the Empire: for the
deciding whereof, they said the Emperor had caused his sister the Queen of
Hongary to come, for the Emperor knowing that the uniting of Germany was
necessary for the Ferdinand who tended to the same end, was resolved not to
suffer himself to be frustrate of this goodly expectation, as well for
himself as for his children. Prince Maximillian who was of a good
disposition, well seen in diverse languages, but especially endued with a
singular grace in his behavior, was very pleasing unto the people. The Princes
and States on the other side, considered well, that this great advancement of
the King of Spain would not be very profitable for them; and although they
showed themselves somewhat inclyning unto the Emperor, yet all was but for
fear, observing well his actions past, and the end whereunto he had always
tended, under a coullor of the Romish relligion which he would so amply Why
the Princes of the Empire preferred Ferdinand before Prince Phillip.
States to incline more touching the succession of the Empire to Ferdinand and
to his son Maximillian, who had their portions and all their successions in
Germany; then to the Emperor or to the Prince his son. And the rather for
that they had observed part of the humors of this Prince, being borne,
nourished and brought up in Spain, and wholly possessed by the Spaniards, and by
the Bishop of Arras, son to Granuelle;

The Town of Magdebourg freed from siege by a friendly composition with Duke
Maurice he being now received into the Town, spoke it openly, that it should
cost him his life, or he would set the Landtgraue his father in law at
liberty. He had before sent his Ambassadors with the King of Denmark and many
Princes of Germany to the Emperor, for his deliverance, being resolved upon
his denial to attempt it by force, he having already entered into some treaty
with the French King. The seventh William of Nassau Prince of Orange married
the daughter and only heir of Maximillian of Egmont Earl of Buren, the only
heir of the house of Launoy: the 1551
marriage (which was the first which the said Prince had of four) was
celebrated in The Prince of Orange first marriage.
the Castle of Buren, by whom he had Phillip of Nassau, now Prince of Orange
and the Lady Mary widow to Philip Earl of Hohenlo, brother and sister by
fathers Maurice of Nassau, commanding at this day in Holland Zeeland etc.

This year the Emperor set a tax of five florins throughout all the country
of Liege, as a fee of the Empire upon every thousand florins value of
Inheritance, to help to defray the charges of the last wars of Germany. The
Liegeois would have opposed themselves and fallen to mutiny, but having sent
their deputies to the Emperor, in the end they yielded upon certain
conditions. The Emperor at the same time did chase all the ministers out of
Ausbourg, John Frederic duke of Saxony, (although he were a The Ministers
chased away by the ^mpe ror.
prisoner) did not forbear to comfort them, and to assist them with money.
Some of them retired into Suisserland, and some else where. The news of this
banishment of Ministers amazed many, for every man feared that what had been
done there, would be also practiced in other places, as it was afterward, but
for a short time in respect of

At such time as all were in these alterations, the French King (hearing that
duke Maurice attempted war against the Emperor) fell upon 22. ships of
Zeeland, bound for Spain, being worth above 200000. florins, the which he
took and spoiled and then carried them into his havens: whereupon the 17. day
of September in the same year 1551. the French Ambassador was sent away from
Brusselles as an enemy, with all the French Nobility which had remained with
the Lady Elenor, Queen Dowager of France, and war was proclaimed the 21. of
that month betwixt these two great Princes, both by land and sea. Many wondered
how the King durst ^eaue the friendship of the Emperor, being then in so great
prosperity, neither did the Emperor (as some 1552.
said countries, made a demand in the Emperors name, of an extraordinary aid
or An assembly of the states of o^ the Nel^nds.
subuention of three Millions of gold: whereunto the Flemings would in no sort
yield, by reason of their small traffic: but they offered to entertain so many
men at arms, as should fall to their shares: wherewith the said Lady was not
well satisfied. Afterward the said estats assembled at Brusselles, where upon
certain conditions they did grant 400000 florins.

Duke Maurice and the Marquis of Brandenbourg, sons in law to the Landtgraue
of Hessen, sent their Ambassadors to the Emperor, accompanied with the letters
of Albert duke of Bauaria; Many Princes (...) for the Landt graves liberty.
of the brethren of Lunebourg: of the Elector Frederic Palatin, of Wolfgang
duke of Deux Ponts, of John Marquis of Brandenbourg, of Ernest Marquis of
Baden, of the dukes of Merklenbourg and of Christopher duke of Wirtemberg, to
sue for the Landtgraues delivery: But it seemed the Emperor respected all
these Princes little, referring the answer of their request to the coming of
duke Maurice; who he said should come to treat with him: William eldest son
to the Landtgraue did importune him, and Maurice more, both he and the Marquis
of Brandenbourg putting him in mind of their bond and promise, speaking
somewhat big unto him. In the mean time the horsemen that had lain about
Magdebourg and within it, wintred in Thuringen Maurice did also send his: the
which did much rejoice the said Archbishops, believing that they had no more
any cause to doubt of him. The chief differences of the Protestants
Ambassadors, were upon the safe conduit of their divines, the which they were
forced to alter three times, and upon the other points which duke Maurice had
propounded. These Ambassadors having received

Soon after many began to murmur that the council should be prolonged, and
that Maurice being in league with the French, made his preparations to war
against the Maurice and his companions, besieged the Town of Ausbourg, the
which three days after was yielded unto him: Which was the cause of the
dissipation of the Council. Maurice writ letters (the Ausbourg vvon by Du^
Maurice.
which were afterward printed) to the States of the Empire, setting down many
lively reasons, which moved him to make war against the Emperor, for the
preservation of his relligion and the liberty of Germany, and withal for the
delivery of the Landtgraue his father in law. He did greatly tax the Emperor,
seeking to bring Germany into servitude, under his Monarchy, as he had already
oppressed Albert Marquis of Brandenbourg, published a writing almost of the
same substance, complaining that the liberty of Germany was oppressed, even by
them that were bound to defend and enlarge it etc. The French King did also
publish letters, by the which he showed that he had no other end but the
liberty of Germany, and of all Christendom; complaining of the wrongs which
the Emperor did and had done to him and to his friends, in whose succors he had
resolved to employ all his forces in that war, yea even his own person,
without any respect to his own private Interest, how great soever it might
be; But only that Germany might be restored, and John Frederic Duke of
Saxony, and the Landtgraue of Hessen delivered etc.

These letters of the Princes and of the French King dispersed throughout
Germany, gave cause of hope to some, and to others of fear and care, William
the Landtgraues son, having put his men to field, went and joined with Duke
Maurice: Albert of Brandenbourg did also join with them, with his horse and
foot. In all places where they past they brought the Towns under their
subjection, taking the Inhabitants into their safeguard and protection, yet
forcing them to furnish both money and Artillery. The Princes did also send to
them of high Germany, and especially to Nuremberg, that they should not fail
to be at Ausbourg, in the end of April, and did also press them of Vlme to
enter into league with them. Whilst these things were doing in Germany, the
French King marched with a goodly army, and took The French takes Metz. Toule
and V^rdun.
the Empire also; He thought to have done as much to Strasbourg, a fair,
great, rich and mighty Town, but the Senate excused themselves, and kept him
from entering, furnishing some munition of corn, and oats for the Kings army;
Leauying five thousand men for the guard of the Town, if happily they should
offer to force them. The confederate princes came to Vlme, which refused to be
of their union; Being arrived there, they houered about the Town: And for
that the Inhabitants were so insolent to shoot at them, they demanded for
reparation of this outrage Duke Mauric^ confe^rs with King Ferdinand touching a
Peace.
three hundred thousand Crowns; The which being refused, they spoiled them
Maurice went to Lints in Austria, to understand from King Ferdinand the
conditions of peace: For that Ferdinand desired greatly to pacefie things with
the Emperors consent. After that he had conferred with him, he returned to
the army and the next day they marched toward the Alps. Heerevppon the
Judges of the Imperial Chamber fled from Spyer: For it was against them that
both the French King and the Princes were incensed, laying upon them all the
blame and cause o^ these troubles.

In the mean time the Queen of Hongary the Emperors sister, made an Assembly
at Aix la Chappelle, upon the Confines of the Duchy of Iuilliers, to make a
League with them; The Prince of Cleues and Iuilliers excused himself by his
Ambassadors: Adolph Bishop of Cologne came, and so did George of Austria Bishop
of Liege. The French King being come to Weissenbourg, after that he had left
the territory of Strasbourg seeing that there was not any thing to be gotten,
the Ambassadors of the Prince Elector Palatin, of the Archbishops of Mentz and
Treues, and of the Maurice for his part did also write unto the King, in the
which was contained what had been treated at Lints with King Ferdinand,
requiring the King (whom Maurice would have comprehended in the treaty of
peace) to declare with what conditions he would compound with the Emperor. The
King found by these letters that they were weary of him in Germany, (and to say
the truth, the Princes would not willingly have seen him advance) so as two
days after he retired with The French King retiers into Germany.
his army again into Lorraine and so into France. But before his departure he
answered the ambassadors, saying that he had obtained that for which he came
into Germany

The King was no sooner gone out of France toward Germany, but presently the
Emperors army of the Netherlandes, whereof Martin van Rossen was Commander,
entered and burnt the frontiers of Champagne, and took Astenay a town seated
Maurice his proceeding touching the peace: and the third was for that he had
been deceived of his expectation upon the town of Strasbourg, the which he
would willingly have had as good cheap, as he had gotten Metz, Toul and
Verdun, but Strasbourg was too great a morcell, the which if he had swalloed,
the Germans might at leisure have repented that ever they had called him.

Being retired out of Germany, he began to march the two and twenty of
May, so as having past the River of Mosella, he entered into Luxembourg where
he wasted, The French King in Luxembourg.
Martin van Rossen, and recovered the town of Astenay, the which he found
without garrison, the Borguignons and Rossen being retired upon the first bruit
of the Kings approach. Then he went with his army before Danuilliers, the which
was yielded unto him, and then Yuois, the strongest place of the country,
Peeter Ernest Earl of Mansfieldt Governor of the country Count Mansfield
prisoner.
was in it, with the flower of all the the youth of Luxembourg, who were all
taken by the French, and the town spoiled through a mutiny among the soldiars,
against the Kings will, as they said.

Duke Maurice after his return from the treaty at Lints, to the Army of the
confederate Princes, he being gone, King Ferdinand went presently to Inspruch
to the Emperor his Brother, to let him understand what had been treated
betwixt them. Maurice his return to the army he marched with his companions
toward the Alps: who being thrust on by du Fresne the French Kings
Ambassador, they were resolved to charge those soldiars which the Emperor
caused to be levied in that quarter. The 18. of May approaching to Fiesse,
(which is a small town at the entry of the Alps) they sent some troops to
discover even unto the straights which the Emperors men held, whereof they
took some prisoners, from whom they learned the estate of that quarter. The
next day they advanced with their foot, and only two hundred men at arms,
and took the way to Fiesse, nere unto Rutte they came unto the straight The
Princes win the straights of the Alps.
of the Mountains, which some eight hundred of the Emperors men held with two
where they happily took the fort under the Castle, and were masters of the
entries

The 22. of May, two regiments were sent to Inspruck by the Alps, which is but
two days journey from thence: all their Caualerie remained with one regiment
about Fiesse and Rutte, to guard the passage; Maurice and the confederate
Princes followed the next day, and joined with their foot near unto Zirle,
which is but two The Emperor flies from Inspruch in have.
Ferdinand, who was arrived a little before to mediate a peace, and bending on
the left hand by the mountains, which lead to Trent, he retired to Villac, a
town of Carniola, upon the river of Drove. He had a little before set John
Frederick Duke of Saxony at liberty, whom he had kept five whole years
languishing in prison, and carried him a long time up and down with him, as in
triumph; whom he freed, The duke of Saxony set at liberty.
for fear his enemies should challenge it as a glory unto them. The which the
prisosoner did also desire, to the end that Maurice might not vaunt that he
had been the cause of his liberty. Being at liberty, he did yet accompany
the Emperor wheresoever he went.

Maurice being arrived at Inspruck, all the baggage that was found belonging to
the Emperor, the Spaniards, or the Cardinal of Ausbourg, was spoiled, but they
touched nothing that belonged to King Ferdinand, or to the Inhabitants: and for
that there remained but three days for the future treaty of the peace, as it
had been concluded at Lints, Duke Maurice went from them to Passau: but the
Princes his confederates returned from whence they came, and came the twenty
eight of May to Fiesse. The Duke being come to the assignation at Passau, to
treat a peace the first of June, that which had been begun at Lints was
repeated, and all propounded and expounded more at large by Maurice. There were
as mediators, King Ferdinand, Albert Duke of Bauaria, and the Bishops of
Strasbourg and Eistede, with the Ambassadors Duke Maurice his complaint
also. Before them all, Maurice made a long discourse and great complaints of
matters that had past in the Emperors name, and of the bad government of the
commonweal: and among other things, that foreign soldiers had vaunted, that
they had vanquished and subdued Germany; the which they did assure themselves
to join unto the Emperors inheritance (as it was his principal desseine) in
building of cittadels in all the chief towns. That the Imperial chamber was
all governed, from the which they of the religion were excluded, and many other
points which he propounded, and required to be redrest: and that they should
restore the Empire to her ancient dignity; and that Strangers might not be
suffered to scorn or contemn

The Princes and Noblemen that were mediators, having conferred together,
thought that his demands contained nothing but what was just: yet to preserve
the Emperors honor, and that he might be the sooner persuaded, they were of
opinion that many things which concerned the reformation of the State, might be
reserved to an Imperial diet. During these conferences of peace, the other
confederate Princes marched still on, especially the Marquis Albert of
Brandenbourg, who made war apart, the which he said was in the French Kings
name, against the Princes, Bishops, Albert of Brandenbourg makes war^ apart.
and towns that were not of their league, spoiling and burning all that he
could not ransom at his pleasure, especially the town of Nuremberg, where
having Nuremberg compoun^ with him.
threatening it with extreme ruin: so as by the means of other Princes that
were intercessors for them, he forced them to redeem this siege, and to buy
their Maurice being returned to his confederates to Mergentheim, declared unto
them what had been done touching the peace: and that king Ferdinand was gone
in all have to the Emperor, and that he thought he would soon send some
counselors with a final answer. But least in this doubtful and uncertain
estate of their affairs, some inconvenience might happen unto them, if they
remained idle, they resolved to go to Francfort, where there were 17.
Euseignes of foot, and Conrard van Hand^steyn, the which might be very
prejudicial for the country of Hessen that lay near it: Francfort besieged by
the Princes.
whereupon they went and camped before the town the 17. of July. During this
siege George Duke of Mechelbourg, in league with Maurice (who had first made
war at Magdebourg) was slain with a Canon. At the beginning when as they
brought the siege before Francfort, the confederate Princes demanded of the
prince Palatin a great number of Artillery, the which he refused once or
twice, but seeing there was no means to avoid it, and that they threatened to
bring the whole army, they gave them eight of their biggest Canon, with all
their furniture.

The Marquis Albert (who had joined with his confederates upon the way) as they
The bishops, Prelates and P^ests, ^he before Albert.
Albert being advertised that Duke Maurice inclined unto a peace, left a
garrison at Spyer, and returned unto Maurice, refusing to be comprehended
therein.

The 15. of July King Ferdinand sent to the Camp of the confederate Princes,
being before Francfort, Henry Vicont of Meissen, and Chancellor of Bohemia,
who arrived after Duke Maurice the 24. of the said month. After they had
contended a little, the Chancellor terrifying him with Duke John Frederick,
whom the Emperor had set at liberty, and showed unto the Landtgraues son
the condition of his Father, A p^ace concluded betwixt the Emperor and the
Princes.
were present, and the Ambassadors of them that were absent, signed this
treaty, the original whereof was dispatched at Passau, which the Emperor
himself signed. A peace being concluded, the French Ambassador retired. The
King disliked of this composition; but hearing that the Landtgraue was in great
danger if it were not concluded, he yielded, and sent back the hostages and
pledges (which the Protestant Princes had given him,) safe and sound into
Germany.

The 13. of August Duke Maurice and the Landtgraues son parted from Francfort
and took contrary ways; the Landtgraues son toward Hessen, and Maurice led
his Albert of Brandebourg, which did much trouble the princes, fearing least
the Emperor should take some occasion thereby, not to release the Landtgraue.
Albert went still in his course after the conclusion of a peace, wherein he
would not be comprehended making war apart, especially against the Bishop
of Ments, Treues and Spyer, forcing the Inhabitants of these towns to swear
unto him; and to furnish him with money. Throughout all their territories he
burnt Castells, Cloisters, and Temples, yea even within the Towns. About the
end of July the Emperor came from Villac to Inspruch, and eight days after,
he past by Bauaria, having with him some troops of Germans, Bohemians,
Italians, and Spaniards, the which arrived at Genoa in the beginning of the said
month, under the command of the Duke of Alua. The Arch-bishoppe of Ments after
that he had run The Emp^or comes to Ausbourg
up and down Suaube for some days, being a fugitive out of his country,
hearing news of the Emperor (who arrived at Ausbourg the twentieth of August)
he went

Phillip Landtgraue of Hessen being freed from prison, according to the
Accord, and retiring home to his house, passing by Maestricht upon the river
of Meuze, he was again stayed by the Queen of Hongaries commandment, being
there, and was again given in guard to the Spaniards even unto them that had
been his keepers The Landtgraue delivered and sta^ed again.
five years together. The cause was (which had troubled confederate Princes as
we have said) for that Ryffenberch who had been entertained by the
Landtgraues son, had gone with all his men unto Marquis Albert; whereby the
Queen maintained that the peace was broken and that she could not deliver
him, until she understood the Emperors pleasure. The same day that the
Emperor parted from Ausbourg he John Frederic Duke of Saxony, with loving
words, promising to remain The Duke of Saxony t^kes his (...) of of the
Emperor.
always his friend. (after that he had insulted over him; he deprived him of
his Electorall dignity, and dispossessed him of a good part of his Country) who
parted the next day and retired into his Country. The fourth of September the
Landtgraue was absolutely discharged, and within six days after came unto his
house.

The Emperor having past the Country of Wirtenberg, marched toward
Strausbourg, before the which he caused his army to pass over the river of
Rhine; and he The Emperor (...) ^o Strasbou^g.
himself with a small train entered into the Town, the which he had never
seen, where he was honorably and lovingly received by the Senate. In the
evening he took the way of haguenau, and lay that night in the next village.
Where as the army John Marquis of Brandebourg, Alphonso Duke of Holsteyn,
brother to the King of Denmark, and Philibert Prince of Piedmont were in the
Emperors army. Those that were banished out of Germany She was daughter to
Christierne King of Denmark.
by the Emperor refused the conditions of peace and remained in France. The
Duchess of Lorraine the Emperors Niece, being chased out of Lorraine by the
French King, conferred with her uncle near unto Strasbourg, and then retired
into the Netherlands.

The Emperor parting from Haguenau came to Metz, where he planted his siege,
the two twenty day of October. Many Counselors of the law and Bourgeses
departed 1552
with leave of the French, whereof some retired into Lorraine, and others to
Strasbourg. Metz besieged.
The twenty eight of August those of the Town of Brussels, and of the seven
villages nearest about it, made a muster in arms without the Town, on a
goodly great plain, upon the way by Elsene under six Captains of three
diverse quarters, from thence they marched in Battle unto the Town, entering by
the port of Couwenbourg, with thirteen field pieces in the midst of them, with
their Gunners and Pioners: passing before the Court, they were viewed by the
Queen of Hongary Gouernesse of the Netherlands, being above seven thousand
choice men (for if to defend the town of Brussels, if happily (the which she
feared) the French should Albert of Brandebourg was then upon the frontires of
Lorraine with fiftye companies of foot, and great troops of horse, near unto
Mussipont. And for that he had some difference with the French King, Albert of
Brandebourg reconciled to the Emperor.
touching the entertainment for his service, both for that which was past, and
that which was to come, he was by the means of some reconciled to the
Emperor, who forgave him all his faults, forbidding any to call him into
question, for the wars past. The which being understood by the French, the
Earl of Aumale brother to the Duke of Guise, (whom the King had sent into
Lorraine with great troops of horse,) having by secret practices debauched and
with-drawne the regiment of Ryf^enberg, and thinking to beat Albert, was
himself beaten, wounded, and taken prisoner, Albert came to the Emperors camp
before Metz, with Aumale his prisoner, and camped upon Mosella, then having
caused his prisoner to be dressed, he sent him into Germany to be well guarded.

The Emperor came from Thionuille to his camp before Metz the twenty of
November, then they battered the town furiously with forty Canons, the report
whereof A furio^ bat^y at M^.
was heard eighteen leagues off. The besieged made many gallant sallies,
especially upon Albert of Brandenbourgs Camp, whom they hated most: and once
among the rest, when as the Earls of Egmont, Aremberg, and other Noblemen of
the Netherlands were at supper with him, in the which Lichtenberg his
Lieutenant was M^ valiantly d^nded.
their breaches, so as the besiegers were no less amazed to see their
diligence and labor, then their valor. The Winter was very sharp and full of
Snow: and although the Emperor had a goodly Army, yet he never gave any
assault, but busied himself only about undermining of the town, wherein he
prevailed little, both by reason of the bad and unseasonable wether which did
hinder them, as also for that the besieged were advertised thereof, and did
countermine. The Town was valiantly defended by choice Captains, Princes, and
others of great houses, and all under the command of the Duke of Guise.

The Emperor seeing his army ouer-toyled, and to disband and diminish daily,
through hunger, cold, nakedness, and want of all things: some Italians
retiring into The Emperor (...) his siege from M^.
he retired his Canon, resolving to make an honorable retreat, wherein he^
employed Cont Egmont to discover and assure the ways: and the first of January
the Emperor came to Thionuille* leaving all the charge to dispose of the
retreat of 1553.
the Army, unto the Duke of Alua his Lieutenant* the which he performed with
great dishonor and shame, for so great a Captain as he would seem to be.
Making the said retreat with the Earl of Aremberg; their reere-ward was
charged by the Vidame of Chartres; who defeated a Cornet of light horse, burnt
a good quantity of poulder, and took more prisoners then he desired, so
weak and languishing were

The Emperor having stayed some time at Thionuille, arrived the sixth of
February at Brussells. Many would not believe that he was yet living;
wherefore he was The Emperor (...) to B^ssels.
his two Sisters, the Queens of France and Hongary. The people in general
were wonderful joyful of his coming, every one desiring to see him often,
for that they could scarce believe that he was yet living, he was grown so
pale and lean with continual sickness. There was a subsedie granted him by
the States A ^umult at Brusselles against the Spaniards.
of Tapistrie slain. Whereupon the Officer of the town took four Spaniardes
prisoners. The Magistrates complained unto Prince Phillip the Emperors son of
the disorder of the Spaniards, falling ten or twelve upon one man to kill him,
the Prince gave them leave to apprehend them and to do Justice. And whereas
one of the chief Authors was fled into Saint Nicholas Church, they went and
apprehended him in the Quier near to the great Altar. The Spaniards did run
thither in arms, meaning to rescue him* among the which there were some of
their commanders la Horca, that is the gallows, as this commandment
restrained them.

In the ^end of the Spring, the Lord of Bignicourt, of the house of
Montmorency, by the Emperors commandment did inuest Teroane, lying in the
midest of Arthois: Teroan taken and razed.
for the defense whereof the French King sent the Lords of Esse and
Montmorency, Adrien of Croy Earl of Roeux lord Steward of the Emperors house,
was general of the army, the town was furiously battered and they endured 3.
charges at an assault, where there was great loss on either side, but of the
French there were diverse of account slain. In the end by sap they overthrew
a Bulwark, which filled up the ditch: which the Lord of Montmorency and the
rest of the captains seeing, demanded to capitulate. But whilst they parled
with Count Bossu, who succeeded the Earl of Roeux, being dead during the
siege, the Germans and Bourguignons gave a furious assault on an other side,
and carried it by force, killing all they incountred. Only the Spaniardes (who
love money) saved the lives of many Gentlemen to have their ransomes. Met, Met,
putting the Emperors men in mind of Metz; where they had lost so many. The
Lord of Montmorency being wounded was taken prisoner, with the Lords of
Attigny, Loches, Varennes, Fauernon, Montenay, la Bar and many others, who
being put in a safe place, the town was all fiered and blown up with
powlder: so as in the end it was quite raized and overthrown, nothing
remaining but one suburb of the Jurisdiction of Arthois, the circuit of the
ground where the town stood belonging to the Bishop of Bologne, the which
he farms out for pasture.

Albert Marquis of Brandenbourg continued war still against the Bishops,
having Duke Maurice defies Albert of Brandebourg.
spoiled the lands of Henry duke of Brunswick, he went into the territory of
Mind. Duke Maurice fearing that he would march into the country of Hessen to
assail Franconia again, he went from Northuse to Emb^ to be before him, and
having gathered together his troops, he sent to defy him by a gentleman,
whereof followed a most gr^uous and bloody battle. Both armies being near
unto Saxony, the ninth of July, Albert having past the river of Wexen, they
joined Battle with all their forces, and great fury and choler of either
side: there was a bloody fight which continued many hours, in the which duke
Maurice who was the stronger in horse, had the victory but it cost him his
life, for he was shot through the body, whereof Albert saved himself in
Honobrie, there were about four thousand men slain upon the place, most of
them horsemen, with a great number of prisoners, Henry of Brunswick lost two
Sons Charles and Phillip, Duke Augustus his brother succeeded him in all his
estates and electorall dignity.

The Prince of Piedmont General of the Emperors army in the place of the Earl
of Roeux went after the ruin of Teroane to beseege Hesdin, whether the French
King had sent a good number of his chief commanders: as the duke of Bouillon
Governor Hesdin taken by the Emperor and (...).
of Normandy and Mareshall of France, Duke Horatio Farneze, the Earl of
Villars, the marquis of Nesle, the Viscontes of Turene and Martigues, the Lord
of Reoux and many other Gentlemen and Captains which had been beseeged within
Mets, and, two thousand soldiars horse and foot. The town was furiously
battered and Horatio, who was carried away with a Cannon, and some gentlemen
about him. The town was raized like to Teroane: The French King assembling his
Army about Amiens and Picqueny, the nineteen of August some Noblemen of the
Netherlands, among others were the Prince of Espynoy, the Duke of Arschot, the
Earl of Egmont, the Earl of Bossu and others made a road into Picardy to
discover The Incoun ter of (...), (...) the Prince of Espynoy was slain.
the Kings camp, without anyfootemen, but only their bands of ordinance,
advancing until they came before Amiens, unto the forward of the French, who
having intelligence of their coming, laid an Ambuscado of foot, and charged
them with their horse, who making their retreat, still fighting for the space
The Duke of Arschot a prisoner (...) ^h.
of Espynoy was carried to Bethune and intered in the Gloister of the
Anonciadoe, founded by the house of Melun of the which he was. The Duke of
Arschot being prisoner in the Castle of Bois de Vincennes, escaped with the
help of a poor Priest, and a couerer of slate, by the vent or socket of a
privy, without paying any ransom.

The Magistrate of Brusselles made a stately banquet to the Emperor and the two
Queene^ of France and Hongary his two Sisters, whether were invited Cardinal
Poole an English man, and the Cardinal of Bourgos a Spaniard, the Prince of
Piedmont, and Mary the Gouernesse espying, being come into the great Market
she commanded them both to retyer, and so neither of them was at the banquet.

In the Spring the French King made three Armies against the Emperor, the first
in Vermandois under the Prince of la Roch sur yone. The second toward Crecy
led 1554.
by the Constable, and the third was commanded by the Duke of Neuers. The first
The French ar^es against the Emperor.
Neuers army entered the Ardennes, took the Castle of Orchimont, by composition
and burnt a great number of Villages, and forced the garrison of the Castle of
Fontaines to yield upon composition: then he entered into the Country of Liege,
having opened and assured the passage of the river of Meuze, by the taking of
strong places and forts along the river of either side. The Constables army
beseeged Mariembourg, the which was yielded and he fortefied it with the Town
of Rocroy: coming out of the Ardennes those of Dinant, were somoned to declare
if they would not persevere in neutrality: whereunto they made a proud answer,
shooting at the Duke of Neuers herald and trompet who took the Castle of
Agimont and the town of Bouuines by force, who would have ravished certain
women and maids taken in a Church, the

During these executions in the Countries of Liege, Namur and Henault; the
Prince of Roch-Sur-Yone, defeated two companies of Bourguignion horse in Defe^
of some Bourguignons by the French.
Arthois, and sent the Cornets unto the King, who hearing that the Prince of
P^edmont gathered together his army, with a resolution to fight if the French
did advance; He past the river of Sambre, being followed by the Duke of
Neuers, and entering into the Country of Henault, he spoiled, wasted and burnt
all where he came, some troops ran to the ports of Niuelle, which is the
first Town of Brabant, where they set them on fire, and burnt all the
villages round about, carrying The Kings revenge ^or the (...) ^cardy.
he caused to be burnt in revenge of the ruin of Folambray, and of the
Towns and villages of Picardie, which the Emperors army burnt. They also fired
Ba^ais and the Castle of Roeux. The army parting from thence, went and lay
betwixt Mons in Henault, Landrecy, Auesmes, Quesnoy, and Valenciennes and
Cambray: The Prince of Piedmont did all he could to have his revenge of so
great a

Those within it (whereof the Seignior of Brias was Governor) answered them
with the like; The King having battred down almost all the Towers, caused them
to be summoned to yield, but they made no answer but with their shot. The
Emperor had sent to them to be of good courage; and to hold out but three
days longer, Renty besieged by the French King.
within the which time he would come in person to relieve them and to raise
the siege: Wherein he failed not, for coming with his army which was very
fair

The Emperor hearing of their flight pursued them with his Light horsemen, and
charged their reer-ward, beating them even unto the gates of Monstreuill;
whereas Renty relieved by the Emperor.
they saved themselves. Then the Emperor entered into Renty and thanked the
Brusselles. And in the end of October he caused King Philip his Son to be
put

This year in August was a furious fight at sea, betwixt two and twenty
Merchants ships of Holland, Zeeland and Westfriseland, which came out of
Spain, laden with A furious fight at s^a betwixt the Fr^nch, Hollanders and
(...) ^landers.
sundry sorts of Merchandise, and nineteen French ships of war and six
carauells, appointed with Artillery, souldiars and mariners for the purpose,
which attended for them, and seeing them come upon the coast of England, near
Dover, they began to assail them, and the others to defend themselves. The
French who were better manned, made have to board them, to avoid the fury of
the Hollanders Ordinance: and in the end they grapeled, fifteen French
ships to fifteen others, thinking to vanquish them by force and the numbers
of their men; but those Hollanders

The seventh of May Anthony Perronet Bishop of Arras was sent by the the
Emperor to Graueling to confer about a treaty of peace with the French King.
They 1555
met on both sides in a great plain betwixt Ardres, Calais and Graueling,
under pauilions, An assembly to treateat of a p^ace.
where there was a great circuit compassed in with cloth, in the which they
assembled. The deputies had about it, every one his quarter apart, and the
English Cardinal assisted as mediator or vmpier betwixt them. The demandes of
either side were so excessive, as they could not agree; and so the assembly
proved fruitelesse. The ninth of the same month news came to the Emperor of
the death of the Lady Jane, Queen of Castille, his mother, at whose funerals
(which should be made Philip would be present, and therefore they were
deferred until The death of the Emperors mother.
his coming. On Whitsonday died that great captain Martin van Rossen Seignior
of Puydroyen, who in his life time had served many masters: the duke Charles
of Geldres, William duke of Cleues, the French King and the Emperor. The
fifteen of July the French passing the fronters, came to victual,
Mariembourg, without any carts, but with horses laden only: and at their
return thinking to surprise all the souldiars that were in the new fort,
whereof William of Nassau Prince of Orange was General, being discovered,
there was a very hot skirmish, the which continued from noone until night,
wherein there died many on either side.

A while after the Seignior of Aussimont Governor of Bapaulmes (the terror of
the French) hearing that some garrisons of Picardie, joined with fifteen
hundred horse of the Arrierban of France which they call the companies of the
Nobles, and four hundred foot, did road up and down the country of
Arthois, having spoiled the suburbs of Lilliers and the burrow of Saint
Venant, he went and charged them in That the Bourguognons took the Nobles of
France without waying them; whereupon it was called the Encounter of the
Nobles. The eight of September King Phillip came after his marriage with Queen
Mary, out of England to Brusselles, accompanied with Emanuell Philibert Duke of
Sauoy and four or five English Noblemen, Knights of the garter, and the
sixteen of the said month the funeralles of the Emperors Mother were
celebrated with great pomp and state. In October there was order given by the
Emperor and Gouernesse, upon the complaint of the Bourgeses of Brusselles, to
the Alcaide Captain of the Court; to the steuard The Emperor makes an Assembly
of the stats to resign the Netherlands.
in the town of Brusselles and there to hear matters that should be
propounded unto them in his behalf: to which end there came into the said
town, many gentlemen, Maximilian King of Bohemia, Son to King Ferdinand, and
William Duke of Cleues his brother in law: to whom the Emperor before his
departure gave three goodly horses out of his Quiry.

The two and twenty of November in the after noone the Emperor had sent for The
Emperor leaves the collor of his order to his son.
all the Knights of the Order of the goulden fleece, to come to Court, in whose
presence, having King Phillip his Son by him he pulled the Collar of the
said order of the fleece from his own neck, and put it about the King his
Sons, saying. See my Son I do now make you head and sovereign of the
Noble order of the golden Princepe hijo. Prince my Son, do you see all The
Emperors exhorta^ion to his son.
these Noblemen here present. These are the chief and most faithful servants
that I have had, which have been the proppe and support of mine Empire, and by
them have I vanquished and ouergone so many perrilles and dangers, for which
respect I have always loved them entierly, If you do the like I assuer my
self they will carry you the like affection and obedience, and will never
abandon you at any need. But if you entreat them otherwise, they will be the
cause of the loss and ruin of your estate This was done in the great Hall of
the Palace at Brusselles which was furnished and hanged with ancient Tapistrie
of the house of Bourgongne, containing the Institution of the order of the
golden fleece, made in silk, gold and silver, the which the Netherlands had in
former times given unto the Duke of Bourgongne. At the end of the Hall was a
rich royal throne, with a low chaier with a back and a cuission of cloth of
gold where the Emperor was set and a skreene behind him before the fire. The
25. of that month, being the day of the Assignation, all the deputies of the
states and towns of the Netherlands came to Court An exception of them of
Louuaine upon their preuiledges.
every one armed withful power and authority as they had bin commanded to
appear, except they of the town of Louuaine, who answered that they were not
bound to go which privilege they would maintain should be entertained and
kept. Notwithstanding A so^lemne act of the Em perors resignation.
hall of the Palace; the Queen caused all Spaniards, as well Officers as
others, of what quality soever, to depart, so as there remained not any one,
but those that had to do, and were called to this sollemne Act. The Emperor
leaning upon the prince of Oranges shoulder, king Philip going on the side of
him, all the Princes of the order marching before him. Being set down in his
seat, King Philip did sit on his right hand, four or five foot behind him,
and Queen Mary the Gouernesse on the left hand: then did the Princes,
Noblemen, Prelates, and other deputies of States sit down, every one that I.
Whereupon Philibert of Brussels, Orator to the Emperor, made a long An Oration
to the states in the Emperors name.
oration in the French tongue, in the name of his Imperial Majesty, as
follows.

My Masters, besides that the Emperor our Sovereign Lord and gracious Prince,
has by his letters sent for you this day, whereby you may partly guess, to
what end this assembly does tend: yet his Imperial majesty has commanded me
to say unto you; That having had the charge and government of these countries
many years, the which fell provinces: wherefore he is the more capable of this
charge, with the good help, counsel, humane society and the common profit be
not lost; but that thereby you may live in peace

This speech being ended, the Emperor began to speak, as if he would confirm
that which the Orator of Brussels had said: whereupon the king rose, and stood
near his father (who spoke French) the better to understand what he would
verbally declare.

The Emperor then said, That he had forty years since in the same place been
emancipated The emperors ^ch unto the St^tes.
by the Emperor Maximilian his grandfather, and put in possession of those
countries: since which time, he had run through many fortunes, and endured
great travel, as well in Spain, to embrace the affairs of queen Jane his
mother, and the government of her kingdoms, as of other Estates: and as the
said Emperor Maximilian died soon after, foreseeing the dissension interrupted
his speech, the tears trickling down his cheeks, the which were accompanied
with the like by some others: then having a little taken breath, he took his
spectacles, and looking upon a little remembrance which he had in his hand,
he said: That his sight and memory were not so good as they had been, and
that he felt himself to decline and to grow weak hourly, unable to endure
the travel that was requisite for the preservation of the country, and of
them all; the which did move him chiefly to return into Spain, and not to
prolong his life; the which he referred into the hands of God. In the end, he
entreated them to continue in the Christian Religion, as they had done until
then, and likewise to observe Justice, remaining friends, and united together:
Whereunto God the Father, the

These words of the Emperor did move the hearts of many noblemen, which loved
him; who seeing him in this anguish of mind, took pity of him, that being so
mighty a Monarch, he could not show the sincere affection which he bare unto
his subjects, but by effusion of tears. After these words, king Philip went to
his seat, and sat him down. Then stood up doctor Mars, an eloquent Orator of
the town of Antuerpe, chosen to that end by the deputies of the States; who
having made a great reverence to the Emperor, King, and both Queens, he made
answer in the name of them all to the speech which the Counselor of Brussels
had made in the Emperors name, and to that which his imperial Majesty had
delivered with his own mouth, saying as follows:

Most mighty Emperor, we know that your imperial Majesty has so many years
ruled The answer of t^ ^s of the Netherlands to the Emperor.
and governed this Estate carefully and religiously, with the great and
infinite toils which your imperial Majesty has endured in many accidents, as
well in the countries and realms of your obedience, as others, as by your
Orator and your own discourse has been related:

The next day about nine of the clock in the morning, the deputies of the
duchy of Brabant King Philip takes the oath as duke of Brabant.
were sent for, to come to Court: whereas king Philip before them of Antuerpe,
Brussels and Boisleduc, together with the small towns and botoughes, having
the privilege of

About that time ended the imperial Diet held at Ausbourg, whereas king
Ferdinand did A resolution of the imperial Diet held at Ausbourg.
preside in the Emperors name: in the which after long strife and debate,
there was concluded, That neither the Emperor, king Ferdinand, nor the other
princes and states should do wrong to any of the Empire in what sort soever,
by reason of the confession of Ausbourg; that from thence forwards they should
not force by edicts or other means, the allies of this confession to abandon
their religion, but should suffer them to enjoy it freely, with their goods,
tributes, rights, and possessions, with many other privileges granted in
favor of the religion. Some months after, there were bruites given out of
enterprises and practices made by the Pope and his adherents against the allies
of the confession of Ausbourg. It was thought that the Pope was wonderfully
discontented with this decree made at Ausbourg, by the which they did leave the
religion in peace and liberty, and that he did solicit the Emperor and
himself also, as if he had been the conductor and manager of such practices:
so Philip, resigned also the Roman Empire into the Electors hands, by an
embassage, having held it seven and thirty years.

The sixteenth of January 1556 were celebrated in Brussels the funerals of the
king of Portugals brother; and the next day king Philip, accompanied with a
great number of the nobility, 1556
departed from Brussels to go to Antuerpe, to hold the feast and Chapter of
the golden Fleece, whereof his father had lately made him chief.

King Philip following the counsel of his father, and solicited by Mary
queen of England his wife, inclined unto peace: for the effecting whereof,
after many iourneyes, a truce was A truce betwixt the French and the
Bourguignons of small continuance.
made the fifteenth of February for five years. The earl of Lalain went to
Blois to see the king Philip to the same effect: but it could not last long;
for both the one and the other had sought nothing but cauilling, as it appeared
presently, the most cunning thinking to deceive his companion (...) whereupon
the French (who are more stirring) began first, for that the Admiral of
France thought by subtlety to surprise Downy by Arthois: the which succeeding
not, the war continued as before, until that a peace was concluded by the
marriage of king Philip and the duke of Sauoy, as we shall see hereafter.

After that the Emperor had resigned all his Netherlands unto king Philip his
son, and that he had settled a good order, and disposed of all his affairs in
the Netherlands, being desirous to free himself from all temporal cares, and
to spend the remainder of his days in rest Elenor, queen of France, and the
lady Mary, queen of Hungary, into Spain: but before his departure he would
also dispose of the affairs and state of the Empire, the which he would yield
and resign unto his brother Ferdinand king of Romans: whereupon he writ his
letters to the princes Electors, and to the States of the Empire, as follows:

Charles by the grace of God Emperor of Romans, always Augustus, king of
Castile etc. The Emperors letter to the princes ^lectors.
To all Princes Electors of the holy Empire, Princes as well Ecclesiastical as
temporal, Prelates, Earls, Barons, Knights, Nobles, Captains, Prouosts,
Judges, Justices, Bourgmasters, Ferdinand king of Romans, of Hungary, and
Bohemia, as our lawful successor in the said quality of king of Romans, the
which government he has often many years since diligently deserved in our
absence, supporting the burden with a brotherly love and charity, and
discharging himself of this charge: To the end therefore, that the Christian
commonweal, especially of the holy empire, during out absence, should not fall
into some dangerous inconvenience; and that the king of Romans, our brother,
may manage the affairs with greater authority, we have advised and resolved,
that he in quality of king of Romans, has absolute and irreuocable power,
to treat, negotiat, and command, in all things that he shall find requisite
and necessary, for the greatness, prosperity, and increase of the empire, as
absolutely, as we our unto you the honor, respect and obedience, which in
this quality you should be bound unto

This done, the fleet being ready in Zeeland, he took his leave of king Philip
his son, and giving him his last blessing, he embraced him and bad him
farewell, as he did all the princes The Em^erors departure out of the
Netherlands.
and noblemen: then he embarked with the two queens his sisters, and sailed
toward Spain, where they arrived in a short time, having a prosperous wind.
Having rested some days in the city of Valladolit, he made choice for his
retreat of a Monastery of S. Ierosme the Hermit, situated in Estremadura, not
far from Placence, an unfrequented place, and fit to meditate on heavenly
things, being retired from all wordly cogitations: whither he caused himself
to be conducted, to pass the rest of his days there, which were not above two
years, spending his time in holy and godly works, and giving himself wholly
to a contemplative life. And

D. GShilippus Rex Catholicus.
PHILIP OF AUSTRIA, THE SIX AND thirtieth Earl of Holland, Zeeland, etc. the
second of that name, duke of Brabant, etc. Earl of Flanders, etc.
By true and right descent, of Holland I am Lord,
And of the wealthy Netherlands, united by accord:
But cruel counsel of the Inquisition,
Was cause that did procure their woe and great destruction.
Love burning in my breast, did me his subject make,
And moved me four several wives one after other take:
My cousin last of them, a son only did leave
Of tender years, when cruel death did her of life bereave.

THE EIGHT BOOK.
The Argument.
THe birth of Philip, the second of that name; king of Spain. Pope Paul the
fourth seeks occasions to make war against him, who sends the duke of Alua for
his general. King Philip gives the order of the Golden Fleece at Brussels. A
great famine in the Netherlands in the year 1536, and 1537. S. Quintines
besieged by the Bourguignons: the French, thinking to relieve it, are defeated.
The ^onstable of France, and many noble men, are prisoners, and in the end the
town is taken by assault. Ham and ^hastelet yielded. Calais besieged by the
French, and yielded by the English to the duke of Guise, with Guines, which was
taken by assault, and the castle of Hames abandoned. Theonuille yielded to the
French: Aaclon taken and burnt by them, with the towns of Winox-Berghe, and
Dunkerke. The same French men, under the marshall (...) Terms, are defeated in
battle near unto Grauelingue. The death of the emperor Charles the fifth,
to when his brother Ferdinand king of Romans, and Hungary succeeded. About
the same time died the queens Dowaers of France, and of Hungary, the emperors
sisters, with Marie queen of England, to whom her sister Eliza^eth succeeded.
A peace betwixt France and Spain, by marriages. The king of Spaines marriage
turned into teres, by the death of Henry the second, the French king.
Marguerite of Austria, best^d to the emperor Charles the fifth, duchess of
Parma, succeeds the duke of Sauoy in the government of the Netherlands. The kig
of Spaines last departure out of the said countries. The death of George of
Egmont, bishop of Vtrecht, to who^ succeeded Frederic Schenck of Taulenburch,
who was the last bishop. A subtle bringing in of the Spanish In^isition into
the Netherlands, by the creation of new bishops. An abstract of the life of
cardinal Granuellet. A division betwixt the chief noblemen of the country.
The earl of Egmont sent into Spain, touching the trobles that were like to
grow, and what answer he brought. Letters from the Gouernesse to the
counselors of the pouinces, touching the edicts and the Inquisition. The
prince of Oranges answer to the Gouernesse. The first be^inning, proceeding,
and effects of the Inquisition. An enterview of the noblemen of the country. A
discourse ^ewing the means to redress the troubles. An assembly of the
nobility, at the marriage of the prince of Parmain Brussels, and afterward at
Saint Truden, to prevent the troubles: their compromise and confederation. A
petition made by them of Brabant, to the king of Spain, to prevent the
troubles. A petition made by the nobilit^, against the bloody edicts, and the
Inquisition. The Duchess answer thereunto: and all her practices to circum^nt
them, and disioine them, as she did. The first defeat of the Protestants in the
Netherlands. Tournay made s^biect by practice. Valenciennes besieged, battered,
and yielded. The defeat of Austruel. The negotiation of the lord of Brederode,
in Amsterdam, who retires into Germany, and so does the prince of Orange. The
death of the Marquis of Berghen, in Spain. An apology made by the Protestants
of the Netherlands, touching the cause and beginning of the troubles.

PHILIP of Austria, the thirty sixth Earl of Holland and Zeeland, the second
of that name, Lord of Vtrecht, Friseland, Ouerissell, and Groningen; 1556
the only son of Charles the fifth, Emperor of Romans, and of the lady
Isabella, daughter to king Dom Emanuel of Portugal. He was borne the 21 day of
May, in the year 1527, at Valiodolit in Spain, where King Philips age.
he was nourished and bred up, for the space of twenty two years; until that
in the year 1549, the emperor, his father, sent for him, to come into the
Netherlands, to have made him as well his successor in the empire (if it had been
possible) as of all his other kingdoms and Belgicke provinces, whereof the
emperor (as we have said in the former book) disrobed himself, and put him
in full possession thereof, in his lifetime.

The emperor being retired into Spain, to a solitary and a contemplative
life: king Philip his son began to order and settle the government of the
Netherlands, making E^nuel King Philips proceeding after the emperors departure
Philibert, duke of Sauoy, lieutenant-generall of his army. And having sent
thoma^ ques of Pesquaire before, to take possession of the realm of Naples, in
his naine, he (...) ^oice of Dom Fernando Aluares of Toledo, duke of Alua, to
be his viccroy there. And fo^ch a^ at that time the war against the French
began to grow more violent, he commanded the duk^ ^o depart presently out of
the Netherlands, and to go into Italy, giving him charge to stay so^e time at
Milan, and to dispose of matters concerning the war. In the which the du^ of
Al^, as general for the Spanyard, and Francis of Lorraine duke of Guise, for
the French king, w^ small honor and reputation. This war of Italy was
attempted by king Philip, against the pop^, in whose succor Henry the 2, the
French king, sent the duke of Guise with an army: whi^ war, for that it does
not concern our history of the Netherlands, we will omit and refer t^

This Summer, in the year 1556, king Philip, pretending many goodly reasons
and color, King Philip makes an excessive dema^d of the Netherlanders.
but the chiefest, was to free and satisfy those debts, wherewith the emperor
had left hi^ charged, made an excessive demand, for the first aid and
subuention which he required from his subjects of the Netherlands: but he could
not obtain a moitie of that which he pretended, neither would that be granted
without a convocation of the general estates of the 17 B^gicke provinces; the
which was wonderfully ill taken by the Spanish counsel, and by the that
enriched themselves with the treasure, to the peoples ruin: so as some
noblemen, and g^uernors of provinces and towns, were not only in disgrace with
the king and his counsel, b^t were also judged guilty of high treason, and the
noblemen which had in any sort contra^cted

On S. Andrews day the same year, king Philip held the feast and chapter of
the orde of the golden Fleece, in the town of Brussels, where as these knights
following were newly ceated; William of Nassau, prince of Orange, Philip of
Montmorency, earl of Horn, the earl of Lalaine, Amorall of Egmont, the duke
of Arschot, the lord of Molembais, the lord of Glaison and the lord of
Barlamont. The 22 of December, the lady Marguerite of Aus^ia, duchess of
Parma, bastard sister to king Philip, came to the court to Brussels, with her
son ^lexander Farnese a goodly young prince, and of great expectation, of whom
we shall have suficient matter to speak hereafter: the king went forth of the
town to receive her.

This Winter was wonderfully sharp and rigorous, as well by reason of the
extreme cold A great famine in the Netherlands.
weather, as through famine, which ensued, whereof died in the town of
Brussels (I omit other great towns) by the report of the masters of hospitals,
above 19000 poor creatures, of (...) sorts, men, women, and children, which
repaired thither from all places, for the great charitie^ ^alms which the king
and noblemen in court gave. There was a drought continued from July 1556,

EMANVEL PHILIBERT DVKE OF SAuoy, Prince of Piemont, Governor and Lieutenant
general of the Netherlands, for King PHILIP.
EMANVEL PHILIBERT DVX SABAVDIAE GVBERNATOR BELGI^Ae


I am EMANVEL PHILIBERT Duke of Sauoy,
That for long time did not one foot within the same enjoy.
Mine uncle the emperor maintained me in estate,
And of his son the gouornment of Netherlands I gate;
Where having ruled a while, at last did peace obtain:
Which being made, my lands to me restored were again.
Henry the French kings sister to my spouse I had,
And by that means assurance of the peace to me was made.
From thence I took my way to Piemont and Sauoy,
Whereas my subjects me received with great and extreme joy.
KIng Philip having after the emperors retreat out of the Netherlands,
appointed The king co^es out of ^ngland to ^is.
general of the said countries, he returned the ninth of December, the same
year 1556, from England to Brussels: The English having before taken a fort
near unto Boulogne upon the sea, and put all the French men they found in it
to the sword, they found in it about fifty cart loads of corn, the which they
did imbarke, and brought to Middlebourg in Zeeland.

The queen of England, and cardinal Poole, by much means, and long
solicitation, brought the matter of controversy between the kings of France
and Spain, to such effect, that she got them to agree to a truce and abstinence
of war, both by water and by land, for the space of Chastilion, admiral of
France, and at Blois on the French kings behalf, unto the earl of Lalaine.
This truce was made wholly against the kings mind, but well known to the
counselor Simon Renart, and to the earl of Lalaine, whereby great hatred and
enmity ensued, and was after chief cause of the controversies and troubles,
that ensued in the Low countries. This year, in the month of August, there
happened a great conflict between diverse Holland and A fight at sea between
the Hollanders and the Frenchmen.
French ships, between Dover and Calis: the Hollanders being twenty two
merchants ships that came out of Spain, and amongst them had appointed one
ship to be their admiral (as the

While they were busied in the Netherlands, touching the ratifying and
establishing of a truce, there began a new war in Italy, by means of pope
Paul the fourth, the first inuenter of the Jesuitical sect. This Paul was one
of the family and house of Caraffa in Naples, that always held with the
French men, in their Nepolitane wars, and for that cause were most of them
banished out of Naples, and served under the French men. This Jesuitical
cardinal Caraffa being pope, began to favor and advance his own family and
kindred, thereby seeking means to be revenged on the noblemen and cardinals,
which in Italy (being their enemies) were such as favored the emperor, and
the house of Burgondie, as also upon the houses and families of Columna,
Romans, and others, charging them to be conspirators against him; and and
curse both the emperor and the king of Spain: for which cause the duke
Columna, and sore anoied the pope, taking many places from him, whereby he was
constrained to crave aid of France, which always held and maintained the sea
of Rome: For which cause, in the end of the year 1556, the duke of Guise was
sent into Italy, with eighteen or twenty thousand horse and foot men, which
did the pope no great pleasure, for that the duke of Alua, having besieged
Rome, and the king of Spain having won the battle at S. Quintines (which
the pope had heard of) the French men were sent for, to return again into
France; by which means a devout peace was made, the duke of Alua first seeking
it, and went into Rome, to kiss the popes foot, and by that means got the
great priorship of Spain, for his bastard son, Don Ferdinando de Toledo. The
war in this sort begun in Italy (notwithstanding the truce made between both
parties not long before) the

The same year, in the month of March, the king of Spain went into England,
to his Mary queen of England ^roclaimeth open war against France.
wife, queen Mary, to have some aid from her, who upon the seventh of June, by
sound of trumpet, openly proclaimed war against France, both by water and by
land; and by a book put in print, charged the king of France to have conspired
against her with the duke of Northumberland, sir Thomas What, Dudley, Ashton,
and other English nobles, in regard that he supported Thomas Stafford, one of
her rebellious subjects, to take the castle of Scarborow, and had secretly
conspired against the town and country lying about Calis: and for that he
made war upon the Netherlands, which the kings of England were by contract,
long since made, always bound to aid and assist: and that he had little
esteemed of her intercession of peace, and desired no friendly nor good
neighborhood: and for those causes she thought it convenient, to declare and
hold him for her open enemy; which she caused to be signified unto him by a
herault, he being then at Reims, in Campaigne: which herault, being rewarded by
the king of France, was presently returned back again, with this answer,
Clinton, and the lord Mountague, and three lord Dudleyes, sons of the duke of
Northumberland, and many others, which went to Calis, and from thence marched
to S. Quintines, and there joined with the king of Spaines army, and help him
to assault and win the said town, where the lord Henry Dudley was slain in the
assault.

The king of Spain being in England, upon the sixth of July, Emanuel Philibert,
duke of Sauoy, began to raise an army, by aid of the prince of Orange, the
duke of Arschot, the earl of Egmont, the earl of Megen, the earl of
Mansfelt, the earl of Barlemont, and others, with whom were joined the Dutch
horse and foot, and with that army marched toward Guise, making show to
besiege the same, and encamped themselves not far from it; but their number
daily increasing, the duke of Sauoy suddenly approached, and enclosed the town
of Saint Quintines with his light horsemen: Within the town there was a
company of horsemen, S. Quintains besieged by king Philip.
led by monsieur Tiligny, and captain Brudit, as then governor of the town;
and not long after in the night time, Jasper Coligny, earl of Chastilion,
admiral of France, got into the town. The siege being strongly placed round
about the same, the ordnance was planted, and diverse Henry king of France sent
an army of men under the leading of the constable of France, and the duke de
Montmorancy, to put more men and victuals into the town; which they thought to
do by means of a marsh or poole of water, lying upon the one side of the
town: and to that end the constable came with his army, and lodging not far
from the duke of Sauoyes camp, shot out of his army into the Spanish de
Nemours, the prince of Conde, the marshal of S. Andrews, the duke de
Montpensier, the earl of Ville^s, the earl of Sancere, the baron of Daudelot,
and the Riengraue, with diverse other great personages, using all the means they
could to send more aid into the town, through the said water, under the leading
of monsieur Daudelot, the admirals brother; but his boats were badly ordered,
for that by the weight of over many soldiers that were in them, which
disorderly leapt into the same, they could not fleet above the water, whereby
many of them stuck fast in the ground, and by that means they could not get
all their men that were shipped, into the town, only monsier Daudelot, with
four or five hundred, got in, upon Lawrence day in the morning, being the
tenth of August: upon which day the counsel of the duke of Sauoyes camp,
assembled in the earl of Egmonts tent, to determine what they were best to do;
and thinking (as it was true) that the Frenchmen had put certain soldiers by
night into the town, and that they would come back again, they resolved, by
the counsel and courage of the earl of Egmont, to set upon them with their
light horsemen; and to second them, they appointed the Dutch launciers, and
some companies of footmen. The French men for their parts, thinking themselves
reasonably well defended by the marsh ground, and meaning not to stay long
there, took no great regard to stop the passage: but perceiving the
Bourguignons to make thither, the duke de Nemours ^od forward with certain
horsemen, thinking to stop their passage: but when he came to it he perceived
the same to be Henricke and The battle of (...). Quintines
Ericke, dukes of Brunswicke, each with 1000 horse, and after them followed the
earl of Horn with 1000 barbe horse, to relieve them, if need were,
accompanied wi^h the duke of Holst, and The names of the noblemen of France,
that were s^e and taken prisoners
wounded, and taken prisoner, with two of his sons, John duke of Aniou
(brother to the duke of Vandosme and the prince of Conde) the vicont of
Tou^aine, the son of la Roche du maine, and many other great lords slain.
Besides the constable, there were taken prisoners, the duke de Montpensier, the
marshall of S. Andrews, the duke de Longueuille, Lodwick prince of Mantua, the
lord of Vasse, the lord of Corten, the lord de la Roche du main, the Riengraue,
colonel of the duchess, all knights of the order; the earl of Rochefocault,
the lord of Abigni, the lord of Rochefort, Brian de la chapelle, Biron de S.
Heran, and diverse others: the duke de Neuers, the prince Philip, not long
after, when he came to the camp before S. Quintines, with great pomp,
accompanied with diverse English lords, where likewise the prisoners were showed
unto him. Amongst the Burguignons there was not many slain, only some few of
name amongst the which one was Lodwick van Brederode, that was smothered in his
armor, one of Ernest duke of Brunswicks brethren, two earls of Spiegelbergh,
and the earl of Waldeck.

They within the town of S. Quintines heard not of that overthrow, till it was
two days after, and yet were not discouraged therewith, but bravely defended
themselves, by the incoragement of the admiral, and monsieur Daudelot, his
brother, that showed themselves to be two brave and well experienced
soldiers, and got in about two hundredth men more into the town, after the
battle, so that they were in all above eight hundred horse and footmen. The
Caziers, a Spanyard, with Lazarus Zwendies soldiers; the second by captain
Nauasse, with his Spaniards, and the earl of Megen, with his Walons; the third
by captain Julian Romero, with three companies of Spaniards, and two thousand
Englishmen; the fourth by Carondo, with the Bourguignons: and by that means
the town being so furiously assailed, was presently entered S. Quintine won the
admiral of France with monsieur Daudelot, his brother, taken prisoners.
Alonzo du Cazierres and the duke of Sauoy, that caused the Spanyard that had
taken him prisoner, to lead him into his tent, and from thence he was sent to*
Antuerpe, where he lay six weeks after sick of a fever; and being healed,
(to comfort himself in his heaviness) he began to read the Bible, whereby
ever after he was inclined to the reformed religion. After that he was sent
unto Scluys, and there paying fifty thousand crowns ransom, he was set at
liberty Daudelot his brother, was likewise taken prisoner, but by night crept
under a tent, and so escaping away got to Han. With him likewise were taken the
lord of Iarnacke, the lord of Saint Remi, the lord of Humes, the lord de la
Guard, and many others. And after that the town was ransackt, and great part
of it burnt, from thence the king sent the earl of Arenbergh, with three
regiments of Dutch men, to besiege Chastelet, which was soon yielded unto him,
by the lord of Solignar: who afterward being in Paris, was for the same
committed prisoner; who made answer for his own excuse, That he had but
three hundred men therein, whereof the one half was either dead, or sore
wounded, by the battery of the canon, that brake the stones of the walls in
such sort, about the soldiers ears, that they had no means to defend
themselves, and that the place was too little to hide the soldiers in. Don
Ferdinando Gonsaga, an Italian, died in Brussels, being come with the king out
of the camp, an old experienced soldier, and esteemed to be the best soldier
in the king of Spaines army, and one that had done great service for the
emperor Charles. In the earldome of Burgondie, the lord of Poleville had
assembled eight or nine thousand men in the king of Spaines behalf, to invade
the territories Paul (doubting some further matter) began to hearken to an
agreement, and to that Peace made with the pope.
That the duke of Alua in the kings behalf, should do that homage and
submission, that a devout son is bound to do unto his holy father thereby to
obtain grace and pardon from him, and so doing the pope should receive him into
his favor again, and in regard thereof, the king should deliver the pope all
the towns he had taken from him, and the pope for his part should Anthony
Column, and Ascanius de le Cornia, only excepted.

The French army being newly gathered together under the duke of Guise,
determined to enterprise something against Calis, which was once before sought
to have been done by the admiral monsieur Chastillion, and then again
attempted by the marshall Strossy: and to that end, upon the first of January,
the duke of Guise came before it, and presently won the fort Calis taken by
(...) French me^
of Newlandbridge, a fort that stood in the way between Calis and Bullen, and
lay in a marsh ground: and likewise another fort, called Risebanke; and being
master of those two forts (the town having but few soldiers within it, which
by means of the taking of the two forts aforesaid, was narrowly beset, both by
water and by land) upon the fourth of January they battered Anthony Ager
captain of the castle, was slain: but the English men returning again (when
the flood came, and that they within the castle could not be aided by them that
were without, and for that there were but a few French men within the castle)
set valiantly upon the castle again, thinking to drive the French men out: but
by the lord of Daudelot, the duke of Aumale, and the marquis Dalboeuf, they
were expulsed: after that they sought by placing two or three great pieces of
ordnance upon the bridge of the castle, and by undermining to win the castle
Wentworth, governor of the town, with others of the principal commanders,
perceiving what danger the town was in, and that the castle was already won,
and they very weak, being not above 300 fighting men, and having want of many
things, and wholly without any hope of relief, by means of a great storm that
as then was at sea, the wind being North-east, whereby no man could come out of
England, whereby it seemed as if heaven and earth were against them, and held
with the French men; they thought good to parlie, and the rather for that they
durst not receive any of the king of Spaines soldiers out of Flanders into the
town (although such an offer was made) for that they were in suspicion, that
king Philip by that means would make himself master thereof: Poole, and two
or three bishops more, of the privy counsel, being then in great authority
in England (little knowing the situation of the place) making the queen and
the rest of her counsel believe that the king of Spaines reputation, the
common opinion of the strength of the place, and of the provision therein,
together with the short passage out of England thither to serve the same,
specially in regard that they were masters of the sea, would keep the French
men well enough from thence, as it after plainly appeared at the lord
Wentworthes arraignment, who being released of his imprisonment in France,
bravely cleared himself by law, which E. Demetrius.
I my self heard, showing what 1558
my lord Gray, an old soldier, with twelve or fourteen hundred English men,
Walons, and Spaniards, and Montdragon a valiant captain sent thither by king
Philip, where they Guynes won by the French men.
whereby they so battered the bulwarks, and other places, that they were easy
to be assaulted, which upon the twentieth of January, with great slaughter of
men on both sides, was done; at which time there was slain at the least four
or five hundred men: whereby the bulwarks being won, the lord Gray, with the
rest of the soldiers, got into the castle, where they began to parlie, and
agreed, That the soldiers should depart with bag and baggage, leaving their
ensigns, victuals, munition, and ordnance behind them, and the lord Gray, with
the rest of the captains, and gentlemen, to remain prisoners; which being
performed, the French men (finding the place to be unprofitable for them)
rased the castle: at which time also the strong castle of Hans was forsaken by
the English men. And by that means the English Mary much at the heart, that it
was after a great part of the cause of her death, which happened upon the 17 of
November after.

The French men also at the same time by force took the castle of Herbimont in
Ardennes: Mary queen of Scots married to the Dolphin of France.
And upon the four and twentieth of April the Dolphin of France married Mary
Steward, queen of Scotland, the only daughter of James the fifth, king of
Scotland: at which time the duchess of Lorraine first began to motion a peace
between both the kings. This duchess of Lorraine was the daughter of Christian
king of Denmark, and of one of the emperor Charles sisters.

This year died duke Maximilian of Burgonie, baron of Beueren, of le Vere,
lieutenant of Holland, Zeeland, Friseland, and Vtrecht, after whom succeeded
William van Nassau, prince of Orange. This year in Summer, the king of France
took up four or five thousand horse, and fourteen thousand footmen, under
the conduct of the duke of Lunenbourgh, the Grombacke, Risebergh, and one of
the Lantgraue of Hessens brethren, the footmen being commanded by the earl
of Rocquedolf, Reycrogh, and others; who being mustered in Lorraine, joined
with the dukes of Guise and Neuers, with their French men, and so besieged
Theonuille, otherwise called Diettenhold in Lutsenbergh, lying upon the river
of Moselle, wherein Peter Quarebbe (a gentleman of Louen) was governor, with
about eighteen hundred men: and upon the fifth of June began to batter it with
35 pecces of canons, the earl of Horn seeking by all the means he could to
get into it with a hundred men, but they were repulst. The mean time the French
men continued their shooting and mining, until they saw convenient time to
give an assault: whereby they within being much weakened, and having no
assurance of relief to be sent them, were forced to enter Theonuille won by
the French men.
Pidue Strossy, that was shot in his breast with a musket, as he stood speaking
with the duke of Guise, that leaned with his hand upon his shoulder. And so the
strong town of Theonuille was lost, which most men ascribed to the small
authority that the governor bare over the soldiers, as being but a mean
gentleman of Brabant.

While this was done in Lutsenburgh, the marshall de Terms governor of Calis,
had assembled certain soldiers out of diverse garrisons, and elsewhere, to the
number of 8000 foot, and Ha, where a number of contrymen were slain, that
thought to have intercepted his passage, and so went along by Graueling and
Borborgh, and from thence to Duynkerke, a town lying upon the sea, where he
planted his ordnance upon the downs, and so battered the same: and while the
burgesses were in parley about delivering over of the town, having Duynk^rke
wo^n by the ^nch men.
Philip being in Bruss^ls, and hearing of the spoil that the French men made
in Flanders, and in Lutsenburgh, assembled his soldiers from al parts, and
sent the duke of Sauoy general of his army, into the earldome of Namure,
there to resist the duke of Guise, and into Flanders the earl of Egmont, with
full power to take order for the safety of the country, before more forces
could join with the lord of Terms. With which charge the earl of Egmont drew
all the garrisons out of the places thereabouts, and with him had the lord of
Bingincourt, marshal of the field: and having other forces sent unto him out of
the duke of Sauoyes camp, he had in all eight or ten Don Henrico Henriques,
and he himself in the middle; the fourth troup were the Dutch swart Ruyters,
and the fi^th the Netherlanders, each under their own leaders: after them
followed the footmen, The battaileo^ Graueling in Flanders.
being Netherlanders, high Dutche, and Spaniards, led by their colonels,
Bingincourt, Manichuysen, Don Lewis de Carauagial, and others: and in this
order the earl of Egmont, upon the thirteenth of July, bravely set upon the
French men, first encouraging his soldiers, to make them the willinger to
fight.

The Frenchmen that stood resolutely ready to defend themselves, received them
with great courage, and at the first onset discharged their ordnance, therewith
doing very great hurt Malin, who perceiving the said battle from out the
sea, went with his smallest ships as near the strand as he could, and shot
many bullets troops of Dutch ruyters sidewayes, which went closely by the
downs, and entered on the Burgincourt, the marquis de Renti, the earl of Reux,
Don Henrico Henricques, the earl of Pontenels, the baron de Fontains, Don
Lewis de Caravag^al, with his Spaniards, and Manich^ysen with the Dutch men.
The French men much blamed the marshall de Terms, because Philip, and the
Bourguignons, showing by experience, that they were too good for the French men
in the field. And at that time Duynkerke and Winoxbergh were both taken again
from the French men. About this time Mary queen of England sent a great navy
of ships of war to sea, conducted by the lord Clinton, admiral of England,
and by reason of the contracts made between England and the Netherlands, as
also for that the queen of England at that time held a regiment of Dutch men
in the Netherlands, in her pay, under the conduct of an English gentleman,
called sir William Pickerin: they of the Netherlands sent twenty or twenty
two great ships of war, well appointed and furnished of all things, whereof
the admiral was monsieur van Wackene, and Capelle (viceadmirall to the earl
of Horn) and with him the lord of Cruningen, and other Netherlanders, with
many

In the month of August both the kings of Spain and France assembled their
powers, notwithstanding that the prince of Orange secretly parlyed with the
constable of France, and the marshall of Saint Andrews (as then prisoners)
concerning a peace. And upon the one Philip went unto his army, as then being
about Dorlens, being thirty thousand foot, and fourteen thousand horsemen,
amongst the which were many high Dutch, under the conduct of Ericke and Ernest
dukes of Brunswicke, the duke of Holst, the earls of Wartstenborgh, Mansfield,
Rennenbergh, and others: and besides Emanuel Philibert duke of Sauoy,
lieutenant general for the king, there was the duke of Parma and Plaisance,
the duke of Seminara, the prince of Sulmona, the duke of Arry, the earls of
Palicastro, Bagin, and Landi, and the lord Ascanio de Cornia: and of Spanish
noble men, there was the dukes of Alua, Arcos, Francauilla, and Vilhermosa, the
marquis of Balanga, and Aquillar, the earls of Fonsalida and Melito: of
Netherlanders, there was William van Nassaue, prince Lanioral earl of Egmont,
the duke of Arschot, the marquis of Bergen, and Renti, the earls of Horn,
Arenbergh, Bossu, Megen, Ligni, Teux, and Hooghstrate, the barons of Montigni,
Barlaymont, Glayon, and others. The king of France also had assembled a mighty
army about Pierrepont, most consisting of Dutch men, Swissers, and some
Italians; the Dutch men alone were 8000 horsemen: to the which army Henry
king of France, upon de Montpensier, the duke of Guise, (the kings lieutenant
general) the duke of Lorraine, Neuers, Nemours, Aumale, and Boullion, all
French men. The strangers were Hans William, duke of Saxon, second son to
Hans Frederick the elector, the duke of Lunenbourgh, one of the Lantgraue of
Hessens sons, the princes of Ferrara and Salerne, the duke of Somnia, and
diverse other marquesses, earls, and barons, which would be over long to
rehearse: and with this army marched to Amyens, and there past over the river
of Some, and encamped themselves not far from the Burguignons, that lay
strongly encamped along by the river of Authie, where many skirmishes were
given between both those armies: but the French men still remembering the two
overthrows that they had received not long before, lay strongly entrenched,
Rigomes de Silua, Anthony Perrenot bishop of Arras, and doctor Vigilius Swichem
president: and for the king of France, the cardinal of Lorraine, Annade
Montmorancy constable of France, Jacques de Albon marshall Andrews (that paying
ransom, were both released of their imprisonment) John de Moruilliers bishop
of Orleans, and Claude de Aubespine secretary, and with those deputies, as
allied on both sides, there sat the duchess of Lorraine, with her son the
young duke: the mean time, upon hope of a peace, both the kings began to
lessen their armies, and to separate them one from the other, and in the month
of November discharged diverse of their men. And while the deputies were in
treaty, and had almost agreed upon a marriage between the king of France his
eldest daughter, and Don Charles prince of Spain, and between the king of
France his sister, and the duke of Sauoy, and thought verily to fall to an
agreement, nothing wanting, but to content the queen of England, who by her
ambassadors much pressed them to have Calis restored unto her again, without
the which king Philip also Mary, the kings wife, died without issue, upon the
seventeenth of November, in the year 1558, after that she had reigned five
Mary queen of England died.
years and odd months, whereby the said peace was prolonged off, for the
space of two months after.

This year, upon the first of February, queen Elenor Dowager of France and
Portugal, died in Spain. And upon the 18 of October after, died Mary queen of
Hongary, that had been The death of queen ^enor and queen Mary, sist^rs to ^he
emperor Charles the 5.
regent in the Netherlands, and one that greatly esteemed of that country, who
unwillingly departed from thence, but yet would not seem to displease the
emperor her brother, that was in great care least she would have taken too
much upon her in the Netherlands, which might dislike the king his son,
whereunto such as were chief rulers under the king of Spain,

The emperor Charles the fifth likewise died the same year, upon the 21 of
September, being S. Mathews day, in the covent of S. Just, of a hot burning
fever, in the eight and fiftieth year The death of the emperor Charles the 5.
of his age, after he had been thirty six years emperor, and forty years
king of Spain. Some write, that when he lay in his death bed (by means of
some admonition given him by the archbishop of Toledo, or by that which he
before had heard in Germany) he acknowledged, that he hoped for his salvation,
only by the death and passion of our Savior Jesus Christ, and by no other
means, according to the opinion of the reformed Church. This emperor Charles
was a man of middle stature, well proportioned of body and limbs, fair
faced, high foreheaded, friendly of countenance, somewhat brown eyed, high
nosed, his mouth somewhat and in his aged days salt flegmaticke humors falling
into his pores, caused him to be mild, that Clement the seventh, the king of
France, Maurice, elector of Saxon, and other princes (that had made a contract
with the king of France) compelled not only to set the Landtgraue free, but
also to lose the fruits of his victory in Germany, as many hystories
sufficiently declare the same, He left issue by lady Isabell of Portugal, king
Philip his only son: daughters, Mary married to the Emperor Maximilian, and
Ioanna princess of Portugal, with more natural children, or bastards, as Don
John de Austria, and Marguerite duchess of Parma. And so king Philip in one
year lost his father, his wife, and his two aunts. In December after he
celebrated their funerals

In the same year and about that time there died two kings in Denmark, as
Christian then king, and Christierne, that had lain two and twenty years
prisoner, because of the tyranny that he had showed unto his subjects, being
nevertheless a mighty king of three kingdoms, as Denmark, Swethland, and
Norway; but he fell into such hatred of his people, that they forsook him, and
chose another king, and in Anno 1532, when with a great army, and by the aid
of the Emperor Charles, he thought to win Denmark again, he was by them
ouerthrown and taken prisoner: which was a wonderful work and punishment of
God showed upon Christian, where they forgave each other from their hearts.
This Christiern married Isabella, sister to the Emperor Charles the fifth, by
whom he had issue a son, that died in the Netherlands at the same time that
his father was taken prisoner; and two daughters, the one Palsgraueni, the
other called Christiana, that was duchess of Lorraine, and in Anno 1558 was a
mediator of the peace between France and Spain, whose son being duke of
Lorraine, married Claude, second daughter to the king of France, upon the last
of January 1559.

As I said before, the death of the queen of England prolonged the treaty of
peace between the kings of France and Spain, but in February after the
Commissioners on both sides assembled Treaty of peace between France and
Spain.
Howard baron of Effingham, Doctor Wotton, and the Deane of Canterbury: and
for the duke of Sauoy two deputies, and with all those the aforesaid duchess,
as mediator, with her son: and after some delays, at last they proceeded so
far, that there seemed nothing resting to be done, but only that the
Englishmen desired to have Callis restored again unto the queen; wherein king
Philip sought to have her satisfied and contented, or else he would accept of no
peace, because that during his wars, and by his means it had been lost: but
the Frenchmen boldly alleging, that queen Elizabeth was not lawful queen
of England, but the Scottish queen (as being right heir thereunto by descent
from the grandmother, king Henry the eights eldest sister) that as then had
married the Philip, and therefore thought it best for her to make an assured
peace with France: wherein on both Guido Caualcanti, a gentleman of Florence,
was specially employed; by whose means, upon the second of April 1559, an
agreement was made in the castle of Cambresis: and after much debating of the
cause, it was agreed, That Calis should be unwalled, and so delivered over unto
the queen; but in the end they concluded, That Calis and the Earldom of Oyen
should continue eight years in the French kings hands, and then should be
restored to the queen again, without any defacing, with all things that
belonged thereunto, only with sixteen brass pieces of diverse greatness, and
for assurance thereof, the French king should give six or seven sufficient
merchants for sureties of the same, which should be bound in the sum of five
hundred thousand crowns; and until such time (that the peace might not be
delayed) as those merchants should be committed prisoners in Bruges, there
should be

First, That a good peace should be holden between the said kings, their
children and subjects, Articles of the peace made at Cambresis.
and that the one might traffic and travel freely and peaceably in the
others countries and kingdoms: all customs of reprisals should be abolished,
all privileges confirmed, and either of them restored unto his own again.

That all the old treaties and contracts of peace should be renewed, and
confirmed, as far as that treaty did allow and permit.

That both the kings should with all earnest zeal hold and maintain the holy
Catholic Romish church and religion, and be a means that the general
counsel might be holden.

That the King of Spain should deliver S. Quintins, Han, and Chastelet to the
French king, and the king of France should deliver him Theonuille,
Marienbourgh, Iuois, Damuilliers, and Montmedi, and such as they had taken one
from the other, without breaking the fortifications, and each of them might
take his own Ordinance and munition out of the same again.

That Terrowane should be restored again without walls as it was, and Iuois on
the other side should be defaced, and should not be fortified again, nor any
fort made within a thousand paces thereof.

Hesdin and his territories, as old patrimony belonging to the king of Spain,
should be his,

The king of Spain should have the earldom of Charlorys restored to him
again.

Whatsoever both the kings possessed and held in Montferrat, should be restored
again to the duke of Mantua: Bouillon should be yielded to the bishop of
Luyck, the Island of Corsica to the Genouois, and Valencia in the dukedom of
Millan, to the king of Spain.

And as it was first propounded, that a marriage of the eldest daughter, lady
Elizabeth of France, should be made with Charles prince of Spain, to the end
that further friendship and unity might be had, it was agreed, That the king
of Spain himself should marry her (who as

That the duke of Sauoy should marry with lady Marguerite the king of France
his sister, and with her should have 300000 crowns, besides the duchy of
Berry, whereof she should receive

That the king of France should restore all the lands that he then withheld
from the said duke of Sauoy, except the town of Thierin, Pignoral, Chyras,
Over, and the new town of Asti, which he should hold in his hands for the
space of three years, until order should be taken about the right that he
pretended to have therein.

That the duke of Sauoy should remain as neuter on both sides. That the king
of Spain should keep Asti and Vercelles in his hands, until the king of
France did deliver the 5 towns of Piemont aforesaid unto the duke. He that
first should make delivery, should choose four persons out of the others for
sureties, and should keep them till the rest be performed.

That each king should comprehend his friends in that treaty of peace, as the
princes, potentates,

That the Dolphin of France, and Don Charles prince of Spain, and the states
of France and the Netherlands should confirm that peac^; only the king of
Spain would not consent to comprehend the Earls of East-Friseland in that
peace, whether it were for any cause of actions that he pretended against them,
or for the reformed religion.

That all the goods of the vassals of either king should be restored unto them
again, and amongst the rest, to William prince of Orange, to whom should be
freely delivered his principality of Orange, according to the contract made in
Anno 1551, and also his lands in Dauphinois, as Derpiere, Tresluys, Monbrison,
Curby, Parriewe, Nouois, Cay, Sauxcy, Vayrume, Beaurepair, and Auxonne, and
that he should have law for his pretense and title to the

That the bailiwike of Hesden should remain to king Philip, and the earldome
of S. Paul to the lady of Tonteuille, du^ches of Longeuille, excepting the
right of both the kings, the sovereignty remaining to the king of Spain:
touching the restitutions aforesaid, the K. of France offered to be the first,
choosing for sureties, the duke of Alua, the duke of Arcos, the prince of
Orange, and the earl of Egmont, which presently rid into France.

This peace was concluded as aforesaid in April, 1559, and subscribed by the
Commissioners aforesaid, as the duke of Alua, the prince of Orange, the prince
of Melito, Antony Perrenot, and president Vigilius: and on the other side, the
Cardinal of Lorrain, the Constable Montmorency, Andrews, Moruilliers, and
Aubespina secretary to the king. In this peace the French king delivered up
unto the king of Spain and the duke of Sauoy, 198 towns, castles, and forts,
that were held with garrison: whereupon Monsieur Mouluc, marshall of France,
writes, That it was the most shameful peace that France could ever have made.
It is to be noted that this lady Isabella, eldest daughter to the king of
France, was upon the 19 of July in an 1551 con^racted in marriage to Edward the
sixth, king of England, as then dead, upon condition, that when she was 12 years
of age, within a month after she should be conveyed into England, there to be
openly and solemnly married to the king upon forfeiture on both sides of 50000
crowns, with 200000 crowns to her marriage, and that if she out-liued him, to
have a dowry of 6666 l. 13 s. 4 d. yearly, as long as she lived, and that if
king Edward out-liued her, he should keep her

For the accomplishing of this contract of peace, the king of Spain gave the
duke of Alua and others full power to fulfill the ceremonies of the contract of
matrimony in Paris, for him and in his name with the lady Isabella, and at the
same time the duke of Sauoy rid thither with a great train to marry with the
kings sister, which was done with great triumphs, where there was a great
running at tilt appointed to be holden in Paris, wherein the king himself, the
duke de Nemours were chalengers against all comers. The king in the first and
second days ran bravely; and the third day, the queen fearing he would
ouer-labor and heat himself too much, or having a secret conceit of some
misfortune that might happen unto him, desired him to refrain from running that
day; but he would not: and the third day, when he had run two hours, and was
about to give over, he would needs show that he was not weary, and calling
Monsieur Lorges, earl of Montgomery, then captain of his guard, that was
esteemed to be one of the best runners at tilt in France, willed him to break
one lance more with him; who excused himself by the weariness of his horse,
and other things: but the king would not be denied; and so as they were running
one against the other, it fortuned, that Montgomery breaking his lance upon
the kings breast, the splinters Henry king of France sl^ine a^ a running at
(...).
horse sore bleeding, with great crying of all the court, and many of the
people; and being unarmed, and his wound visited by diverse expert surgeons
(whereof one was Andreas Vesalius, sent thither by king Philip) it was found to
be mortal, and altogether deadly; and yet by the great experience and policy
of the said surgeons, he lived ten days after, and died upon the tenth of
August 1554, at the age of forty years, and in the twelfth year of his reign,
at his death complaining of his own lightness, and also amongst other things,
that he had been ouer-rigorous against those of the reformed religion: but the
Cardinal of Lorraine told him, that it was the Henry left issue four sons
and three daughters; Isabella the eldest was then espoused to the king of
Spain, the second was duchess of Lorraine, and the third queen of Navarre:
Francis the eldest son was married to the queen of Scotland, and succeeded
his father; after him Charles, after him Henry, that was also king of Poland,
Francis the fourth son in Ann. 1582 was made duke of Brabant, all which died
without issue.

In K. Henry the seconds time two great sins reigned much in France, as
Atheism and Nigromancie, which was much imputed to the Italians, that were
attendants upon Q. Katherine de Medices, and thought to be they that brought it
in; wherein many French poets and rymers Anna du bourg prisoner, that openly
spoke unto the king in the parliament house to be favorable to those of the
reformed religion: for which cause the K. being fore moved, threatened him, that
he would duhourg was afterward burnt, notwithstanding the kings death. This
year in August, Pope Paul the fourth of the family of Caraffa, that was the
cause of breaking the peace, and had made war against the king of Spain, and
the first founder of the Jesuits, died in Rome, at such The death of Pope Paul
the fourth.
time as with all his kindred and sect he had undertaken and concluded to make a
great persecution (under pretense of religion) against all good persons. His
death gave many men cause to Minerua, because they were addicted unto the
Inquisitors, if by means of Marcus Antoniu^ Columna and Julius Caesarino it
had not been prevented: who by many fair words dissuaded them from it:
whereby also the Popes nephews and kindreds houses were likewise spared. The
Popes image standing in the Capitol, they beat down, and drawing it through
the streets, cast it into the river of Tyber, and commandment given in the
name of the counsel and people of Rome, upon pain of great punishment, that
all the Popes and his family of Caraffes, images, arms, shields, and titles,
should be broken down in Pius the fourth, his successor, although he had
promised Cardinal Caraffa, and the duke of Paliano his cousin and their
family, to forgive all offenses fore-past, and assured them thereof by his
hand writing, yet nevertheless he caused them all to be committed to prison,
and put some of them to death.

MARGVERITE OF AUSTRIA, DVTches of Parma, bastard daughter to the Emperor
Charles the fifth, Gouernesse of the Netherlands for king Philip.
MARGARITA AUSTRIA DVCISSA PARMAE BELG^ DIT^ P. HISPA. REG^ NOMINA GVEER.


Who ere he be that sees this picture in this book,
Upon the bastard daughter of The Emperor Charles does look:
That first was macht with one of the house of Medicis,
And afterward espoused in the stock of Farnesis:
And had a son that was a man of worthiness.
This bastard wholly gave her mind to craft and subtilnesse,
And with dissembling face did veil her bad and foul intent:
For while in Netherlands she had the government,
The gentlemen thereof she knew how to deceive,
And many men of good account in troubles great did leave:
But ere she saw the effect of her disloyalty,
Another had her government, and did the place supply.
MARGVERITE of Austria, bastard daughter to the Emperor Charles the fifth, was
first married to Alexander Medicis, the first duke of Florence, Octauio
Farnese, duke of Parma and Placence. Anthony Perrenot, Cardinal of Granuelle
(before bishop of Arras) caused her to be preferred to the government of the
Netherlands, before all the princes of Austria, sons to the Emperor
Ferdinand, and the duchess of Lorraine, niece to the Emperor Charles,
daughter to Christierne the second king of Denmark, and to the lady Isabella,
sister to these two Emperors, and so cousin germane to king Philip: The which
the said Cardinal, a great counselor and mignion, had labored, to the end,
that this lady Marguerite coming out of Italy, new and unacquainted with the
affairs and state of the Netherlands, The lady Marguerite advanced to the
government by the Cardinals means.


King Philip having now made peace with the king of France, determined to go
into Spain, there to aid the Inquisition, being certified, that certain
noblemen there were great favorers of the reformed Religion, and also from
thence the better to further the general counsel: Anthony Perrenot, bishop
of Arras (who not long after was made Cardinal of Granuelle, William van
Nassau, prince of Orange, Lamorale Degmont, prince of Gauare, and earl of
Egmont, Philip de Staden baron of Glayon, Charles baron de Barlamont, chief of
the Treasury, and doctor Vigilius president of the privy counsel. After that
Philip de Montmorency, earl of Horn, admiral, and Charles de Croye duke of
Arschot were joined with them. He appointed further, That the knights of the
order of the golden fleece being called thereunto by the lady regent, should
also be admitted to sit with them, and those also of the privy counsel and of
the treasury. He likewise gave them secret instruction, whereby they had
authority to sit in counsel, make enquiries, and hear causes, but should not
resolve upon any thing without the advice of the Cardinal, the prince of
Orange, the earl of Egmont, the baron of Barlamont, and the Vigilius. The
privy counsel consisted of twelve more or less doctors of the laws, and
each counsel had their secretary. He ordained a governor in every province,
that were knights of the order of the golden fleece: as in Brabant, the regent
had the chief charge, as general governor, being resident there: the prince
of Orange was governor of Holland, Zeeland and Vtrecht, and after that also of
the earldom of Burgundy: the earl of Egmont was governor of Flanders and
Artois: John de Ligni ca^le of Arenbergh was governor of Friseland, Ouerissel,
Groaning, and Lingen: Charles de Bunen earl of Megen, was governor of
Guelderland and Zutphen: Peter Darust earl of Mansfield, was governor of
Lutsenburg: John marquis of Berghen, was governor of Henault, Valencia, and
the castle of Camericke. The baron de Barlamont was governor of Namure: John de
Montmorency lord of Currieres, was governor Florence de Montmorency, brother to
the earl of Horn, was governor of Dornicke and Tournesis. These were all the
principal lords of the Netherlands, and had authority over the soldiers and
execution of justice. He also appointed the ordering and government of the
bands of ordinary horsemen unto those lords, that were three thousand horse
well mounted, and esteemed to be the best and brauest horsemen in Christendom,
Florents of Montigny, the marquis of Renti, and the earl of Hooghestrate, of
the house of Lalain.

The states of the land having behaved themselves so well toward their prince,
whereby he had attained to so honorable a peace, and the gentlemen in his
service having ventured both A petition m^de by the states to king Philip, to
send the Spaniards out of the Netherlands.
foreign soldiers out of the Netherlands; over the which soldiers, the
prince of Orange, the earl of Egmont, and the Earl of Horn were colonels.
Which their request he would gladly have denied them, but for that they
earnestly alleged all their privileges, and showed him the copy thereof, and
what he had promised and sworn, and to the contrary must have been forced to
protest against him, he was content to grant, that they should depart out of
the country within three months after; but it fell not out in half a year at
the least, when he had great need of them about the loss of the Island of
Zerby in Barbary. The cause why the states were so earnest to have the
Spaniards out of the country, was, for that many courtiers (wholly depending

This pretense of these counselors and the Spanish hatred was at the same time
sufficiently made known unto the greatest personages of the Netherlands; and
that it was resolved, that the authors of the petition (touching the departure
and withdrawing of the Spaniards) should be well punished: and namely, a
Spanish counselor (that bare a good affection unto the nobility of the
Catholic religion, and punishment of heretics, and went to Zeeland, where
King Philip (...) from Vlish^g into Spain.
hulkes, and 40 other ships, and with a good wind in few days landed at
Lacedo in Biscaye, where presently the wind changed.

The counsel of Spain thought his return into those countries to be very
necessary, in regard that the Lutherans began greatly to increase within the
land: for the which cause, presently upon his arrival in Spain, he caused
great and rigorous execution to be done, not only upon men, but also upon
women, and with great and solemn pomp and ceremonies burnt

This year in January, Isabella the French kings daughter was brought to the
frontiers of France by the king of Navarre and the Cardinal of Bourbon in
great magnificence; where she was received at Rouceaulx by the Cardinal of
Burgos and the duke of Infantasgo, and by them conveyed into Castilia to the
king, and upon the 31 of January, with great pomp and solemnity, she was
married unto him; where it is said, that during the feast it cost the king two
thousand ducats every day: and not long after, prince Charles (the kings only
son) was openly proclaimed and declared to be heir apparent unto all the
kingdoms and dominions, Amman van Brussels, duke of Lockeghem (a great
furtherer of this worthy work) was for the same much commended, and praised of
all the people.

This year upon the sixteenth of October king Philip erected an University in
Doway, and Charles, in Anno 1530 hindered and stayed the erecting thereof: but
at this time (without the knowledge of Louen or of the townsmen of Doway it
self, by the procurement of Cardinal Granuelle, president Vigilius, and the
counselor Nigri) it was by the king strongly granted, and confirmed by Pope
Paul the fourth. The reasons the king had to move him thereunto, were, That
youth might there (to the furtherance of the Catholic religion) be instructed
and brought up in learning, and there likewise learn the French tongue,
without going to the Universities of France, which were suspected and reported
to be spotted and full of the Geneuan sect. The towns of Brabant murmured much
against it; and generally all the Brabanders: the prince of Orange saying, That
no Popish Seminaries ought to be erected in any of the frontier towns, as
Florentius vander Haer writes. The first rector thereof was Master Walrant
Hangovaert, chancellor, provost of S. Annes. The king about the same time also
caused the great Bible, called Complutensis, to be The Bible called
Complutensis, printed in Antuerpe at the costs and charges of K. Philip.
printed by the famous Printer Christopher Plantine, to the printing whereof
he gave thirty thousand ducats; and for that cause it was called the kings
Bible: whereof the learned doctor Arias Montanus had the charge to see it done;
who much enriched the same by many annotations in the margent: a worthy,
great, and an honorable work, and a worthy action of so great a prince,
being a Bible in four languages, and mother (as it were) of all other Bibles.

For that our intent is to declare and set down the original of the troubles
that happened in A brief declaration of the privileges of Brabant
and Dalem (amongst many other joyful entries, additions, charters, and golden
bulls) have

First, That the duke of Brabant shall be unto them a good and faithful lord,
and shall not use any force nor violence against them, neither permit nor
suffer the same to be done unto them by any means whatsoever.

That he shall not deal nor cause them to be dealt withal, contrary to the
ancient customs, but shall use them according to the customs and privileges
of their towns and territories; where the party accused may by his counsel
openly and freely plead and speak for himself.

That the inhabitants of the said country shall not be subject to any other
Spiritual Jurisdiction, than that of the two bishops of Cambricke and Luyck,
who, each man severally in his quarter, may take knowledge, and enquire only
of three several things, as of contracts of

That they may not raise nor augment the spiritual state, without consent of
the nobility and the towns, and may not alter nor change the state of the
land.

That he may not ordain nor appoint any officers in the country, but such as
are naturally borne Braband^rs, and such as are lawfully borne, and not
bastards, unless it be in some small offices of little worth.

That those officers must swear to be true and faithful to the duke and the
land.

That he must not undertake nor make no war, nor banding, nor cause the same
to be done

That he may not assemble the states of the country out of their own
territories, neither are they bound to determine any thing out of the same: and
that they may assemble together at all times when they will.

That he may not cause any man to be committed to prison, without information
first had from the magistrate of the place, and no prisoner may be carried out
of the country.

That he may stamp no money, but by the counsel, will, and consent of the
states, and such like things.

That he may not give nor grant any pardon for killing of a man, before the
parties grieved

And that if he does or causes any thing to be done, contrary to the said
privileges or charters, that then the vassals and subjects of the same are and
shall be discharged of all oaths of says and fidelity, and from all duty and
obedience, unless he make satisfaction and amends therein, and do recall and
leave off such abuse, and that they do accept of him and his government again:
as you may read at large in the said printed book of privileges.

Many such like privileges and charters the other provinces do challenge and
claim to be given and granted them by contract made with Maximilian king of
Romans, upon the 16 of

By these freedoms and privileges, most part of the provinces in the
Netherlands have bin ruled and governed for the space of five hundred years
together, and there is not almost

But as many heads or rulers cannot defend and preserve that which belongs
unto them, so well as one alone, that has good, well devised, and politic
means; therefore necessity compelled them to choose and appoint amongst them a
certain small number of fit persons, to whom they gave the commission, charge,
and care to uphold and maintain their privileges, and they in that behalf
were called by the names of the States, and by that means the people were
divided into three parts or members of the Commonwealth, as Spirituality,
Nobility, and citizens or townsmen: and those protectors of their said
privileges were called (being so Aristocratique, or paucorum potentia; wherein
notwithstanding the superior lords and princes governing well and wisely
according to their privileges, may use great authority, and do whatsoever
they will, so it be well done: but doing the contrary, they are to be ordered
by the States, and the States by the commons, that are divided into
handicrafts, guilds, and fellowships, which are ruled by their masters and
wardens, whereby some men call it a mixed or composed government.

The Netherlanders get their livings most part by handiworks, marchandises, and
seafaring, and that vprightlier and trulier than any other Nation, being
compared together (as all Nations generally and usually report of them) being a
people much addicted to labor and getting

For the meaner sort of gentlemen, there are not many in the same: for that in
regard that

And for that there are no great number of mean gentlemen in the said
provinces, their lords or princes (tyrannously addicted) could not well brook
their subjects, but were forced to deal ciuilely. And it has many times
happened and fallen out, that the lords and The lib^ralitie of the Netherla^d^s
to their lords and princes.
and were the causes to procure great and special friendship between the said
princes and their subjects: but their successors forgetting those former
favors and forepassed good deeds, were by those conditions, charters, or
privileges put in mind thereof, by the old or chief magistrates, states,
counselors, and officers, who, every man entering into their offices,

These great authorities and privileges of the provinces and states, did
commonly much dislike the great and mightiest princes ruling over them; and
amongst the rest, duke Philip the Good, and his son duke Charles the
Valorous, which sought and intended to have cut off and bridled the same: but
to effect it, the goodness of the one, and the great troubles and business of
the other, hindered their intents: whereunto there wanted no flatterers nor
prouokers, which told and made them believe, that they were not bound to any
such privileges, and that their predecessors could not so strictly bind their
successors, and especially to that, which they pretended to show might be
hurtful unto the subjects themselves. But to the contrary, there is a custom
used in the said Netherlands, That they never acknowledge nor will install any
of their superior lords and princes, before he personally swears, to hold and
maintain Maximilian of Austria sped in his high minded enterprises concerning
this matter (under couerture and pretense of the protectorship of his son
Philip) we have already showed.

The like coffeehouse did the Emperor Charles evidently show in Anno 1539,
touching The emperor Charles thought to have reduced the Netherlands all into
one kingdom.
them of Gaunt, determining to cut off their privileges, which at that time
fell not out as he desired, by means of certain persons that withstood him;
for the which he punished many of them grievously: and for that cause coming
through France out of Spain, he intended to reduce all the provinces in the
Netherlands under one kingdom (which is called an absolute of his son king
Philip, which he intending to do by the greedy and covetous desires of his
Under pretense of religion othermeans were sought to take the privileges of
the Netherlands from them.
anno 1576, whereby he declared all their freedoms and privileges, to be
forfeited and lost, troubling and molesting the people thereby, to move them to
make certain rebellions, and to rise up in arms, and so to have just cause to
dislike them, and by that means to enterprise that which he intended to do.

The emperor Charles in anno 1521 (not respecting these privileges and
freedoms of the Netherlands, and without the consent of the states of the said
countries) at such time as Martin Luther first began to preach and teach
against the pope and his doctrine, did for the advancement of the Romish
Catholic religion, and thereby to root up and extirpe the said Luthers
doctrine out of the Netherlands, sent forth most rigorous and cruel
proclamations and commandments, generally against all sects and kinds of
Religion, which were almost yearly renewed, and to the end, that not only the
states of the land (that were not summoned nor called to the making thereof)
but also the common people, should not dislike nor think amiss thereof, the
said proclamations were grounded upon pretense of punishing the wicked
practices and

By force of these proclamations, no man might have, buy, give, bear, read,
communicate, nor dispute of the doctrine, writings, or books, made by Martin
Luther, Wicklife, Swinglius, Melancthon, and such like, in any language
whatsoever; nor yet confer nor dispute with any man,

By force, power, and authority of these proclamations, there were in Charles
the emperors disallowed of the said doctrine: and priests and monks which (to
avoid fornication) had married

This manner of proceeding seemed over rigorous and cruel unto the Netherlands,
and clean contrary to the privileges, rights, and freedoms of the same, who
in that point ought not to have been subject to any spiritual jurisdiction:
and the rather, because the number of the said Lutherans, Protestants, or
reformed religious persons (as then so termed) were much augmented and
increased in the Netherlands, because their neighbors held and accounted them,
and Charles the 5, in anno 1550, would have brought the Inquisition into the
Netherlands. The said provinces, and above all Brabant, and specially the town
of Antuerpe, were against it, esteeming it to be the only way to drive all
foreign merchants from thence: and by means thereof they got Mary queen of
Hungary, the regent (in love and favor of the Netherlands) to ride personally
(to the assembly of the princes of Germany at Ausburg) unto the emperor her
brother, The Inqu^tion not suffered to proceed in the Netherla^ds* oy means of
Mary queen of Hungary.
showing him by word of mouth the estate and manner of the land, and there
obtained a kind of moderation of the proclamation for religion, and that the
Inquisition should not proceed. Philip his son, to whom (although a certain
form of Inquisition was in his time used in Flanders) they contributed toward
his wars in France (although the said wars proceeded not upon any occasion
concerning the Netherlands) many millions of gulderns, in the space of 9
years. We have before made mention in diverse places of the numbers of them
that made profession of the reformed religion, the which increased daily both
in Germany and the Netherlands, notwithstanding the kings rigorous edicts, made
by the persuasion Inquisitors of the Faith made
that not any one should read or keep in his house, any book mentioned in the
edict, containing a catalogue of all the forbidden books; and that no man
should dispute of the Romish religion, to contradict it in any sort. For the
execution whereof they began to appoint throughout all the Netherlands, such
like Inquisitors, with ample commission and absolute authority in that respect;
notwithstanding the promises which the king of Spain had made, no to charge
his subjects with any such a burden and intolerable yoke. The promise being
understood by they resolved therefore so to disguise this business, as they
would not doubt to bring it to the Francis Sonnius, a divine of Louuaine, at
the instance of cardinal Granuelle and his ministers of the Inquisition, was
sent to pope Paul the 4, to give him to understand, that the Netherlands were
within these few years greatly augmented and enriched in people and wealth: and
that the diocesses of bishoprics, had such large limits and ample
jurisdictions, as it was not possible for the bishops, being so few, to have a
fit care of their flock, with other such like informations: for the which the
pope, as supreme pastor, should be entreated to provide; after that he had
represented Sonnius being at Rome, furnished with instructions and directions
from cardinal Granuelle, he entreated that it would please his holiness, to
cut off that which did exceed in great and ancient bishoprics, and to divide
it among new, the which he should erect in diverse places of the said countries,
whereas there had never been any, fitting every one to the natural language of
the country: and to supply the want of entertainment of the new bishops, he
should appropriat and incorporat unto their bishoprics, not the least, but the
richest and most sufficient abbeys, priories, prouostships, and other good
benefices. The pope consented easily, the 19 of March 1559, and granted this
request of the Inquisitors and private clergy men of the Netherlands, Vigilius
Aita of Zuychem, president of the counsel of state, being a widower, retained
for his part the bishopric of Gand, with the prouostship of S. Bauon. The
chancellor Nigry, a high Bernard. Doctor Sonnius had Boisleduke, with the abbey
of Tongrelo. Martinu^ Rithonius had Ypre, with the abbey of S. Martin. Claude
of Americort, before abbot of S. Bertin had S Omer, with the prouostship of
Watenes. Petrus Druthius, had Bruges, with the prouostship of S. Donas. Anthony
Hanet, a Iacobin of Arras, had Namur, with the tithes and Monasteries of the
same county. Nicholas van N^eulands, or Noua terra, had Harlem, with the abbey
of Nicholas of Castro, had Middelbourg, with the abbey of S. Peter in Zeeland.
Cunnerus Petr^ had Leeuwaerden, with the abbey of Ma^iengaerden and Lidden.
James Ruiff had Groningen, with Golswaert. Guliel^us Damasi Lin^anus had
Ruremonde, with the regulers. Frie^ Giles vander Bergh, a Franciscan, had
Deuenter, with the Prouostship of S. Lievin. Behold how all these new
bishoprics were distributed, and enriched with the best spiritual livings of
the country; the collation and presentation whereof, should belong unto the
king of Spain, and the confirmation unto the pope. It was also decreed* that
there should be nine prebendaries, three for learned divines, three for doctors
of the civil law, and three for the canon, upon condition, that they should do
their duties, and yield all assistance to the bishops, in the execution of the
Inquisition.

Before we pass any farther, for that we have much to speak of cardinal
Granuelle, whom The li^ of card^l (...)
many have held to be the author, aduancer, and nourisher of the troubles of
the Netherlands, you must understand, that he was called Anthony Perrenot, his
grandfather (for farther it is not known) was a smith at Noze^oy, a town in
Bourgoigne, whose name is supp^est, for that it His ^randfather.
was of so base a style. His father was Nicholas Perrenot (who first took upon
him the name of Granuelle, of a seigniorie which he had bought) having been
first a simple clearke, and afterward H^s father.
a subtle and (...) attorney, following the court of parliament at Dole, who
for his quick wit, by the recommendation of the chancellor of Bourgoigne, was
advanced to be secretary to the lady Marguerite dowager of Sauoy, aunt to the
emperor Charles these, whereas he carried himself so well, as after the death of
the said chancellor, he came to serve the emperor, not ^is (...) to have the
king (...) of ^s counsel.
himself in this absolute credit; for he had so managed the kings affairs,
and with such dexterity, as he had always great need of him, for the
direction thereof, the which he continued or surceased, advanced or recoyled, as
he thought good. And moreover, he had a free power That she should grant no
pardon, office, estate, benefice, nor any thing else, nor make any dispatch nor
resolution in matters of state justice, nor religion but with the cardinals
advice and counsel, which she should wholly follow: Having given the king
secretly to understand, that yet she had not knowledge of affairs, and
therefore she might be often abused and err And. so he held the duchess of
Parma subject to his will, who durst not but gratify him in any thing that he
pl^ased, so as she would not meddle nor take knowledge of the quarrel the
noblemen had against him a little before his departure. And he had so won her
by his policies, as she not only made wonderful great esteem of him, but did
also advertise the king by her letters, of his deep knowledge, wisdom,
dexterity, diligence, and loyalty, in all that did concern the government of
those countries How he prevented the envy of the cou^
in court, those only that were his creatures, and assured unto him by long
experience, to frustrat them that he desired not. And such as he advanced, he
knew to be tractable, or rather simple and gross witted: for they that were
cunning, how wise and grave soever, must not attend any thing, fearing least
they should discover his policy. Being preferred, he drew them wholly by these
means to be at his devotion, and to bind them more strictly, he made them (as
some said) to take an oath to be faithful and secret unto him. Thus he
fashioned them to his own mould, some for hope of gain, others through
ambition to be great, or for fear to displease Vigilius Aita was the chief,
whom he had advanced to be keeper of the seals (though they were at his
disposition) so as al matters were resolved on and determined by them two. The
gain and spoils of miserable suitors, was divided equally betwixt them,
according to the register, which their careful broker Morillon kept. The
cardinal sent all matters to Vigilius, and he did nothing but what it pleased
him to command, were it to answer petitions, to write unto the king, or to
move the gouernesse, and therefore he had made him president of the privy
counsel, that he might have him always ready and obedient unto him in that
charge. Besides this league with Vigilius, he had intelligence with some of the
chief of the treasure, of the chamber of accounts, of the great counsel at
Macklyn, and of all other provinces, yea with some magistrates of towns, to the
end he might leave nothing out of his power. Barlamont, a counselor of state,
as himself, and besides chief of the treasure; who being by nature covetous
and ambitious, had many children, whom he desired also to advance, wherein the
cardinal might cross him: so as the earl of Aremberg, his brother in law,
consented with him, but yet so, as he would not loose the friendship of the
other noble men of the contrary faction. The duke of Arschot followed them in
this rank, and the marquis of Renty, his brother, did accompany him. He had
many prelates at his devotion, Francis Richardot, bishop of Arras, was his
creature, and all the new bishops which he had lately forged, but above all,
the archbishop of Cambray. But omitting a long discourse of the subtilties and
The cardinal^ private life.
per fas vel nefas, without any respect, neither of his princes service, the
commonweal, justice, good order, no nor yet of religion, the which served him
as a cloak with a double lining, when as in heart he was a very Atheist. We
will come to his private life, and consider in particular how dissolute,
lascivious, and detestable it has been, even to his old age, we shall find
nothing but villainy, filthiness, infamy, and the most polluted, stinking,
and abominable vices, that ever were written of any other. His luxury,
adulteries, insupportable pride, with his other goodly virtues His adultery and
luxury.
and like perfections of body and mind, made him to be chased out of Milan,
Rome, and Naples, and yet it did nothing impair his credit in the court of
Spain; so as whilst he labored to torment the Netherlands by his letters and
instructions, he purchased (to his great dishonor,

Du Cardinal la braguette,
A fait per dre la Golette. The Cardinals codpisse,
Has made the king Golette miss.


His life was so dissolute and so public, as his house was a sink of all
filthiness and villainy. And as he was a great enemy to them that beat down
images, it seemed he had some cause; for he made so great account of them, as
in all parts of his house (under color that he was a great lover of the art
of Statuary, or making of images, and of rare and antike pieces) there were to
be Venus, Pallas, Juno, Ceres, etc. he had drawn naked, and to the life, the
best qualified ladies, gentlewomen, and good bourgesses, which he had abused.
Of the sumptuousnes of his lodging, his delicat meats and his prouocations to
luxury, there is nothing spoken, for that His enchantments and witchcr^t.
curious of the works of nature, and of the Mathematikes, he did honestly cloak
his coniuring, wherein he was his crafts master, with the which he mingled
witchcraft, sorcerie, and poisoning, the which he could use cunningly, having
given a dram of his drugs, by his masters commandment, unto that good prince
Maximiltan the 2, when as he was but king of Romans, as the said cardinal
confessed unto his friends, but he durst not publish it, fearing the cruelty of
his master. And afterward he posted from Naples to Rome, to poison that young
nobleman of great hope, Charles the prince of Cleues, only for that he made a
little difficulty to kiss the popes pantofle. And this reverent robber (I
would say pillar) of the church, showed himself so zealous of the word of God,
as ordinarily he made a jest of it; as when he Magnificat: Esurientes impleuit
bouis, and diuites His contempt of the word of God.
dimisit in aues, perverting the words of bonis and inanes.

Behold what our cardinal of Granuelle was, what his life, and by what manner
of man the Netherlands have been governed, the nobility disgraced, the
subjects pilled and ruined, and the troubles raised, by whom the king suffered
himself to be abused and misled, to the spoil of his subjects, and the
desolation of his countries. Such an one was he, who called himself the prop
and supporter of the Romish church. I protest here, that what I have said, is
not to tear his bones out of his grave, nor in malice of his prosperity and
greatness, and much less to detract from him or his race, whose remainder I
would wish they might hereafter grow in all

These creations of new bishops, and incorporations of the best benefices,
ministered matter of murmr and discontent to many of all qualities; as an
innovation brought in without the consent of the states and towns, every one
speaking according to his passions, yet truly. And although they did their best
endeauours to install them in their bishoprics, and to mortify this fear
and opinion of the people: yet could they never satisfy their minds, nor yet
the Estates, Governors, Magistrates, and Officers of towns and provinces in
general: who were Granuelle, Vigilius and Nigry: so as they had reason to
doubt that they would circumuent them, and covertly entrap them with the
inquisition of Spain: And that which did the more increase this fear and
apprehension; in court they had no good audience given them, and small hope of
redress for any griefs or complaints that they could make: but contrariwise
they did perceive that they meant to proceed, using all the practices they
could.

Hereupon the earl of Horn, admiral of the Netherlands, thinking to do the
king a grateful and French nations, in the midst whereof the Netherlands did
lie, who should not be

During this perplexity of the people, for the innovation of new bishops
(which made the The clergy at debate for the new bishops.
clergy odious to all men) the prelates themselves, and other churchmen, did
not agree: for the ancient archbishops and bishops, whose jurisdictions and
preheminences they did restrain and Bernard, and Affleghem (whose abbots were
lately deceased) did most repine: for notwithstanding all the pursuit they made
in court, they could not be admitted to choose new abbots, according to the
ancient customs and privileges

The magistrate of Antuerpe was in the mean time in great perplexity, by
reason of the cessation of traffic, and other inconveniences which they
feared, doubting also that the reception of a bishop, would bring in with it
the Inquisition of Spain. On the one side they were importuned by the commons
to maintain them in their privileges, liberties, and rights: and on Godfrey
Sterck Ampiman of the town, and the seigniors of V^ssel and Wezebeeck, into
Spain (under pretext of some other affairs, least their passage Deputies sent
from Antu^rpe to the king of Sp^ne, touching the bishops
by writing, the same answer was made unto them, that before, as well by mouth,
as afterward by writing. Whereupon the said deputies showed unto the K. that
the people murmured, that by the popes bulls the Inquisition lay hidden under
this episcopal introduction, and that they could not otherwise persuade the
merchants, both natural borne, and strangers, whereon undoubtedly depended the
total ruin of this rich and flourishing town; with many other reasons to that
purpose: beseeching his Majesty to give them leave to stay so long in his
court, until they might understand their minds, to see if there were any
means to satisfy his Majesty's intention, and to maintain the town in her
estate, the which was granted them: Granuelle) would have all things pass
according to their own private passions, yielding nothing to the counsel of
others. It was therefore decreed in the said counsel, by the Gouernesse and
noblemen, that one of the knights of the order should The lord of Mon^ sent ^to
Spain.
to which resolution, the baron of Montigny, went into Spain, in August 1562,
where having exposed his charge unto the king, and had diverse conferences with
his Majesty, touching these affairs, some months after he returned, full of
hope, good words, and promises. But matters continued still in these
innouations, contrary to the advice of the chief lords, who were also much
discontented; so as in the end the prince of Orange, with the earls of Eg^ont
1563
and Horn, w^t unto the king, the 11 of March 1563; That the chief cause of
all the mischief Letters of compl^int vnt^ (...) ^g, ag^ the cardinal.
was, for the excessive credit, and too great authority, which the cardinal
Granuelle did arrogat unto himself in the managing of the affairs of the
Netherlands, the which should never be to his Majesty's content, and as he
desired, so long as the cardinal should have to do in it, for that he of the
counsel of state, if his Ma. thought it good, holding it neither fit nor
convenient for his Ma. service, nor for their reputations, to continue any
longer there so discontented as they

Whereunto the king answered them the 6 of June; That he was well assured, that
what they The kings answer.
did advertise him by their letters, proceeded from a good zeal and affection
which they bare unto his service, whereof he had long since made good trial:
but it was not his custom to change his servants without good reason, seeing
that by their letters they did not set down any particular occasions, etc.
Whereunto the noblemen replied the 29 of June; That their intention was not to
frame any action before his Ma. against the cardinal, but they did hope that
the The noblemens reply.


Notwithstanding al these admonitions, nothing followed: and as the practices
of the clergy did grow more and more odious, so the number of the Protestants
increased daily, notwithstanding al their persecutions, the which in the end
were so abhorred of all the world, as they might easily perceive, that this
fear of bishops and Inquisition, nor the rigor of their edicts, was no longer
to be endured. And then brake out openly the division betwixt the nobles (which
had lain long smothered) having the chief government of the affairs of the
country: for that they which would govern all alone (whereof the cardinal was
chief) could not endure that the princes and knights of the order, being with
them in the counsel of state, should propound any mildness or moderation of
affairs, to the kings content, and the preservation of the commonweal,
Armenteros unto the king; at whose return the cardinal (being called away)
went into Spain; where being resident, if he ever did bad office in the The
cardinal called back into Spain.
now much worse, interpreting all things to the worst construction. In the
mean time the persecutions ceased not throughout all the country, against
them of the religion, but were more violent than ever, not without great danger
to the magistrates and officers of justice, during the time they did their
public executions; at which times the people did commonly mutine, casting The
p^ution o^ (...) ^ster.
of C. Fabr^, a minister in Antuerpe, having bin in former times a Carmelite,
he was betrayed by a certain woman, who made a show to bear a great zeal unto
religion; having ^dured long imprisonment, and many miseries, in the end he was
condemned to be burnt alive. And as the Marcgraue, with the bailife his
lieutenant, having brought him to the place, went to execute him: the people
having first song Psalms, fell to casting of stones against the executioner,
and his servant: neither was the Marcgraue nor his lieutenant free from touch,
notwithstanding any help they called for of the burgesses and the sworn
companies, who would not stir; so as the poor patient being bound, and fire
beginning to be set to, the Marcgraue and his lieutenant, not daring to stay
any longer, fled into the state-house, and so did the executioner, who yet by
the lieutenants commandment, before he leapt from the scaffold to save
himself, stroke Fabri on the head with a hammer, and beat out his brains, and
stabd him in the back with a dagger: so as the people running to preserve him
from the fire, found him dead, and there the dead body lay in the mire until
4 of the clock in the afternoon, that the Marcgraue with his gua^d, having put
him into a tumbrell, seeing the great multitude of people which followed him,
he caused a great stone to be tied about the dead bodies neck, and to be cast
into the river of Escaut. Afterward, some being rescued out of their hands by
force, for a time they durst not execute any one publicly, but in the prisons,
either by the sword, halter, water, or other torments, til after the coming of
the duke of Alua; then the persecutions began to be done publicly, and greater
than ever. The Winter after Christmas grew extreme cold, and the ^rosts 1564
laden, from Antuerpe unto Flanders side, upon the river of Escaut; upon the
which they did set up shops, tents, and pauilions, in the which they sold meat
and drink; yea there were hogs singed upon the y^e. The rivers of Rhin, Meuse,
Wahal, Leck, and others, were past over every where, both with horse and cart,
yea upon the sea, from the islands of Tolen and of Goes, unto the said river of
Antuerpe. About the same season there grew some question and mistaking betwixt
the queen of England* and the duchess of Parma, Gouernesse of the Netherlands,
from the year 1563, by reason whereof the commerce was interrupted, and the
traffic did cease for Difference betwixt England and the Netherlands.
one whole year, to the great prejudice of the poor people, the which did more
increase the alterations and discontentments of the commons, being sufficiently
moved by the precedent occasions.

The prelates of Brabant, and namely the 3 chief abbeys above mentioned,
appointed to incorporation, and being destitute of abbots, seeing that by no
suit nor soliciting, neither in Spain, king, to the profit of the new bishops;
so as not only the said three abbeys but the rest that were afterward void,
were furnished with new prelates, and freed from incorporation, upon promise

And at that time some thieves having spoiled the abbey of Ouwerghem, a league
from The abbey of Ouwerg^m ^obd.
Brussels, seeing they could not get the abbess nor her nuns, who had saved
themselves in a strong dortoir, newly made: after they had let go the wine and
beer in the cau^s, and burnt all the ornaments and books of the church, they
set fire on the cloister; and hearing the bell ring out to call in the country,
they retired laden with the b^st goods they could ca^ away. The brute was, that
these thieves were set on by some, who would lay the blame upon them of the The
earl of Egmont sent into Spain.
had this legation, wherein he discharged himself honestly, and was sent back
with good hope and promises, that his Majesty, conformable to his
instructions, would send dispatches after him. At his return every man
rejoiced at so good an answer, expecting with great devotion, that by the first
pa^ket that came from Spain, the country should be quieted and assured: but
there came not any thing, all were but promises and holy water of the court;
and this hope was the occasion of a miserable despair. How could any good
come, seeing the cardinal, a mortal enemy to the said earl of Egmont, to the
prince of Orange, the earls of Horn and Hochstraten, 1565
But contrary to that good reformation which they hoped for and expected, in
December The kings letters, other than were expected.
1565, the duchess Gouernesse, received letters from the king, concerning his
Majesty's pleasure, and what he would have observed in the Netherlands,
touching religion: the copy of which letters she sent to all the counselors
of provinces, to disperse them in their subalternall jurisdictions, containing
in sum these three points.

First touching the edicts, both old and new, made by his imperial Majesty, or
by the king, for Execution of the edicts.
found that by the looseness of some judges this mischief was increased:
therefore if there were any judge, that for fear of tumult durst not put the^ in
execution, that they should advertise him, to the end he might provide others
that were more coragious; and that in executing the edicts, it was to be hoped,
that all dangers should be sooner prevented, than by any other means.
Secondly, Introduction of the Inquisition.
in the exercise of their charge, for the good of religion, being his
intention, that the Inquisition should be put in practice by the Inquisitors,
as it had been used, and belonged unto them by the laws of God and man.
Thirdly, in regard of the counsel of Trent, seeing there remained nothing, but
to put it in effect by the bishops; that the Gouernesse should give them all
assistance To put the cou^ll of Tre^t in pra^e.
and aid, for the effecting thereof, as it was fit, and the good of the
country required, and that she should give the like charge unto the noblemen
that were about her, to employ themselves therein, as his Majesty did hope.
This was another song than that which was promised, and that they expected with
so great devotion.

The Gouernesse did accompany the kings letters (out of the which these three
articles are drawn) with her own, directed to the governors and consuls of
provinces, as follows.

Marguerite by the grace of God, duchess of Parma and Placence, etc. Regent
and Gouernesse, The Gouernesse s^ters to the (...).
etc. Most decre and well beloved, although that from the beginning of the rule
of the king my lord over these countries, as well by the renewing and
publication of edicts, made by the deceased emperor Charles, my lord of famous
memory, touching religion, ratified and confirmed by his royal Majesty, as by
those which have been since enacted by him, yea at his last departure out of
these countries, for his realms of Spain; you might always see his Majesty's
good zeal and holy affection, to the preservation of our ancient true faith,
and Catholic Religion, and to the rooting out of all sects and heresies, in
these his countries. Yet as it has pleased his Majesty, for some certain
occasions, to put us in mind of his holy intention, by his last letters, we
have by his express charge thought it good, to represent unto you what he has
Margareta:

The prince of Orange having received the like letters, to govern himself
accordingly in the towns and places of his government of Holland, Zeeland, and
Vtrecht, thought that this resolution which the king had taken, to proceed with
all rigor, would cause great troubles; and the rather, for that all men should
find themselves deceived in their great expectation of a better

Madame, I have received the letters which it has pleased your Highness to
write unto me The prince of Oranges letter to the duchess.
and to the Consuls of my government: whereby I understand his Majesty's
pleasure upon three chief points; enioyning me expressly, to cause them to
be executed throughout all the places of my government. And although (Madame)
they have not demanded mine advice in a matter of so great weight and
consequence, yet as a faithful servant and vassale to his Majesty (moved with
zeal and desire to discharge my duty, whereunto I am bound by

Touching the second point, containing, That Governors, Consuls, and other
Officers Marie have often and diverse times assured the said countries, as well
by mouth as writing, That the Inquisition should never be brought in, but that
they should be maintained and governed as they had been in former times; yea,

In regard of the third point, that the kings absolute resolution is, That the
Edicts made as well by the Emperor as his Majesty, should be duly executed in
all points, with all rigor, Touching the execution of edicts.
informed. Withal, in my opinion (under your correction) the time is not now
fit to

Notwithstanding if his Majesty and your Highness be so resolved, to have the
said points and articles presently executed (the which I see cannot be put in
practice, without putting the The prince excuse^h himself f^o^ this ch^rge
country into a greater fear of a total ruin, whereunto his Majesty,
being here present, might take better regard) I had rather (if they will not
surcease this work till then, but will

Upon the receipt of these letters and others written afterward by the prince
of Orange, the The Gouernesse sends for the prince of Orange to come to
Brussels.
said Gouernesse writ back unto him, requesting him very earnestly to come to
Brussels, with

And as these alterations did increase daily, there was found the three and
twentieth of December, at night, a certain writing set up in three or four
streets of Antuerpe, containing a complaint and exhortation (in the name of the
bourgesses to the magistrates) against the Inquisition, wherein consisted their
ruin; alleging, that in doing so they should offer them violence, and go
against their privileges, and the kings promises, made unto that town, as
well in the Netherlands, as in Spain: requiring the magistrates to defend
them, and to cite the king (according to the privileges of the country) to
the imperial chamber, to have those violences disannulled there: pretending,
that Antuerpe (a town of Brabant) was

The magistrate of Antuerpe having recovered one of these writings, considering
the The magistrate of Antuerpe sends to the Gouernesse.
apparent tumult by the continuation of this brute, sent one of their College
with all speed

About that time a peace being concluded and made in France, after the
battle of Dreux, the Queen mother led the king and the duke of Aniou, her
sons, unto the frontiers of Spain, whither came the Queen of Spain their
sister. The king conducted her to Bayon, where they stayed long. During their
abode there, the duke of Alua, with diverse others of the Counsel of Spain,
had very secret consultation and conference with the Counsel of France. Their
conclusion was, to root out them of the reformed Religion, as well in France,
as in the Netherlands; and that they must begin with the heads, A bloody
resolution.
following the apothegme of the Spanish duke; the which he put in practice
soon after upon the heads of the earls of Egmont, and Horn, and diverse
others also at Brussels: That it was but a folly to busy themselves for
Frogs, they must first fish for the great Salmons.

Those of the Netherlands (during so many cauillations, wherewith they sought
to bring them asleep, thinking to persuade them, That the Edicts should be
moderated, that the Inquisition of Spain should not be planted there, and
that nothing should be altered touching the bishops) were more vehemently (yet
more covertly) persecuted than ever: for the king of Spain caused wonderful
executions to be done upon them, that could be known to be of the Religion,
putting them to death in prison by sundry torments. Yet those of the Religion
did not forbear (by a common consent) to present a confession of their faith
unto the king of Spain, and to publish it to the world: with a complaint unto
the king and to the magistrates of the said countries; containing among other
points: That it was a

But notwithstanding any endeauours, they were in so lamentable an estate, as
any man of a mean capacity and sense might very easily conceive, that the
peoples minds being thus wonderfully perplexed and strangely altered, could
not be long contained, counsel of Trent: and that for that cause the commerce
and accustomed traffic decayed

It happened, that almost all the chief noblemen of the Netherlands met
together both at Breda and Hochstrate, to entertain some noblemen strangers;
among the which were the prince of Orange, the marquess of Berghen, the earls
of Egmont, Horn, and Hochstrate, the lord of Brederode, and others, that were
well affected to the good of their country: who lamenting the miserable estate
thereof, which had been so flourishing, considering the ^mall care was used to
order things in time, and to apply convenient remedies: after they had debated
all things well, and found that the eminent peril proceeded from nothing, but
from those cruel and horrible persecutions, from the new erection of bishops,
from the Inquisition, and from the counsel: seeing they would give no ear to
that which the towns and they had so often and so zealously propounded, and
that they would not Francis Baudwin (who had been banished from Arras for the
Religion) was sent for out of France by the prince of Orange, to hear the
difficulties that were there presented: who after the reuocation of his
banishment by the chamber of Arthois, at the instance of the Archbishop of
Cambray he went to the prince, to Brussels; where, having conferred with him
and the other noblemen,

As all we which live under one King, are bound to seek the preservation of
the public A d^scourse of F^s Baudwins, teaching the means to ^uent the
trou^s.
good and quiet, and the entertainment of the kings greatness and
prosperity, who is the head of the body, whereof we are members; I have
thought, that I was not to be taxed of arrogancy, if (according to that small
talent which I have received from the Lord) I endeavor

First, we must consider, That when any one speaks of a Religion, or Law, it
is Definition of this word Re^on.
to be understood, that he speaks of the faith and apprehension which men
have conceived and imprinted in their hearts and minds, touching God and his
service, and also As for the first, it is most certain, That they which follow
the new religion, have a constant persuasion and impression in their hearts,
that what they do and believe, is conformable to The minds of men cannot be
commanded by force.
mind by corporal violence? How can any one persuade me, that that man has a
bad says, whom I see die constantly and joyfully, although I know not the
ground of the one, nor the other? Even as it is impossible for all the Monarchs
of the world, to keep the fire from exercising his heat, when it encounters an
object fit to burn: in like sort, it is as impossible for all men (how mighty
soever) to restrain and hinder the spirit of man from discoursing and judging
as he pleases, and not to apply himself to that which he finds best
agreeing to his natural impression: the experience whereof is daily seen. For
what has it auayled to have put to death so many poor souls for the faith?
Whereto have served

The kings of Egypt were mighty, but they could never command the consciences
of the children of Israel. The Roman Emperors held all the world almost in
subjection, who neither spared fire, nor flames, crosses, nor gibbets, cords,
nor tortures, nor any kind of torments that could be devised and invented, to
root out the Christian faith, and to terrify their subjects, to divert them,
and to retain them in their ancient belief and Pagan Religion: and yet they
prevailed nothing in their desseignes; but contrariwise, did much That the
blood of Martyrs was the seed of their Churches. And indeed, Julian the
Apostate Emperor, a malicious and subtle man (seeing, that to root out the
Christian Religion, all his predecessors had advanced nothing, but
contrariwise, that it was much augmented by the means of the persecutions; and
that those which died for their faith, took it as a glory and honor) from
that time forward he would no more persecute them, neither by fire nor sword,
nor by any corporal violence, although they hated him deadly; but sought by
gentleness and persuasions to draw them from their faith; and forbearing all
outward force, he sought by all policy to hinder their increase; wherein he
prevailed much more: for that some through covetousness, others through
ambition, suffered themselves Covetousness and ambition do more than torments.


The means then to divert them from their opinions, is, to persuade them, that
their faith and belief is not conformable to the word of God: To effect the
which, there is no other means, than to give them free audience, to the end,
that they may propound their reasons They must give audience to them of the
religion.
and motives with all liberty, and that they be confuted of error and heresy
by the word of But on the other side, those which behold others to die with
such constancy, take a delight to Paul has made, as well with the Jews, as
against the Pagans: then presently those which sought the truth, knew that he
had reason, and that the other were in ^rror. So in the counsel of Nicene, the
Arrians were admitted to propound their reasons and grounds with all liberty,
and being convicted by the word of God of error and heresy, were forced for a
time to desist from their enterprise: but presently after when they persecuted
them, they had suddenly many disciples; some moved by pity, others by their
false persuasions, the which was the cause of great mischiefs and
inconveniences in the Church: yea, in our times we have seen in all places
where the Anabaptists have been persecuted, Mahumet has so carefully
forbidden, Mahumet forbids to dispute of his religion.
that they should never dispute upon the points of religion brought in by him,
knowing well, that the truth being once confronted against his lies, his
doctrine of necessity must go to smoke.

It is a true mark and badge of truth, that it desires to be known, made
manifest, and debated, being like unto the Palm Tree, the more it is deprest
and charged, the higher and straiter it grows. For this reason the ancients
did appoint to hold free and general counsels every year; although by the
corruption of time many abuses have been brought in, by the ambition

It will be to no purpose to say, That they have been often heard and
confuted: for admit They of the reli^on never heard with patience.
it were so, yet a great multitude of people, which are inclined thereunto,
deserve so much pain, as to be instructed in hearing and examining their
reasons. But when you have said all they were never heard with patience: For
when as Luther began to preach this doctrine in Germany, it was presently
condemned by the Pope, and persecuted by all the kings and princes of
Christendom. He was once called to be heard, but it was to see if he would
recant, or maintain his writings and his doctrine, and he on the other side
protested nothing more than the desire which he had to be better taught and
instructed by the holy Scripture. The like proceeding was held against John Hus
at the counsel of Constance, who was never heard in his own defense: but as
soon as he was arrived there, they laid before him certain Articles the
purpose. For if it be so (as they say) it will be the more easy to overthrow
them now, The holy Scripture as powerful now as ever to confute heresies.
Scriptures, to confute these, for that the word of God remains eternally,
and the Scripture has now as much force and virtue to confute heresies, as
ever. But to condemn them by the very name and authority of some counsel,
without alleging the Scriptures and reasons of the said counsel, were out of
reason: for they submit themselves to prove, that the counsels (by the which
their doctrine has been condemned) were but petie counsels, assembled, and
allowed by the tyranny of some, who alone have decreed what they pleased
against the authority of the Scriptures, without hearing or admitting their
adverse parties. And doubtless, Counsels rei^cted by some bishops.
counsels as suspect and not lawful, nor grounded upon the authority of the
word of God, but rather upon the authority of men, as we read of Maximus
bishop of Jerusalem, and of S. Hillarie bishop of Poitiers, yea and of S.
Athanasius, Chrysostom, and Photinus. So as it is not without reason, if many
ages after them there have been counsels suspected to these men. But as for
the most ancient, and received on either side, they are content to allow of
them, so far forth as they prove their sayings by the word of God. There
rests then nothing, but that their reasons may be heard, that the truth may
be known, and their errors and heresies avoided, seeing there is no other
means to procure a public peace, and to draw all the subjects to one
Religion: That if their adversaries (as if there were no controversy That they
must in all things follow the word of The word of God must determine of
controversies.
God, the which alone has authority to judge all controversies, and to define
which is the true and the false Church. Which Maxim can never be wrested away
by the authority of any man, much

Seeing then it is a point resolved among all men of judgment, that touching
the faith If it were fit to hinder the exercise of Religion.
and inward belief, no corporal violence can command, and that men must be
confuted of error in their consciences, we must examine the second point
which we have propounded: which is, whether it were not possible to hinder the
outward exercise of their Religion, forbidding them to assemble, preach, teach,
nor to make any outward profession of that which they believe in heart. And
first, in case it were feasible, whether it were fit and convenient Gracian was
wont to say: That it was necessary the people should be maintained in some
outward discipline of some Religion, whatsoever it were, good or bad. For as
man by nature is inclined to reject the yoke of God, it is necessary he should
be kept in awe and discipline, else he will be like unto an untamed horse,
rejecting the fear of God and man. Being then impossible to root out the faith
which they have in their hearts, it were not convenient (although it were
possible) to hinder their exterior discipline and exercises, by the which the
people are maintained in their Religion, and in the fear of God, and of the
magistrate: unless (whereas in their assemblies they are taught to be good
men, and to fear God and honor to loose their goods or honors, refusing to
apply themselves to discipline and exercise of Abuse in the Church the cause of
great (...).
themselves to be Christ himself; others, the Spirit of God; others, Charity.
To conclude, they are profane people, and contemners of God and the
magistrate, maintaining, That there ought not to be any sword or superiority
used among men, but that the Spirit should govern and guide the heart of man,
as it pleases. The which grows through no other occasion, but that seeing
the great abuses which have reigned and do still reign in the Charles the
fifth, of famous memory, who made all the world to tremble? Have we not seen
his incredible diligence to suppress this Religion? Have we not seen the
rigorous Edicts which he made? And whereto tended it? but to hinder the
preaching of this new Religion, and that they which made profession thereof,
should forbear their assemblies; for he knew well their hearts could not be
forced: and yet he prevailed nothing, notwithstanding all his prohibitions. It
may be they assembled in some strange country, where they had greater
liberty: no, no: but contrariwise, all the princes in Christendom, together
with the Pope, were resolved to root them out, and to give them no place of
retreat, The christians in old tim^s assembled in the deserts.
hinder the Christians from their assemblies; who desired rather to live like
savage beasts, in caves and rocks, than to abandon the exercise of their
Religion. I will not examine, if their quarrel be like unto this: so it is,
that they are as well persuaded in their hearts, that they follow He that is
disloy^ll unto God, will be also unto the king.
which they commit against God and the king. For without doubt, he that shall
carry himself Constantius, father to Constantine the great, although he were
a Pagan, yet he called Fuse^ius in the life of Constantine Emperor.
Christians into his Court, and admitted them to favor, whom he did see ready
to abandon goods and honors, yea their own lives, rather than to be disloyal
unto the God whom they did worship: yea, he held them worthy of his
friendship, and did impart unto them his most important affairs. And in truth
the king has no subjects more faithful than those which obey him for
conscience, that is to say, because God has so commanded it. They which
falsify their conscience to please the king, or for any other private respect,
show, that they do not obey the king for conscience only, but for some other
particular affection.

It is plainly to be seen, That the Arts, Occupations, and Trades, by means
whereof this country was wont to flourish above the rest, do now decay, and
are transported A good consideration touching the (...) of the Netherlands.
many good men can witness) in Antuerpe, Lille, Tournay, Valenciennes, and
other such towns. And this has been one of the chief occasions, why of late
years the English have been persuaded to leave Antuerpe to go to Embden,
that is to say, from the flower

But above all it is to be considered, That the profession of arms and war,
which has been flourishing in these parts, has and will be greatly
interessed, if it be not otherwise prevented. I will not speak of many
gentlemen, good and faithful soldiers, which might do good service to his
Majesty, which are now retired quietly to their houses, fearing for this only
occasion to employ themselves in any action whatsoever. Neither will I say,
that many others, who desired to do the king good service (even of those which
knew the seats and situations of countries) are forced to leave their native
soil, and to retire to their enemies, preferring the liberty of their
consciences before all things in the world. Without doubt there must a care be
had: for if any war should happen either against the French, the English, or
any other neighbor country, we know not whom to trust. And Mahomets Religion:
for this affection is incredible, and exceeds all others. The which being
well considered (with the great diversity of humors and conditions of men, it
were no strange thing, if in so great a multitude of them for that cause unto
their kinsfolks and friends: Wherein it is greatly to be considered, That No
sorts maintain kings so much as the love of their subjects.


If the Inquisitors and their adherents fear not the Huguenots, for that (as
they say) they have not the wit to revenge themselves, who maintain that they
must do good for evil; yet they may well have heard the common proverb, That
patience too much urged, in the end turns to fury: And if they be not void
of all sense, they must think, that all the kinsfolks, friends, and allies of
them that they persecute, are not all of one mind and equal patience, that
they can so easily pass over the wrong which they think they have received:
The cause of the troubles in France.
which partly took their beginning from such occasions. And it is most
manifest, that if king Henry, or his father king Francis, had in their times
granted free exercise of Religion, restraining them with good laws and
ordinances; without doubt they had left their realm much more happy and
flourishing, and had prevented so many calamities, which have ensued. I know
there are some which say, that the like is not to be feared here, considering
the small number there is, and therefore it were no reason, that for a handful
of men, and of Great numbers have forsaken the Netherlands for Religion.
are retired into England, where they have their public assemblies in
infinite numbers: then let them turn to those that are gone into France, in
as great numbers: from thence let them muster up them that are at Francfort,
Strausbourg, Heidelberg, Franckendal, Cologne, Aix, Dousbourg, Embden, Geneua,
Hambourg, Breme, and other towns of the East countries: without doubt (in my
opinion) they shall find an hundred thousand. And as for those that remain yet
in the country, it is most manifest there are many more. There where it
seems they have greater liberty? and in truth the officers dare make no more
This, or Steven, preach this doctrine publick^ly for the space of a whole
year, in the view of the whole world, in despite of all such as did oppose
themselves; and notwithstanding all their pursuit, yet could they never
apprehend him, for that all the people did accompany him both going in and
coming out of the church: so as sometimes h^ was carried upon their shoulders,
and lodged sometimes in one house, sometimes in another? Whereby we may see,
that the number is not so small, as some maintain; yea, they complain, that
they cannot furnish them with ministers and preachers enough. Without doubt, if
they were gathered together in one place, as well those which are ^tired, as
they which remain, there would be found at the least two or three hundred
thousand. If they will have respect to them that are of the same opinion, and
yet

Whereas they say, That they be all people of base condition: The contrary has
been That those of the (...) are (...) ^ll of base cond^on
seen in Germany, France, England, Scotland, and Denmark; whereas not only
the common people, but also princes and kings have embraced this Religion: and
doubtless, if they might discover themselves without danger of life and goods,
they should also find here a great number of gentlemen, and others of good
sort, that would declare themselves to be of their Traian was wont to say, That
he had rather save one citizen and subject, than defeat a whole army of his
enemies: a speech worthy of a Monarch and Emperor. Such then as think they
should not spare to ruin (as much as in them lies) the bodies and souls of
the kings poor subjects, show themselves ignorant, what Christianity,
humanity, or the clemency of a king requires; the very name whereof makes his
fame more glorious, than all the trophies and victories that he could obtain
of his enemies.

But some will say, That these men are wicked and profane, and that they
corrupt the rest. Whereunto I answer, That the point of Religion only
excepted (whereon it is not my

Moreover, we must in despite of our selves confess, That the greatest and
best wits, and the most learned men, maintain their party. I will not
disgrace the others. But if we will Most o^ the (...) and best w^ts ^re of the
(...).
lay aside all savor and affection, we shall sind, that the most excellent
wits have been and are of their profession; yea, the restoration of arts and
sciences (the which were buried in darkness) is come from them: The knowledge
of the Tongues, especially of the Greek and Hebr^w* has been beautified more
by them than by any others. To conclude, their adversaries themselves are
forced to confess, that there are singular men among them in all sorts of
sciences: besides that, the life of many of them is irreprehensible. If then
there were not so great a number, as there is, yet they should have a respect,
not to ruin, and chase away those whom God has endued with such excellent
graces, and deprive the To conclude then, if it pleased his Majesty to grant
this liberty, he should not only prevent In the end they shall be forced to
grant liber^e of religion.
commonweal: seeing that in the end they shall be forced to come unto it, were
it after his decease, as in other countries where the like accidents have
happened.

It remains now to consider the inconveniences that may arise, the which I
find to be two principal. The first, that if the exercise of their religion
were allowed them, they might multiply Objections against ^ee excr^se of
^ligion.
in such sort, as the ancient religion would decay and come to nothing, the
which the king would not endure by any means. The other is, That they hold
commonly, that in one country there cannot be two diverse religions, without
great trouble and disorder. As for the Answer to the first objection.
or the authority of men: for a religion may be grounded upon the authority
of men, when having regard unto that which our ancestors have done and
followed, or to that which our king commands, or to that which some great
personage does inioyne us; we ground our religion upon those respects, without
any other firm reason, or feeling in our hearts, that we do well or ill: as
the Turks, Pagans, and idolaters have always done, yea and the greatest part
of the world do at this day, changing their religion and manner of serving God,
in what sort, and as often as it shall please the king, or those to whom they
defer this credit. But for that those religions proceed not from a religious
heart, fearing God, but rather from the respect and reverence of men, it is
easy to hinder the course, and to plant in other by humane means,

The second point seems to be of great moment: for they say commonly, That to
entertain the public quiet, we must have but one Law, one Faith, and one
King; a thing without doubt which were greatly to be desired, for that it
should bring us to that golden age. But seeing that religion and faith is a
mere gift of God, engraven in the heart of man, over the which none can
command but God only, it were a great indiscretion to think it possible to
reduce all the inhabitants of one country to one faith, by force and corporal
violence. It is true, that to the exterior exercise: for before the coming of
Christ, the kings of Egypt, Persia, Antonius Pius and Marc Anto^ne, not that
they were of an accord with them (for they had the name of a christian in
horror) but for that they found they were not seditious, nor disturbers of the
public quiet: and so of many other emperors who have suffered them, and
forbidden that no injury should be done them, although they were of a mere
contrary opinion. True it is, that some one may say, That all these examples
serve but to advance the Christian Faith, which the king intends to maintain,
in rooting out the new religion: yet it is most manifest, that it is no new
thing to endure two religions in one country; yea and that all wise kings and
princes have so done according to the necessity of It is no new (...).
Theodotius, Honorius, and Arcadius, who gave temples to the Arrians, and
No^atians, sometimes within, sometimes without the city, as the necessity of
the time and place required. In the Ecclesiastical history, it is reported
for a remarkable thing, that Valentinianus the emperor was Orthodoxe, and a
good Christian, yet he suffered the Arrians, though he favored them not so
much as the others. Valens his colleague, or companion in the empire, was an
Arrian, and would by no means suffer the Christians in his government, but did
persecute them in all sorts: whereby we may easily gather, that in all

It is then a great ignorance, to think that subjects cannot be maintained in
quiet, when they are of diverse religions; for who so will look nearly to the
spring and beginning of tumults and seditions, he shall find, that they
proceed not so much from the diversity of religions, (...) ^row (...) (...)
the diversity o^ ^ons (...) p^ons
as through private passions, as covetousness, ambition, revenge, hatred, and
such like; from the which ^all quarr^ls may grow, and when the magistrate
preuents it not in time, then by private passions of their subjects, in steed of
suppressing them by justice. And as for controversies Marie, had caused great
troubles throughout all Christendom; not that the controversy was of any
great importance, but through the negligence of the magistrates, who nourished
these factions, and became partisans. Seeing then it appears, that whereas
good order has been settled, people of diverse sects and religions have been
quietly governed, without any sedition or tumult: and contrariwise whereas no
order was, not only diversity of religion, but even small quarrels have bred
horrible seditions and tumults; any man of judgment may gather thereby, that
seditions and tumults take not their increase from the importance of the
quarrel, whereon they are grounded, but rather through the want of good order,
for that the magistrates neglect to punish

It is then easy to resolve, that good order would be settled, if liberty
should be granted to them of the religion to assemble, and exercise their
discipline, restraining and bridling them Note this counsel.
with such laws as shall be thought good: And that the kings magistrates and
officers be careful to execute his Majesty's intention, foreseeing above all
things, that the people usurp not the authority of the sword, under color of
the factions of great men. So as above all things there must be a prevention,
that all violence be forbidden of either side, and that those which proceed by
any other unlawful means, as by taxing and slandering, shall be well
punished, Amen.

Such was the discourse of M. Francis Baudwin, wherein he touched the true
point, concerning the remedy of the troubles, the which the king and his
counsel might since have known

Whilst that both great and small in the Netherlands were thus distempered,
for fear of the troubles which were at hand, by reason of the new bishops,
Inquisition, bloody edicts, and An assembly of the nobles at the marriage of the
prince of Parma.
counsel of Trent; Alexander Farnese, prince of Parma, son to duke Octauio,
and the duchess people, and so flourishing in riches, should for the
aboue-named causes come to ruin and de* The noblemen assemble at S. Trudon,
touching the troubles.
been affected to the religion, and therefore hated the edicts and all other
cruel innouations.

And to the end that through the persuasions of some seditious instruments, the
matter might not be so disguised, as their assembly and good intention should
be taken in ill part, and otherwise interpreted than was sincerely intended,
they thought it convenient for their assurance, to make a confederation or
league together by the which they did promise to succor one another,

Whereas we have been lately duly informed, and it is most true, that
certain perverse A compromise of the nobles of the Netherlands.
creatures, cunning and malicious, making a counterfeit show of great zeal,
which they have to the maintenance and increase of the religion, and Catholic
faith, and of the union of the people; but indeuouring only to satisfy their
instiable covetousness, ambition, and insupportable pride, have by their ^gred
words, and false suggestions, so persuaded the king our lord (notwithstanding
any petitions to the contrary, that have been made unto him) that God, or the
diminution of the kings greatness, or his estates: but contrariwise, that our
intention

In witness and assurance of our said league and confederation, we invoke
the holy name of the living God, Creator of heaven and earth, and of all that
is in them, as Judge and searcher of our hearts, consciences, and thoughts, who
knows that such is our desire and resolution, beseeching him humbly, that he
will give us the grace of his holy spirit, to the end that all Amen.

This assembly and confederation of the nobles, could not be made so secretly,
but it was Diverse opinions of the confederation of the Netherlands.
discovered: and as no man in court could learn what their design and intent
was, but the confederats themselves, so it bred a great fear and alteration in
the gouernesse, and those of her counsel: and as it commonly falls out in the
like occurrents, many reports, and diverse aduertisements were sent touching the
same. The more the brute of this league increased, the more their conceits and
diversity of opinions augmented; some tending to good, some to bad: some said
that all the country was revolted: some that there was an assembly of many
thousands of men, which came armed toward the court: some gave it out, that
they had secret intelligences

All these brutes brought a terrible fear and perplexity to the court,
especially to them who were partly the cause, that these persecutions,
executions, and Inquisition (from whence every people. And in the mean time
by provision, and according to the kings letters to the duchesle, The very
words of the Inquisitors commission.
deliverances to the secular power, to use imprisonments, and apprehension of
men, making of processes without any ordinary form of justice; choosing only
some one of the kings counsel, who should be bound to give sentence as they
should require, according to the forme^ and tenor

Moreover, the most apparent, as well among the nobles, as merchants and
artisans, and especially the richest, were already enrolled in these
Inquisitors books, to proceed against them, as against men, subject to
confiscation, both of body and goods at the least in case of repentance to
great pecuniarie fines. Thereupon was heard of all sides the brags and threats
of Inquisitors, The vaunts and threats of priests and preachers, incenseth the
people
priests, and monks, daring to des^ribe, yea to name in their sermons, the most
apparent. Whereof not only the people of Antuerpe, which heard it, and the
magistrates, which had been daily informed, bare witness, but also the towns
of Lille, Tournay, Valenciennes, and others of the countries of Flanders,
Brabant, Holland, and Arthois, whereas these threats have been Erick of
Brunswick, to plant the Inquisition (as it was given out) by force in the
Netherlands, as they had before designed, yet could not effect it: and that all
this did tend to put it in execution, that is, to make a conquest of these
Netherlands, and by that means having abolished the privileges, to convert
them to a realm, as I have said. This levy of men was confirmed by the
entertaining of captains, to whom duke Erick had given in pressed. This did so
amaze the people, that many merchants, yea of the most apparent, had already
packt up all, to free themselves from such violence and oppression, by a
voluntary exile: many were already retired, and the trades were transported
from all parts, namely from Flanders, Tournay, Valenciennes, and other neighbor
places, in such great

On the other side the French, neighbors to these countries, who had long
affected this estate, as if the better part had proceeded from them, were loath
to let slip this occasion, seeking by all means to sound the hearts of the
inhabitants of the country, giving them to understand Provinces of the
Netherlands confederats with the empire.
Holland and Zeeland, where they said, that they were confederats with the
empire, and therefore should enjoy the privileges of the pacification, made and
past in Germany at Passau,

In Brabant and Flanders they objected an accord made by the deceased emperor
Charles the fifth, with the princes electors of the empire, making one circle,
the which in the Germane tongue they call Creyts, by it self, contributable as
much as two princes electros. Whereupon, and to show that it was true, they
pretended that they of Flanders had given a gratuitie unto his imperial
Majesty, as an acknowledgement of the good which they pretended to have
received by the means of the said accord; the which his Majesty had taken in
good part: and that thereby he was bound to the observation of the said
treaty. Moreover for the

Whereunto they added, that the duchy of Brabant was fallen to the king of
Spaines predecessors, by right of election, the which depended upon conditions
sworn of either side: all which conditions they said, were broken, if they
brought the Inquisition of Spain into that country. Those of Brabant did also
produce six principal articles among others of their Six chief articles in
the privileges of Brabant.
privileges, whereof the first was:

1 That the duke of Brabant might not augment the state of the clergy, more
than it had been in old time, and so placed by the dukes, unless the two
other estates of the nobility and commons should consent thereunto.

2 That the duke might not pursue ciuilely or criminally, any of his natural
subjects, or strangers dwelling there, but by the ordinary course of the
justice of the country, whereas the accused may defend and justify himself
by his counsel.

3 That the duke may not raise any tribute or other imposition, nor any
innovation, without the consent of the states of the country.

4 That the duke may not place any strangers or forreiners in any offices of
Brabant, except in certain petie exceptions, namely in his court, where he
may have two strangers of his counsel, so as they be of the same language; as
also one that is not borne in Brabant, having for a time enjoyed some free
seigniorie there, may be president in the said

5 When as the duke would assemble his estates, were it to demand money, aid
subsidies, or any other thing of his subjects, that those of Brabant, nor the
other estates of the country should not be bound to go out of the limits of
the country, nor to conclude any thing

6 If it should happen that the duke would restrain and infringe their
privileges, were it by force, or otherwise; in that case his subjects of
Brabant, having made a solemn protestation before, should be freed and
discharged of their oath and homage, and as free men may provide for themselves
as they shall think most convenient.

Which privileges most part of the towns and provinces did maintain them to
be in like sort given unto them, by accord made with Maximilian king of
Romans, in the year 1488, the 16 of May, according to the 14 article of the
said treaty, and other accords made with the said provinces.

Besides all these allegations and propositions, in the end they durst say
openly, that by the feodall laws, the lord loses the right of his fee, by
the same occasion of felony, that the Deputies of the nobles with a petition
at an imperial Diet.
at Ausbourg, with a petition unto the emperor Maximilian, in the name of the
inhabitants of the Netherlands, having left the Romish religion, and desiring
to add hereunto the reformed: in the which was discoursed at large, of the
Inquisition of Spain, and of the publication and observation required of the
counsel of Trent, which sought to pull from them their privileges, freedoms,
and the liberties of their consciences. They therefore besought his Imperial
Majesty, and the princes of the empire, to admonish the king, to forbear the
shedding

Matters standing in this estate, the Gouernesse and her counsel thought it
fit and expedient to send for all the noblemen that were absent to court, as
well governors of Provinces, The governors and knights of the order sent for
to court.
as knights of the order, and in the mean time to charge them to write unto
the noblemen of their quarters and jurisdictions, not to deal any further in
their confederation, but to give it over; finally that they should endeavor,
that the said nobles and their assembly might be dispersed, upon hope that
matters might be pacified. They did also write unto the said noblemen, to the
place whereas they thought they were assembled, and to the heads of them, That
if they had any matter of grieuance or complaint, they should send it in
writiting by The Gouernesse writes to the king all the ^res of the Netherlands.
aduertising him of all that had past, of the murmr and coffeehouse of the
people, of the apparent danger, if they did not relinquish the Inquisition, and
moderate the rigor of the edicts, of the confederation and compromise of the
nobles, whereof she sent a copy, and generally of the complaints of the four
chief towns of Brabant, upon the breach of their privileges, etc. The said
lady did also cause the three estates of Brabant to be called together, to
whom she declared, That she had been well advertised and informed, that
there was a certain conspiracy plotted, and an enterprise made upon the
country, the which might cause great inconveniences, and therefore they must
be stopped and prevented by any The Gouern^ p^th the ^es o^ ^bant.
whereas she had understood, that the pretexts which they took, was against
the Inquisition, she had the day before commanded the counsel of Brabant, to
answer a petition presented

The governors, knights of the ord^r, and other noblemen, being assembled at
Brussels A project to moderat the edicts.
upon the Duchess commandment, with the kings counsel of state, it was
propounded how they might moderate the rigor of the edicts, and the punishment
of the offenders, so as they might still maintain the ancient religion* and
pacify the troubles which began to arise* thereupon they concluded to write
unto the king* and to understand his good pleasure. But as soon as the people
understood, that they would take no other course, but by moderation and
changing of the accustomed rigor, this made them to enter into greater
suspicion than before; and the more, for that they sought to keep that secret
which they had resolved in the said counsel, touching the moderation, thinking
they should have small ease or relief thereby. And if before they had cast
about pasquils, now they

Sir, although that all your obedient subjects, as well of your town of
Antuerpe, as of the rest of the duchy of Brabant, be not ignorant of your
Majesty's good affection to A petition sent by them of Brabant to the king of
Spain.
and relieved, according to that which shall be held expedient for the service
of God, Demades is always true, That it is more easy to govern the helm of
a ship, when she is whole and under sail, than to gather the pieces together,
when it is broken through the violence of the waves, or against some dangerous
rock. Whereof we must all have a care to the greatness and dignity of your
Majesty, the quiet of all your subjects, and the private profit of every town
and city that is under your command. It does not seem fit nor reasonable,
that your faithful subjects, who are ready to employ body and goods, yea and
their very lives for

If a finger of the hand be interessed and festred, must we therefore cut off
all the arm, and cast it to the dogs? or if the foot be grieved, must we
therefore abandon the whole body, and give it in prey to Lions and savage
beasts? And it has been one of the goodly and grave counsels, which of late
days has been given to your Majesty, to hold Brabant for an enemy country,
and a land of conquest, only in regard of the privileges They would have
Brabant ^or an enemy by reason of their privileges.


What counsel then is this, can it proceed from piety, seeing they would have
your Majesty's indignation fall generally upon all, good and bad, without
distinction? Can it proceed

In the mean time, although that through your wisdom these mists have been
dispersed for a time, yet is it not rooted out of the hearts of some, which
persuade (at the least endeavor secretly to persuade) the same, all they can,
as if they made mines under the earth, to compass that which at the first they
had incountred and maintained with all vehemency: for whereas before they
talked of exposing the country in prey, now they will finish the same work
begun, under color of a remedy against sects, which rise in some of your
Majesty's countries: so making the number sometimes double, and devising other
means to deprive

They charge your country with infinite wickedness, to plant hatred in your
heart, which is already graven in theirs: to the end (if it were possible)
that your edicts might be cords to tie them that offer you all service, and
your magistrates and officers, the inhumane executione^s of their passions: not
that we will condemn of so damnable a mind, all those that make any bad
report unto your Majesty of the Netherlauds, for we know many of them think
by this means to root out the sects that grow, for the zeal they bear to the
Romish Church. And others in like sort think, that two religions can never be
entertained together, Augustine against the Pelagians, Donatists, and

And whereas they think, that the Inquisition is the true and only means to
root out heresies and errors, they consider not on the other side, that it is
the way to impouerish your subjects,

Moreover as the people find this manner of proceeding very strange, and that
in a manner there is not any one but has compassion of them which are executed
for the confession of their faith; this has hitherto bred such a hatred
against the Inquisitors, as all men think that they are come to trouble the
quiet of the country, and to hinder men from following of

And such is the estate of your country, that although there be fertile places,
rich and abounding, some in corn, others in cattle and pasture, yet all is
not sufficient to entertain the rest of the country, three months in the
year, as well through the greatness of the country, which people in all
places, as it is impossible to number and comprehend them. In the mean time,
Charles Marie, dowager of Hungary, his sister, at that time Gouernesse of
these countries, gave his imperial Majesty to understand of the perplexity
and eminent danger of the town of Antuerpe (and by consequence of the
Netherlands) that he might prevent all mischiefs and inconveniences, and
preserve it from a total ruin and destruction: notwithstanding the
persuasions of some, who sought to bring in the pragmaticke Sanction; partly
for that they were ill affected to the said town, and partly through want of
judgment and consideration. And since, when as they sought under your
Majesty's name and authority to establish a new bishopric in the town of
Antuerpe, the merchants fearing the said Inquisition, were resolved not to
attend the end of this novelty, but to make their retreat as soon as this new
bishop should be received

Wherefore it should not seem strange nor troublesome unto you, if now your
obedient subjects address themselves unto your Majesty, to let you understand
the estate and condition of their cause, and to divert you from hearing of
them, who seek no other thing but the hurt and prejudice of your Majesty and
your subjects; the which is sooner prevented in the beginning, than when the
thing is advanced: for our parts we desire it, hoping there will be from you,
but that you will have this opinion, that the safety and preservation of all
their

Your Majesty knows well, that your town of Antuerpe consists only in the
commerce of foreign nations, and that by their retreat they shall decline from
their flourishing estate, and by the loss of those great revenues, which they
receive daily, it cannot long subsist, by reason of an infinite number of debts
wherewith they are now charged, being engaged heretofore for many great
services, which the town and the inhabitants thereof have done unto your
majesty and your predecessors, and in like sort in the fortification thereof,
after that it had bin besieged by Martin van Rossem. For all which things they
beseech your Majesty to provide in such sort as the merchant strangers be not
forced to retire themselves from the place, which most apparent to your
Majesty, that these two cannot concur together, to have the Inquisition

If then they shall give your Majesty to understand, that they are ready to
do you all duty and service, both with their lives and goods, and yet that
they have no intent to be subject to Inquisitors, who would use all rigor,
cruelty, tyranny, and inhumanitie over them and their families; we doubt not
(if your accustomed mildness and clemency does not abuse us) but you will
yield that grace and favor unto your subjects, in regard of their continual

But if the prince (regarding only his own assurance, and the keeping of his
countries) draws an enemy into them, who is a disturber of the public
quiet, hindering the course of traffic, his subjects profit, and the
advancement of his own glory; this people should have some reason, if it were
made known unto the prince. The which was apparent in a matter of much less
moment, when as Antipater at that time lord of Athens, which in former times
had been so famous and renowned, had put Menillius (a mild and tractable man)
in Phocion. But these are no Menilles, no quiet spirits, entertaining peace,
but seeking war in the midst of peace, shedding of blood where there is no
wound, opposing themselves by their troubles to the common quiet, pouring forth
their rage upon a number of poor men, unworthy oftentimes of such torments.
This is not the complaint of one of your subjects alone, but of all in
general, to the end, that if the prayers and supplications of one be not able
to confute the slanders, disperse the hatred, and divert your Majesty's heart
from so great a mischief, and make you taste this great and excellent good
which we attend of you: yet let the cries and common consent of all in general
make you apprehend this pretended mischief; for the which we hope your
Majesty will provide, when it shall be made known unto you.

Besides, when as al your well affected subjects come unto your Majesty for so
great a good, which they desire should be entertained in the countries of your
obedience, and the mischief which they seek to prevent, with your aid and
succors; it is not their authority which they bring, it is not their will
they would have serve for a law, it is not their own pleasures which they
respect and follow: but it is your Majesty's authority, your will and
pleasure, whereon they rely, and the which you have once promised them by a
contract and an accord, which they have made with your Majesty, the which you
sealed by a solemn oath, the firmness whereof is well known unto us. For
otherwise, if you should have any such conceit if they should seek to make you
apprehend it, and to put it in execution; where were then your Majesty's
Maximilian, king Philip, and Charles the fifth, and the dukes which have gone
before them in these of merchant towns, the ornament of the Netherlands, and
of your crown, a ready treasure

I have served your predecessors long; I have employed all my means for the
preservation of your dignity; I have given my self into your hands, and you
have received me with your mutual and reciprocal promises: I demand nothing
as due by contract or promise; I demand no requital for that which I have
employed and spared for your Majesty; I am silent of those things, I will
renounce my right, least I should be accused to have used any

This was the contents of their petition of Brabant; the which if the king had
seen and read, as he ought, without doubt he would have changed his opinion,
if not wholly, yet in (...)
part. But the Cardinal of Granuelle, and those of his faction, who possessed
the king, meant not so much good to the country, nor to their master, as to
suffer him to consider of these reasons, set down as well in this petition, as
in the discourse of Francis Baudwin, and many other admonitions, wherewith the
court was continually importuned: But it prevailed as much, as to cry unto the
deaf, or to sow upon the sand, or in the waves of the sea, during their
greatest violence, the which, in stead of bringing us to a safe Port, sought to

Those of Flaunders, in the mean time, were nothing more graciously entreated:
for the four members seeing plainly, how the whole country was unpeopled,
the traffiques, An ambiguous and rigorous apostile to the petition of them of
Flanders.
but contrariwise, charge was given to M. Peter Titelman, deane of Renay,
Inquisitor general of Flaunders, who (as a Salus spirans minarum) ran from
town to town, with four Sergeants and other Officers, together with the
Attorney general, or of the country: in doing so (said the Gouernesse) there
was hope, that the inconveniences

Whereupon the four members of the county of Flanders, together with the
magistrate A second petition made by them of Flanders against the Inquisition
of Bruges, sent their deputies to court, to complain of the attempts of the
Clergy: and the rather, for that they did see their neighbors of Brabant were
not yet charged: requiring, to be maintained in their ancient rights and
privileges: that the Inquisition (which did directly contradict them) might
be disannulled, in regard of lay men; and that the Clergy Lodouic of Nassau,
^d the Lord of Brederode; all without arms, and very modestly, attending the
Earls vanden Bergh, and of Culenbourg, who were not yet come. The fourth day
they demanded audience. The next day they marched in goodly order, five in a
rank, toward the court, being about four hundred noblemen and gentlemen,
going out of Culenbourg place: whereof the last (as it were) shutting up the
company, were the said earl of Nassau and the lord of Brederode; where they
found the Gouernesse, the counsel of state, the knights of the Order, and the
governors of provinces, which attended That they were but a rabble of Gueux,
or beggars.

Upon which speech, and for that Barlamont and his adherents did at that time
accuse them of rebellion, they resolved to show, that their intentions tended
to the contrary, and to bear The beginning of the Gueux, by the which the
protestants in the Netherlands were called
a mark or badge among them, to let the world know, that they pretended to
live and die in the kings service, taking the subject of their device upon a
wallet and a dish, fit for beggars, and on the one side of the medailes (were
they of gold or silver) was graven the kings picture, Faithful to God and the
king, even to bear the wallet: inferring thereby, and by their symbol of a
dish and a wallet, that they were better servants unto the king than Barlamont,
or his adherents: and retaining this epithet of Gueux, and their emblem, they
gave the world to understand, That they did not refuse to be Gueux, or beggars,
yea, if need were, to carry a wallet, that is to say, to suffer the loss of
all their goods and possessions

Madame, the gentlemen assembled here in this town, and others of the like
quality, of a competent number (who for certain respects are not here present)
have resolved (for the K. service The lord of Brederode his speech, presenting
the petition.
and the public good of his Netherlands) to present this petition unto your
highness: whereupon you may give such order as you shall think fit and
convenient, beseeching your highness to take it in good part. Moreover
(Madame) we are advertised, that we have bin charged before your highness, the
lords of the counsel, and others, that this our deliberation was chiefly taken
in hand to move tumults, seditions, and reuolts; and that which is much more
abominable, nothing of all that he had said touching those accusations,
neither had she ever had such an opinion of any one of them, whom she assured
her self to be the K. faithful servants: and as for their petition, she would
look into it, and impart it to the counsel, the tenor whereof was:

Madame, it is well known, how highly renowned the loyalty of the
Netherlanders unto The petition of the nobles against the Inquisition, etc.
their lords and natural princes has been and is yet throughout all
Christendom: wherein the nobility has always held the first rank, having
never spared body nor goods for the preservation and increase of their
greatness: wherein we his Majesty's most humble vassals desiring Charles of
famous memory had with a good intention decreed: Yet seeing that the diversity
of times brings withal diversity of remedies, and that within few years
the said edicts (notwithstanding that they have bin executed with all rigor)
have yet given occasion of many grievous inconveniences; Without doubt his
majesty's last resolution, by the which he not only forbids to moderat any
thing of the said edicts, but commands expressly, that the Inquisition should be
observed, and the edicts executed with all rigor, gives us just occasion to
fear, that not only the said inconveniences will increase, but also in the end
may follow a mutiny and general sedition, tending to the miserable ruin of
the whole country, according to the apparent shows of the peoples alteration,
which are to be seen in every place: wherefore knowing the greatness of the
danger that does threaten us, we did hitherto hope, that either by the together
with the zeal which we bear unto his Majesty and the country, to attend no
longer,

This was the petition presented by the nobility; the which was both pregnant,
just, and conscionable: the which the king should have acknowledged, as
proceeding from his faithful and loyal servants, and grounded upon right,
justice, and good policy. Yet by the sinister The petition of the nobles
interpreted to rebellion.
interpretation which was made by the Cardinal and his adherents, it was
imputed to rebellion,

Her highness understanding what is demanded by the contents of this petition,
is resolved to send unto his Majesty, to represent it unto him, and to do all
good offices, to make his Majesty The Gouernesse answer to the petition of the
nobles.
Margareta.

Who so does well consider of this apostile or answer, may easily gather the
profit that should follow, and what fruits the nobles might expect: for this
delay to advertise the king, was only The Gouernesse policy.
to win time, and so to be better instructed of the most expedient means to
avoid this danger. Upon this, on the 8 of April the gentlemen desired another
time of audience, where they thanked the Regent for her gracious favor, wishing
that her answer had bin somewhat cleerer and larger, saying, that it grieved
them, that she had not the authority to disannul the proclamation, desiring her
notwithstanding to forbid the officers to proceed any further therein; and as
they were content to submit themselves in all things to that which his Majesty
should ordain and appoint to be done concerning religion, they hoped likewise
so to behave themselves, that nothing but good report should be given of them,
protesting once again to have done their duties, Monsieur Dassonuille,
entreated the Regent, that she (for more quietness) would send the gentlemen
away with better satisfaction. Whereupon to give some content unto the
gentlemen (fearing, that an absolute denial, or the long expectance of avoyage
into Spain, should alter them, by some new iealousies) the eight day

The noblemen here present, promise upon their faith, and the oath of their
Order, to the deputies of this noble and honorable company, having sufficient
authority to receive the promises of the said noblemen, That from this day
forward the magistrates and Inquisitors

Cousin, most dear and well-beloved, whereas many gentlemen of these parts of
the country have presented a petition unto us, to abolish the Inquisition and
the Edicts of the king my The (...) the (...).
lord, touching matters of Religion, and to make a new Edict with the consent
of the general Margareta, and beneath Ouerloepe.

By these letters, whereas she uses these words: That for matters of Religion
they should proceed with all modesty, discretion and wisdom. She confessed,
that the Inquisitors and their officers had before used too great cruelty,
indiscretion and brutishness: and that for the present, in steed of rosting
and burning them, they should be contented to cut off their heads and hang
them, as they Tantalus, fed with vain hopes, for they persuaded themselves,
that the liberty of their consciences hung over their lips, and that they were
ready to taste of it; and yet the more they thought to embrace it, the further
off it was from them.

The regent and her counsel determined to fend certain lords into Spain, to
certify the king of their proceedings, and to desire and beseech him, to grant
some favorable protection and order unto the Netherlands, who she knew would
be much moved at the assembling and proceedings of the gentlemen of the
countries, which was written and sent unto him in the worst manner, as
expecting a worse event. To which end (many promises and persuasions The
contents of the moderation of the procl^tion for Religion.
should but lose their heads, and the common people should be banished.

This moderation (so called by the common people) the court and the counsel
sought to have ratified by the states of the land (upon whom the common people
so much called) and to that end first sent for the smallest provinces, as
Artois, Henault, and Namure, etc. and none but they, who being so called, were
sent with full commission, to do whatsoever should be requisite, without further
instruction from their masters, towns, or counsels, and withal were charged to
keep it secret from the common people. When those provinces had given their
consents Hans Tuiscaen, a tapistry weauer, was put to death

At which time the baron of Montigni went alone into Spain, because the
marquess of Berghen had hurt one of his legs, but not long after followed
him; who being come into Spain in the month of June, were oftentimes heard
both by the king and his counsel, who as then lay at Segobia, his counsel
being Don Aluares de Toledo, duke Dalua, etc. Don Gomes de Figuera, Don
Anthonio de Toledo, great master of the Order of S. John, Don Mauriques de
Lara, high steward of the kings house, Ruygomes de Silua prince of Euoli, and
earl of Melito, Lois de Quixada, chief esquire of the princes body; all men
of great authority, wisdom, and experience in Spain: but no more
Netherlanders than Monsieur Tisnack, president of the counsel of estate in the
Netherlands, the counselor Hopperius, keeper of the kings seal, and
Secretary Corteuille.

Before the king and this his counsel the ambassadors of the Netherlands
oftentimes showed, That the alterations in the said countries happened only
upon the kings letters, touching The commission of the ambassadors of the
Netherlands declared unto the king.
the planting of the Inquisition, executing of the proclamation for Religion,
and such like, and that there was no other nor better means to remedy the
same, than utterly to abolish the Inquisition, and to consent unto a moderation
of the proclamation, as they desired, and to grant a general pardon, without
contradiction, if the gentlemen confederates would be content therewith, for
that they desired, that all might be done by the consent, counsel, and advice
of the general states: yet they said, in behalf of the lords of the Order of
the golden Fleece, and others of the principalest of the nobility, that they
had all resolved and agreed together, That Omers, and Ypre, and that certain
French

and the rather (as she said) for that the secretary gave it out, That it was
by their consent and commandment, which they should prevent and make known by
the effects, that their intentions

Whereupon the nobles answered by writing punctually to every article, in the
form that follows.

Madame, We cannot give your highness sufficient thanks for the good offers
which were An answer of the ^obles to the du^sse excuse.
propounded unto us at Duffel, the 18 of this month, by the prince of Orange,
and the earl of Egmont, on your highness behalf, who left it us in writing
as follows, the which seems to

That your highness has sent the marquess of Bergen, and the baron of
Montigny unto the king, 1
to acquaint his Majesty with our petition: For the which, Madame, we most
humbly thank your highness, and we hope that those noble men being so
sufficient, will do all good offices with his Majesty, whereby he may
understand our just intentions to be conformable to our petition.

Secondly, We are put in mind of the promise which we made, to die in his
Majesty's service, and (...) 2
your highness feet: Wherein Madame, we desire to continue always, neither
had we ever any other will.

For the third, That we know, that since our petition there has been no
innovation, touching the 3
Inquisition and edicts, according to our dema^nd, and that therein your
highness has satisfied (...). We believe that your highness has altered
nothing since our petition; but the magistrates have not duly obeyed your
highness letters, but have continued still in the apprehension and
imprisonment of people, by virtue of the Inquisition and edicts. That which we
persuade our selves, is directly contrary to your highness intention and
command.

Fourthly, That a^ good and loyal subjects, according to our promises, we
should restrain and suppress 4
the insolency of sectaries. As for our promises, Madame, we hold, that we
have wholly satisfied them both in general and particular; yea we have done
our best endeavors to contain the people in all modesty, and to hinder the
preaching, from whom we cannot take away the persuasions which they have
conceived upon the stay of his Majesty's resolution: for

Fifthly, That matters tend to a popular sedition, and that strangers are
dealers in it, and those which 5
are our ant^ent enemies. To that, Madame, we answer, that whenever any
strangers shall be dealers in it, we will be the first that shall go to
horseback to hinder them: but that we or any others ought not to oppose our
selves against the kings vassals and subjects, we find it not for his
Majesty's service; but contrariwise, the ruin and overthrow of all the
Netherlands, for that they submit themselves to the resolution of the general
estates, as shall be related more amply hereafter.

The sixth article, That the sectaries give it out, That it is by our consent
and commandment, so 6
as it may well ^e judged, that our petition, which we say we had presented
for the preservation of the country, is the only cause of their public
preaching. We answer, Madame, that neither in general, nor yet in particular,
ever any one of us, did incite, move, or persuade the people to make the But
that there are some of our company, which do allow of them, for that they are
of the same

As for the seventh point, That we ought in duty to hinder them, and make
known our good intention by the effects, and that it tends to a good end, and
that our petition was presented for the kings 7
service, and the good of the country. We say, Madame, that herein we have
done our uttermost endeavors: but seeing that the people would in no sort yield
unto our persuasions, for the reasons above mentioned, we beseech your
highness, that it may please you to find out some good means, wherein we will
willingly employ our selves.

The eight, That we should not distrust the king who has never used any
tyranny toward his subjects, but all gentleness and favor. We answer,
Madame, that we have no distrust of the king, 8
knowing him to be so mild and just a prince, as if he were here present (which
we do greatly

The ninth and last, That your highness does not doubt but his Majesty will
forget all things, and that your highness has often written favorably to his
Majesty. We say, Madame, that as for his 9
Majesty's forgetting, we do not think that we have done any thing contrary
to his service, ^or given any occasion for our parts, why he should forget any
thing: But contrariwise it will ^e found, that the advertisement which we have
given, by the presentation of our petition, ^ath already taken effect if not
all, yet at the least in part: wherefore the said advertisement ^ught to be
taken as a most acceptable service done unto his Majesty. And for that your
^ighnesse has written so favorably and so timely unto his Majesty, we most
humbly thank The earl of Megen and others.
^s they have dared to use speeches publicly against us, tending to sedition:
saying, That they ^ere ready to break our heads, if they were commanded. And
moreover, bruting it out among the people (to make us odious) That the king
coming into these parts, he would in^at us as rebels and seditious persons,
with many other wrongs, which were too long to re^ate in particular: the which
we have for a time past over with silence, without making com^aints highness
cannot do it but by provision, we beseech you that at the same instant, you
will be

We have thought good to advertise your highness freely of these things, to
the end you may dispose thereof according to the necessity of the time, and as
you shall find it most convenient for the good of the country; protesting,
Madame, that we have discharged our selu^ in all these things. And if hereafter
any other inconveniences happen, that we are absolutely discharged by this our
present advertisement. Moreover, Madame, we offer our selves again^

If this answer pleased the Gouernesse, I leave it to them to judge, who know
the fears and The duchess perplexed for the answer of the nobles.
doubts wherein she was; so as from that time, secretly and under hand, she
levied men of al sides, under the commands of the earls of Megen and
Arembergh, and the lords of Beauuoit Noircarmes, and others. Which fear she
made more apparent, when as hearing that then were certain soldiers about
Villevoorde, she packt up her baggage to fly from Brussels, and to retire
toward Mons in Henault, the which she had done, if the prince of Orange had n^
assured her, and vowed and sworn unto her, with other noblemen, that they
would rath^ loose their lives, than the least displeasure in the world should
be done unto her.

The nobles and gentlemen confederats, stood also upon their guards, having for
their ass^rance both within and without the country, soldiers enrolled, to
have them ready upon the first occasion: but the Gouernesse (who wanted no
intelligence, to keep them still in breath v^till she were ready, to the end
they should not proceed any further in that which she feared (...) much) framed
many doubts upon their answers, whereof she said she would be better satis^
sending the earl of Egmont to them to that end, who having delivered his
charge, was req^red to carry their solution unto her, of the said ambiguities,
and to satisfy her of that wh^ she said she could not well comprehend.

In the mean time Antuerpe was in combustion, through the earl of Megens
arriu^, who it was well known had charge from the Duchess to leuy men, as he
had done, and James vander Heyde bourgmaster, Thierry vander Werue, Nicholas
R^kox, ^dermen, and the orator Wesenbe^k, to court, to acquaint the duchess
with the apparent danger, that was within the town, by the long stay of the
earl of Megen, of the one side, and ^e Two factions in Antuerpe.
lord of Brederode on the other; and that one of them beginning to stir, the
other would the the contrary part, which whould be cause of a great disaster
and effusion of blood on eit^ side within the town. Wherefore they desired her
highness to command the lords of M^gen (...) was sent alone, with good
instructions for his discharge: who being arrived at Brussels, (...)
unto her: she kept it, saying, That she would peruse it with the noblemen
there present, and decree what should be most convenient for the kings service;
adding withal, That the magistrate might command the lord of Brederode to
retire, seeing he had nothing to do there. The magistrate sent a new charge the
next day, by letters unto their deputies, to make greater instance unto the
duchess. But notwithstanding any suit they could make, as well for her
highness coming unto the town (the which they did earnestly desire) or for
the finding of some man of authority, to keep all things in good order, they
could never obtain any

At the same season there was a petition made by them of the reformed religion,
of the said town, in French and Dutch, and directed unto the masters of the
quarters, for to present it on their behalfes (as it was) unto the magistrate
and superintendents of the town, the sum whereof was:

That some days past they had expected and hoped for a good answer to their
former petition, A petition made by the reformed churches, to the magistrate of
Antuerpe.
by the which they desired to have some public place granted them for the free
exercise of their religion: and yet notwithstanding they had understood, that
the magistrate blamed their assemblies, as heretical, seditious, and prejudicial
to the town, so as it seemed they would hinder their holy congregations by
arms, which made them in like sort to go thither armed: the which they did
not to any other end, but to defend themselves, their wives and children,

On the other side the magistrate of Antuerpe seeing how they of the reformed
religion increased daily, and the auditors of Romish Catholics decreased
visibly, considering also that the people murmured, by reason that they had
deposed two curats of the parish of Kyel by the town, preaching to the great
content of the people, one being chased away, and the other imprisoned: It was
therefore resolved by the said magistrate, that it was their best course to
allow wonderfully, yea more than of those of the reformed religion; who having
a greater

The prince of Orange according to the charge which he had from the duchess,
at the suit of the burgesses of Antuerpe, being come into the town, he
conferred presently with the magistrate, The prince of Orange seeks to order
things (...) Antuerpe.
from whom he understood the pitiful estate of the town, and perused certain
articles which they had drawn for the ordering thereof, and to maintain it in
the kings obedience, and its ancient beauty and prosperity, where he promised
them al favor and assistance. Then having called together the other members of
the body of the town, as the old aldermen, the masters of the quarters, the
deanes of trades, the sworn companies, the nations of merchants, the clergy,
and some private persons (after that he had heard them) he found, that the
distrust Did ust the cause of troubles in Antuerpe.
for the magistrate did put no trust in the bourgesses, and much less in them
of thereligion. On the other side, the inhabitants in general (of what
doctrine soever) distrusted the court (fearing the garrison which they would
give them) and much more their magistrate, who seemed to incline thereunto, all
whose actions were suspected. Then they of the religion feared and distrusted,
not only the court and magistrate, but also all the members of the town, and
which is more, they were in jealousy one of another, they of the confession of
Ausbourg of the one side, and those of the reformed religion of the other. He
found also, that those of the religion were in wonderful great numbers, and
armed, who according to the weak government

And as the prince gave the magistrate to understand, that it were too great a
toil for him, and for them, to go for the smallest occurrents, sometimes to
one, sometimes to another; as to the members, the nations of merchants, the
consistories, yea to some private persons, to confer with them: It were
therefore requisite to have some man of quality appointed, that were acquainted
with affairs, and sworn unto the town. Whereupon the magistrate named
Wesenbee^ The prince requires a levy of 1200 men in Antuerpe.
Whereupon there was a day of advice and deliberation demanded by the commons,
and a

Whereunto they answered, That the levy of those soldiers was not fit in a
town of such The answer of the great counsel and the members of Antuerpe, to
the princes proposition.
traffic, but that they were ready to subject themselves, to those duties
which such soldiers or bourgesses enrolled should observe; so as they should
have the like service from them, and with less trouble and charge. And as for
the preachings, they would do their best endeavors to divert every one and that
the mildest way seemed the most safe unto them, so as in their opinions a
general pardon for them that had been at these preachings, should be very
necessary. But above all they did insist, that as the assembly of the general
estates was the true remedy, they should press to have them presently called,
to apply a general remedy to a general sore: and that in the mean time the
said prince would advise of some gentle means, fit for

And as during these actions they had so well labored with them of the
religion, as they began to forbear the carrying of arms, and that it was to
be hoped that soon it would be wholly left; it happened that the Drossard of
Brabant (which is as much as a Provost Marshall) having

About that time came certain aduertisements, that duke Erick of Brunswick
continued still Another occasion of trouble in Antuerpe.
to levy men by the kings commandment, and that about Linghen there were some
ready to enter into the country, the which bred new alterations. And whereas
moreover upon the pursutes made in court by the deputies of Brabant, the
Gouernesse had the 23 of August given a resolution upon certain points, the
commons received contentment by the one part, and coffeehouse by the other:
for whether it were that she had pardoned some repenting Anabaptist, except
his abiuration and accomplishment of penance (at the suit of some of the town
made unto the prince and the magistrate, who were intercessors for him unto the
said lady) this did somewhat content the people, as also for that the said lady
was content to pardon by proclamation, all those that had been at their
preachings and assemblies: but to the convocation took it ill, and were
greatly moved, seeing that all the merchants, and they of the religion in It
seems the duchess de^ to ^at the people for small matters.


We have said before, that the nobles confederat entreated the earl of Egmont,
who sent unto them from the Gouernesse, to carry her their answer, upon the
ambiguities which she desired to be explained, the which they promised to do.
The said answer and explanation was as follows.

Madame, the earl of Egmont has given us to understand, That your highness
desired to An explanation o^ ^o bl^ answer to the duchess.
the which in our opinions are plain enough, and that the rest will be but
tedious: yet Madame, to satisfy your commandment, we have thought good to
make this declaration which follows, to the end that our just intentions may
be thereby the better understood, and that hereafter they may have no cause to
interpret them sinisterly.

And to answer first unto the third article of our answer, Whereas your
highness requires that we should set down in particular in what towns the
prisoners be, and the occasion wherefore, and that your highness pretends
that it is not come to your knowledge. We say, Madame, that in Tournay, Lille,
Mons, Air, Bethune, Ath, Bruges, Gand, and other pla^ there have been many
prisoners apprehended for religion, by virtue of the edicts, as will appear

And touching the article of our greeuances, whereas we say, that we have heard
threats, and discovered secret practices: we say, Madame, that presently after
the delivery of our petition, we have found plainly, that many noblemen, yea
and knights of the order, have distracted and separated themselves from us
flying our company, as if we were guilty of rebellion and high treason,
treating many affairs secretly among themselves, the which they were not
accustomed to do: yea they have advertised some of their kinsfolks and friends
not to join with us, and that they should have respect unto their honors,
laying before them the dangers would fall upon us, if the king should come into
these parts, obiecting the like unto them which had already signed our
compromise, promising to procure them a pardon from his Majesty, if

And as they are noblemen which assist and give their voices in counsel, it is
to be presumed, that according to the impression which they have of us, they
inform his Majesty, and give such advice as must needs be to our prejudice
and ruin. Diverse posts are also come at sundry times from Spain, without
bringing any resolution from his Majesty, concerning us,

Whereas your highness desires to know what people we mean, whereas we make
mention of the kings subjects and vassals: We answer, Madame, that they be the
inhabitants of these parts, allowing and consenting to our petition and
compromise.

And for the last, Madame, which concerns our assurance, according unto that
which is The noblemen insist upon their assurance.
contained in our writing, we find no means to give contentment and assurance
to all those of The prince of Orange, and the earls of Egmont and Horn.
whom we have made mention) to the end they may be mediators betwixt the king,
your highness, and us; we intend not notwithstanding, that the charge which we
desire should be given them, should in any sort diminish your highness
authority, but that al which they shall do, may be by your commandment. We
doubt not but some gouerners of provinces may take it ill, for that we demand,
that from henceforth no leuies of soldiers should be made, neither within nor
without the country, but under the charge and conduct of the said three
noblemen: and that the said three noblemen (after that your highness has
appointed them what numbers of men they shall levy, for the guard of the
country) may divide the charges to such captains,

And to the end your highness may understand this more particularly, our
meaning is not to bind your highness, nor all these noblemen, any further by
the promises which shall be made unto us, but by provision, and until that
his Majesty has allowed or refused it. Provided always, that your highness
and these noblemen shall promise us, that in case his Majesty shall refuse it,
we shall continue still under their protection, for the space of three weeks,
from the day that we shall be advertised of his Majesty's refusal. And that
during the said three

As for the assurance which your highness demands of our company, we assure
and promise you, that from henceforth we will never treat any thing, without the
counsel and advise of the said three noblemen. And touching the forces which
we have without the country, we offer to employ them for his Ma. service, and
the good of the country, whenever we shall be commanded, remitting and
submitting our selves to all that it shall please his Ma. to command us, by the
advice and consent of the general estates. Most humbly beseeching your
highness, to take this our declaration in good part, and to give us a good and
short answer.

You may see into what terms the affairs of the confederat noblemen and
gentlemen were brought, by the faintness of some, and the falling away of
others: whereas in the beginning, and at the presenting of their petition they
thought to carry it clear, so much they presumed of their forces, and thought
themselves to be so strictly united in league together, as nothing should
break or dissolve them. Now by the tedious practices and dissimulations of the
Gouernesse, which bred a coldness in some, they are forced to provide for The
(...).
hearts leapt for joy, to see the confederats thus altered: and although she
had long before (from the month of May) received letters from the king (as we
shall presently see) quite contrary to that which she said unto them, and
caused the said prince and earl of Egmont to deliver (to whom nothing was
imparted of these letters) that they might take the more taste thereof, and be
the better assured, fearing to mar all if she had been too hasty, or that
her practices had been discovered (wherein she was more politic than the
counsel of Spain) she left them in suspense of their last petition, until
she had discovered whereto all the mischief tended, and

Most dear and well beloved, As we do visibly see the apparent and instant
ruin and general desolation of our ancient Catholic religion, and of the
common estate of these countries, The Goue^ n^se ^s to the towns of the
Netherlands.
if it be not speedily prevented by fit and convenient means: and the greater,
more apparent, and

In this sort the duchess entertained both the one and the other: the nobles
by a promise of their assurance and the towns to confirm them in their duties,
for their discharge unto the king, although it were difficult, yea impossible
to satisfy both parties equally. For on the one side she was privy to his Ma.
intent, touching the noblemen, and on the other side she could not keep the
people in awe, by the magistrates and governors of provinces, unless she cut
off the

Whilst that all this past betwixt the noblemen and the duchess, the prince
of Orange was Troubles in Antuerpe.
much troubled in Antuerpe, to contain the people, who were greatly moved, for
many reasons, according unto the complaints which they made daily, the which
were satisfied but by halues, and (as they said) for a fashions sake. Among
others the 10 day of August, there was a great tumult, for that one Peter
Rythou, a divine and pastor of the parish of S. Peter at Louuaine,

In the mean time the prince did insist all he could, to the end that they of
the religion should forbear carrying of arms to the preaching, at the least
within the town, going and returning: sending to the ministers and
consistories to that end, who promised to govern themselves accordingly, so as
they might be assured, that neither the Drossard, nor any other, should offer
them outrage: the which was promised them, and notice given to the Drossard, in
his house. But this hope and assurance which they expected, continued not long,
turning Four reasons why they kept their preaching in Antuerp
Brussels, of the thirteenth of August, of a certain resolution concluded
betwixt the Gouernesse and the deputies of the town, being in court, to
massacre all those that they should find at the preaching. The second, That the
Drossard (of whom they were always in fear) caused about that time certain
wagons laden with arms, to pass through the town to go to his house, one of
the which being stayed by the people, and released by the magistrate, who
favored the Drossard, did much distemper the commons. Thirdly, for that they
were The fourth reason was, That they were advertised by one of their assembly,
whom his companion

These four points bred a terrible alteration, and put the town in danger:
and although the greatest trouble were pacified, yet they of the religion
resolved to have their preaching in the town. The prince of Orange being
desirous to hinder them, sent the orator Wesenbeek unto the ministers, and two
gentlemen of his household to the chief merchants of the religion, to advise
them to forbear this presumption, or else he would seek to hinder them by all
means, yea if it were by force; and that they should attend the regents
resolution, the which Just ^tion of the commons sent unto the prince, touching
the preaching.
the people to murmr, promising to make them forbear carrying of arms at
their assemblies, as they had been often pressed by him: beseeching the prince,
that he would not take it in ill part protesting in all things else to be
obedient unto him, and to keep good guard, that for their parts no insolency
should be committed: and if he were not pleased to accept of their excuses and
iustifications, they had rather (though to their great grief) to have his ill
will, than The breaking of images beg^n i^ Flanders
and beat down all Images, crucifixes, altars, tables (how rare and exquisit
soever) ornaments, and generally all that was displeasing unto their eyes, and
that seemed to be contrary to the profession of their religion: The which was
so suddenly executed in all places, as well in Brabant, things. Wherein there
was one thing admirable, that it could never be known who was the An admirable
thing in the breaking of Images.
among the people, no, not the ministers, who contrariwise did blame those
actions committed by boys and girls, amongst the which there were some
thieves, who sought for booty; yet notwithstanding a part of it was restored
to the magistrates of those places where it happened.

It were too tedious to describe here the particularities of the beating down
of Images in every town and province of the Netherlands: we will speak only
of that which happened at Antuerpe, being the chief and most renowned, whereby
we may judge of all the rest.

Ordinarily on the eighteenth of August falls out a feast or solemn
procession in that Breaking of Images in Antuerpe.
Marie; wherewith were charged one after one, in their turns, some of the
magistrates, the deanes of the occupations, and the chief of the sworn
companies of the town, with great ceremonies, as well in lifting, carrying, as
setting it in the place. On the eve of this feast, the prince of Orange,
governor of the town, was sent for (all excuses set aside) to come to court,
for matters of great importance, and especially to conclude with the
confederats: yet at the great instance of the magistrate he stayed all the day
of the feast, the most dangerous day (according to the time and the disposition
of the state of the town) of all the year; partly by reason of the public
ceremonies which were used both before and after dinner, and for the multitude
of people of all humors, that came

The same day certain young fellows standing at the Quier door, asked, if the
maid (meaning the Image of the virgin Marie) was afraid, because she went so
soon into the Quier again, and such like speeches. On the other side,
certain youths playing in the great church, about the pulpit, their heads
being full of proclamations, would needs counterfeit the preachers, and to that
end a great knave got up into the pulpit, and there began to utter many vain
and frivolous speeches. The rest of his companions mocking him, some threw
things at him; others would have pulled him down: but he spurned and kicked at
them with his feet, and in Marie: whereat an old woman that sat before the
Quier door to sell candles, and to receive alms, being offended, cast dust,
ashes, and other filth in the youths faces, and their eyes; whereupon they
began to quarrel: for which cause the Marckgraue with his sergeants and
halberdie^s came thither, and willed them to depart out of the church; which
some of them did: the rest said, they would stay and hear evening prayer:
whereupon the Marckgraue bad his officers tell them; that there should be no
evening prayer said there that night: which made some of them unwilling to go,
and to say one to the other, that they themselves would sing euensong: and at
the last some in one place, some in another, began to sing, others played and
rouled stones and bowls in the church; and with that noise there came more and
more people together. The Marie, and presently began to break open the quier,
crying viue le Gueux: which being once begun, they ran together with such
fury,

The Images in this sort being cast down and broken in the great church, a
great multitude of the youths, and some men, with whores and knaves, al mingled
together, ran throughout the town, to other churches, to do the like, as to
the Franciscan friars, S Clares, S. Ieames, S. Andrews, S. Georges, S.
Michaels, the Peter pots, the Borcht, the Fakens, the White sisters, the Black
sisters, the third Order, the Nuns, the Bogarden, the preaching Friars, and
to all the

Mean time the magistrates and the townes-men stood abashed and amazed, all
night in their arms, as if they had been bewitched, and knew not what they
were best to do, every

Thus the magistrates and the townes-men being in great perplexity, stood with
heavy hearts and hands, and yet in arms, and in good order, one counselling
and admonishing the other to a unity, and to be careful, that no murder nor
blood shedding might ensue, wherein they all agreed (as the Spaniards say) being
carefuller and readier to defend their own lives and goods, than the holy
Romish relics and service of God: and although in the said breaking of
Images, and ransacking of the churches, many things of great worth were stolen
and secretly conveyed away, nevertheless great store of jewels, silver works,
and other things were brought into the towne-house, and other places: and some
handycrafts and guilds did likewise entreat the people to give them diverse
fair, costly, and cunning pictures in regard and love of the great art and
workmanships therein showed, which they took and bare away with

In the morning as soon as the gates of the town were opened, a great part of
the Image-breakers got out and went to S. Bernards, a cloister about a mile and
a half from Antuerp, and from thence to all the villages round about the town,
with great boldness and fiercenes pulling down and breaking all their Images:
the rest that remained within the town, ceased not all that day, and two days
after to run about the town into every church, breaking down and spoiling all
the relics whatsoever they found standing whole therein, no man daring once so
much as say or do any thing unto them. But at the last, when they began to
break down a fair crucifix that stood in the great church over the great
quier door, it falling upon the arms of the knights of the order of the golden
fleece, which were painted round about over the seats of August were hanged in
the market place, and three others banished out of the town, the Jacob
Wesenbeek, who for that cause upon the 24 of August took occasion both by
writing and by word of mouth to show the magistrate Jacob vander Heyden,
bourgmaster, that they in truth would and might protest before God, that the
breaking down of the Images was done without their knowledge and consents, and
that they allowed not of the manner of doing the same, if it were not done by
order and authority of the magistrate (although the great idolatry used in
that town had well deserved no less) and that they blamed and detested the
theeuerie, ransacking, and other insolences used therein; and that their
preachers in their sermons should admonish the people to restore the stolen
things into the magistrates hands: That they of the reformed Religion were ready
to be obedient unto the magistrate in all things, touching the resisting and
withholding of all insolences and forcible actions: That they acknowledged
the lords and magistrates of the town to be their lawful magistrates, appointed
by God to rule and govern them, and that therefore

By means of this declaration, request, and admonition, in the end the matter
was so brought to pass, that they of the reformed Religion were suffered to
preach in the new town by authority of the magistrates, to hinder them from
preaching in the holied churches: but the preacher of Kiel (which preached
after the confession of Ausbourg) was suffered to preach in S. Georges church,
as being the chief church of the Kiel, thereby to avoid many inconveniences,
and to set strife and contention between them of the reformed Religion.

While this was done in the town of Antuerpe, the like breaking of Images was
done in other Throwing down and breaking of Images in other places of the
Netherlands.
places. In Mechelen certain of the people began to do it in the Friars
church, and other

In Lier the people going about to do it, the magistrates of the town (to
shun the same, and to hinder the ransacking of the churches) commanded all the
Images and other things to be pulled down, and the church to be emptied of
such trash: which done, they showed it unto the deputies of the Image breakers.
The like was done in many other places of Brabant. At Hertoghenbosch, Breda,
and Berghen up Zoome, they endured the like destruction of Images, and other
things, that they in Antuerp did. The same did they in Gaunt, Ypre, Oudenard,
and many other towns in Flanders: as also at Valentia, Dornick, and other towns
in Waesland, and at Vtrecht, Amsterdam, Leyden, Delft, the Hage, Briel, and
other places in Holland. At Middleburg, Campuere, Vlishing, and other places in
Zeeland, at Groaning, Leenwerden, and the people, when all the Images and altars
were pulled down, they were not content therewith, Hippolitus Persin,
president of Vtrecht (being as then with them) to give them his advice: and
finding that the request was not well to be refused nor denied (the trouble
being so great in every place) they appointed certain serieants of the town
to go with the said goldsmith, to keep the church doors, that no tumult
should arise, and the Images should be taken down without any hurt or trouble.
They compelled likewise all such as had any Images in their houses, either to
deliver them unto them, or else to break them. At Dorcht, Tergone, Harlem, and
Rotterdam, the Images were preserved and kept from breaking by means of the
magistrates, as also in other towns, when at the last they saw and perceived,
that thieves, vagabonds, soldiers, ruffians, whores, and knaves were mixed
with the actors therein, and in the

The news of this breaking down and destroying of Images coming to the ears
of the Regent and the counsel in Brussels, struck a great fear and doubt in
their hearts, so that both The Regent in great fear.
the court and all the town were up in arms, to keep them from doing the
like within that place. This notwithstanding, the Regent would go to Bergen
Henegowe, fearing to be in danger of her person, and to that end desired the
governors of the provinces, and the knights Vigilius, That the townes-men had
seized upon all the gates thereof, and would not suffer her to go out, she was
content to stay there that day, upon promise made unto her by the lords, that
they would help to get her out of the town, if need were, or else die for it.
Thereupon she willed Peter Ernest, earl of Mansfield, to take the charge of
the government of the town upon him, who the next day summoned all the
townes-men, to assemble together into the towne-house, and going thither, took
with him the prince of Orange, the earls of Egmont, Horn, and Hoochstrate,
which showed them, That the Regent stayed there in the town upon their words
and promises, upon condition, That The Regen^ being in ^eare, accuses the
lords unto the king.
Vigilius.

The next day the Regent perceiving the great troubles and apparent general
reuolting and

That they should hold and observe the points contained in the letters of
protection, and for that she perceived the great and imminent necessity then
reigning, she was content, that the said lords should enter into an accord with
the confederated gentlemen, and certify them, that the common people laying
down their arms, in such places where as the preaching was then presently
exercised, and keeping themselves from giving any cause of scandale, or
disordered Dassonuille: which met and consulted with the deputies of the
gentlemen, being Lodowicke earl of Nassau, Eustace de frenes, baron
D'esquerdes, Charles de Revel, baron Dandreguyes, Bernard de Merode, baron de
Rumen, Charles vander Noot, baron de Risoire, George de Montig^t, baron de
Noyles, Martin de Serlues baron de Sterbeeke, Philip van Marbays, baron de
Lounerual, John de Montigni, baron de Villers, Charles de Lieuin, baron de
Famars, Frauncis de Haeslen, John le Savage, baron de Descouberque. These after
long conference, at the last drew unto a conclusion, agreement, and accord in
his Ma. behalf: which, for that it is of so great importance and consequence,
and that all the troubles and wars that after ensued, had their foundation
from the same, I thought good to set down the true copy, both of the
proclamation and act, made in manner of a security or protection.

Marguerite by the grace of God, Duchess of Parma and Plaisance, Regent and
Gouernesse Letters of assurance from the gouernesse to the nobles.
for the king my lord in these his countries, to all to whom these presents
shall come, In the month of May before the nobles had demanded any assurance.
the which, we desiring the good, quiet, and tranquillity of the said
countries, and to make the gentlemen petitioners more willing to yield all
obedience and service unto his Majesty, according unto that whereunto they are
bound both by nature and oath, and as they have always offered themselves: we
have, at their request, and according to the power and authority given us by
his Majesty, and as Regent and Gouernesse general of the said

Her highness has caused the gentlemen petitioners to return the twentieth
of August, assurance, and to cause it to be entertained inuiolably for ever,
suffering the gentlemen Margareta.

The gentlemen confederats holding them assured by these letters, gave
reciprocally an act in writing to the Gouernesse, of their promise, whereof
mention is made in the letters of assurance, signed by the deputies, as
follows:

We Lewis earl of Nassau, Eustace of Fiennes, lord of Desquerdes, Charles of
Revel, lord An act of the promise of the contederats given unto the Gouernesse
of Andrignies, Bernard of Merode, lord of Rumen, Charles vander Noote,
Seignior of Risoir, George of Montigni, Seignior of Noyelles, Martin of
Tserclaes, Seignior of Tylly, Philip vander Mere, Seignior of Sterbeke, Philip
of Marbais, Seignior of Louuerual, John of Montigni, Seignior of Villers,
Charles of Lieuin, Seignior of Famas, Francis van Haeften, John the savage,
Seignior of Escaubeque, and John of Casenbroot, Seignior of Bacquerseel, as well
in their own names, as deputies for the other noblemen and gentlemen
confederats, having presented a petition unto his Majesty in April last past,
touching the Inquisition and Edicts for matter of heresy: Whereas we have this
day received from the high and excellent princess, the duchess of Parma and
Plaisance, Regent and Gouernesse for the king in these countries, certain
letters patents, having authority from the king, our sovereign lord and
natural prince, The letters of assurance above mentioned being inserted at
length, with their bonds and promises, this was the conclusion.

Be it known, that according to the said letters of assurance, we have
promised and do promise, upon our solemn faith, and the words of gentlemen,
true and faithful vassales and subjects to his Majesty, that we will observe,
fulfill, and keep all and singular the points and articles above mentioned, as
well for our selves, as in the name of all the others, for whom we are
deputies, and have power, commission, and authority, promising to cause them
to be entertained, observed, and kept by our said confederates. And therefore
we do hold our confederation and compromise to be disannulled, void, and of
no force, so long as the said security promised by her Highness in his
Majesty's name, shall hold. In witness whereof we have

This promise was made by the said noblemen deputies, to the prince of Orange,
the earls of Egmont and Horn, to the Seignior of Hachecourt, and to
Christopher of Assonuille, counselor of State, being committees to that end by
the Gouernesse: whereof the said lady advertised all governors and counselors
of provinces and towns, commanding them, that in consideration of the said
assurance and promise to the nobles, they should do their best endeavors to
restrain the people, and suppress all disorders, until the kings coming,
which she said would be shortly. And in truth these letters did somewhat
pacify the people, and made them here and there to lay down arms.

In the mean time the prince of Conde, the admiral, and other noblemen,
protestants of

Let us now leave the confederates in rest with their letters of assurance; and
the better to explane the matter, let us see what the kings letters contained,
the which were received by the duchess the three and twentieth of August,
whereof mention is made in the said assurance, the which had reference unto
those which she had received in May before; the

First, that it was not fit to alter any thing touching the Edicts, but that
they should be duly An extract of the kings l^tter to the duches after the peti-
moreover, That the counsel of Trent (which had been already published)
should be put in execution. And as for that which concerned the bishops, that
the said lady should give them all direction and possible assistance, that it
might be effected, as was fit: concluding, that what he had written was for the
good of Religion, and of the Netherlands, the which else would go to ruin:
And that she should give charge unto the noblemen that did assist her to do
the like; whereby they should discharge their duties which they owe to God, his
Majesty, the general good of the Netherlands, and to themselves in particular.

This charge from the king unto the duchess, is nothing else, but what he had
written in December 1565, and after the presenting of the confederats petition,
by his letters written in May following: In all which letters there is not any
mention made of the petition, exhibited by the confederat gentlemen, nor of his
intention to redress those alterations by any mild or moderat course, as the
duchess had so often promised. Whereby it appeared, that they did not acquaint
the king truly with the estate and affairs of the Netherlands: and that the
counsel of Spain (being too violent) not considering the season, the estate
of the country, nor in what terms the Romish Religion then stood (being
without doubt greatly shaken) sought only by this latter charge unto the
Gouernesse, to ruin the nobility and the commons of the Netherlands. But she
proceeded more modestly and discreetly, than the said counsel

On the other side, if the Gouernesse would have inclined willingly to some
tolerable moderation and good order, touching that which the gentlemen
demanded in their petition, and not to have fed them with so many delays,
excusing her self absolutely, that she had no credit nor authority to
dispense with the Edicts and Inquisition, she had quenched the fire which lay
smothering in the ashes, the which had not flamed out, being uncovered, as we
have seen; and every one had been contented to live (with the liberty of his
conscience) quiet in his house, seeing themselves free from fear of search by
the Inquisitors, touching their faith and belief. But contrariwise, many have
believed, that both the duchess Ieams van Hessel, Attorney general of
Flanders) sought all occasions how to effect it. Besides, the retreat of the
Spaniards, required by the noblemen, and the refusing of money, without a
convocation of the general Estates,

And although that after this assurance given by the Gouernesse, and the
promises made by the confederats, it seemed that all troubles should cease: yet
notwithstanding, although the duchess sought by all means to hinder the
preaching without the towns, yet the people having gotten this liberty since
the breaking down of Images, leaving the fields, did appropriate unto
themselves certain churches within the towns: so as they were forced (with
the Gouernesse consent) to suffer them to build new Temples in Antuerpe for
their exercise, with some rules and ordinances over all, to avoid scandales and
disorders: after that those of the Consistories of the Religion, and the
Ministers, John Taffin, Herman Modet, and George Siluain, for the French and
Dutch churches, had made their excuses by writing unto the magistrate

My masters, we protest in truth, as before God, that what has been done
touching the A justification of the Prote stant ministers at Antuerpe.
beating down of Images, was without our priuitie or consent. As for the
spoils, robberies, drunkenness, and other dissoluteness and insolences, we
both blame them, and detest them. Wherefore the Ministers of the Word shall
exhort (as they have already done) their auditors in their sermons to abstain,
and to deliver into your hands what has bin stolen away. Those of our Church
are ready to yield you all obedience, and to oppose themselves under your
command, against all violences, thefts, and other insolences. We will
acknowledge you to be established by the lord in the office of magistrate, and
therefore we are bound to obey you, not only for fear of punishment, but also
for conscience sake: and by consequence we ought and will

Upon which request, there was a certain accord made in Antuerpe, betwixt the
one and Ex mandato Dominorum, Polites. The like in a manner were made in
Vtrecht and Amsterdam, then at Gaunt, Tournay, and other places, to entertain
the inhabitants in concord and love one with another, and to assure the towns
from all eminent danger, until the king had otherwise provided, by the advice
of the general estates: the which was done by the particular governors and
magistrates of towns, as well in Brabant, Flanders, Holland, Zeeland, Vtrecht,
Friseland, Gueldres, as other provinces of the Netherlands: whereby the
reformed Religion did wonderfully increase, and the Protestants had for a time
some cause of content, seeing themselves freed from that odious Inquisition,
from the new bishops,

Yet the people did not altogether forbear carrying of arms, but in many
places did assemble like men of war: for which cause, the Seignior of
Backerzeel, a chief counselor to the earl of Egmont (who had been one of
the deputies for the nobility, and had signed the compromise) issuing out of
the Audenarde with some bourgesses and pesants, fell upon a troop of these
armed men, near unto Gramont, whom he surprised suddenly, not fearing any such
encounter, defeated them, and put them to rout, whereof he slew twelve, and
took one and twenty prisoners, the which were afterward hanged.

This was the first exploit that was done by arms against them of the
Religion: and afterward they began by little and little, by virtue of letters
and secret commandments from the Gouernesse, to pursue them in diverse places:
whereof some seeing this change, and that Those of Alcmar complain of the
secret instructions
by these latter letters, written in secret, directly contradicting the letters
of assurance, and the kings bounty, whereof she made so great brags, desiring
to have a more ample resolution thereupon. Whereunto she answered, that
notwithstanding any objections made by them of West-Friseland (which are the
towns of Alcmar Horn. Enchuysen, and Medenblyc) they should govern themselves
according unto the instructions sent to the officers and particular magistrates.

This passing in this sort in the Netherlands, and the contract aforesaid being
sent into Spain to the king, he was not a little grieved and offended thereat,
being as then at Segobia, sick of an The kings resolution in Spain.
ague. This matter being brought before his counsel, was by them much and long
debated: many the Regents dealing with the confederated gentlemen, and the
sectaries, nor once speak

According to this resolution, in the month of October, the king writ two
sorts of letters, the one to be showed to the counsel and the lords, and the
other to be kept secret: in the first he wrote, That for that the Queen his
wife was then brought in bed of her first child, being a daughter, borne upon S
Clares day, and for that cause named Isabella Clara Eugenia, he was as then
going from Segobia to Madril, to make preparation for his voyage into the
Netherlands, Maximilian, much complaining of the troubles in the Netherlands.
Whereunto the Emperor, as a wise, experienced, and politic prince, returned
The emperor Maximilians answer to a letter sent him by the king of Spain.
him an answer in the month of September, satisfying him in every point of
his letter particularly, desiring to hold and maintain all love and friendship
with him, as brethren are bound to do, one unto the other; amongst other
things saying and by many reasons and arguments proouing, that he, after due,
ripe, and good deliberation and advice taken, considering the ground and depth
of the same, found it to be a matter of exceeding great consequence

About this time many of the noblemen in the Netherlands wrote their several
letters unto the king, as the earls of Egmont, Mansfield, Meghen, and
Arenbergh, the baron of Barlamont, Noircarmes, and Rassinghem, the Burghgraue
of Gaunt, the University of Louen, and diverse others, every man according to
his affairs, showing in general and particular what had passed, especially in
every one of their several governments. Whereunto the king made them answer in
most friendly wise, thanking them for their good service in his behalf, and
willing them to Vigilius with his own hand, thanking him for his great pains
and good endeavor done in his service, and desiring him (not respecting his age,
feebleness, and indisposition of body) to continue therein till his coming
thither. And for that about this time the prince of Orange and the earl of
Egmont made complaint unto the king and certain lords in Spain that were
their friends, that some complained of them behind their backs, and had a bad
and sinister conceit and opinion of them, against all truth, as time and
opportunity should well declare, with such like speeches, they were answered by
the third hand of certain counselors of Spain, that the best means for them
(to cease all bad speech^s and conceits) was to show and prove the contrary by
their actions, conforming with all celeritie and promptness, although he had
some particular feeling to the contrary: esse, until the coming of the king
into the Netherlands; with diverse such instructions.

The Gouernesse by her manifest demonstrations of mildness, and by so many
goodly assurances, which she promised, did not only labor to retain the
people and merchants from retyring out of the country, but also the nobility;
who, notwithstanding any assurance she could give them, were not without
distrust: but above al (having disappointed the league and compromise of the
gentlemen, which made her hardy, and yet dissembling) she studied to
entertain by all kinds of favor and courtesy, the prince of Orange, with the
earls of Egmont, Horn, and Hochstraten. The king having sent her word, that
she should be very careful, not to give them any cause of jealousy or
distrust, but to assure them of his love, both to all his subjects in general,
and to them in particular, to take from them all desire, to retire out of the
country. The king himself did write unto the prince of Orange, to testify

I have received your letters of the seven and twentieth of May with great
affection, and The kings letter to the prince of Orange.
since of the foureteenth of June: and by that which I have written unto my
sister, you may conceive not only what small occasion you have to think that
which you writ in your letters of the seven and twentieth of May, but also the
contrary. It is certain, that you should be much deceived to think, that I
had not great confidence in you. And admit, that any one should seek to do
bad offices, yet am I not so light and credulous, as to believe them, having
had so great experience of your loyalty and services: whereby you may therein
satisfy your self, and rely upon the letters which I have heretofore written
unto you in that behalf, and Philip.

This letter would have lulled a very sufficient man asleep, if the prince of
Orange had not received aduertisements of a contrary tenor, yea, even from
Spain; and if there had not Francisco d'Allana, ambassador for the king of
Spain, at the French court, to the duchess of Parma: which we have thought
good to insert, showing how the said lady should entertain all these noblemen:
the first was of this tenor.

Madame, Although I have written unto you at large fifteen days since, and by
the post Francis^d All ^as (...) letters to (...) duchess of Parma.
which came from Spain, yet having received a packet two days since out of
Spain, I would written unto me, whereby you may see many particularities,
which in my opinion will give you contentment: and to understand the good order
which his Majesty has taken, and the great preparations which he daily makes,
as well to resist the Turkish army, if it should attempt any thing upon that
coast, as to reduce his subjects to Gods obedience and his. Your highness
shall also understand, how much they are satisfied with your manner of
proceeding since the stirs which have happened in those parts where you are:
and above all they have commended the last point of intelligences, and places
of strength, whereby his Majesty does now pretend to effect his To turn the
Netherlands into a royalty.
designs, with little pain and resistance, contrary to the doubt which
Think of this both French and English.
Majesty to let slip) to subdue one by another, whom he pleased, and that
might hereafter oppose themselves to the good of his affairs in those
countries. And for that, Madame, the point which seems to me of greatest
importance in this action, is to assure more and more the disguised The nobles
aboueme^tioned
The marqui of Bergh, and (...) baron of Mon tigny.
two which are gone to his Majesty, with whom they have carried themselves so
cunningly, giving them such entertainment, as they do not swear but by the
faith which they owe unto their master: and besides they have made such
practices in their families, as they cannot do nor say any thing, but it is
presently advertised. In the mean time they are resolved to make them keep
good residence by his Majesty, and not suffer them to depart, no more than the
seignior of Ibermont, who thought to return presently. But I must tell you,
Madame, that the greatest mischief I know for the present in this business,
is, that those which have the greatest power and credit with his Majesty, and
namely the duke and the prince agree well upon the O'Alua and Rigomes:
punishment, but not about the means: for the one presses his Majesty's
passage all he can, That he knew that what had been done in his Netherlands,
not only concerned his repuoation, but also the service of God: and that he
did so much apprehend it, as he would rather hazard therest of his estates,
than not to punish such a rebellion exemplarily, and in the view of all
Christendom. And to that end, even in the same place, his Majesty resolved to
part out of Spain, as soon as possible he could, and to lead with him the
prince his son, and the queen, who notwithstanding they of Spain. That his
Majesty arriving soon after in Italy, he would treat with some princes
Iunius, the other David, to demand certain money which the said princes did
lend during the troubles of this realm, to the chief of the Protestants
faction; and withal to recommend them which hold their goodly religion unto
the French king: But in truth it is (as far as I can discover) to make some
practices with the said Huguenots, Of Lorraine
being happily arrived in the town (who in truth has done a world of good
offices, and would do more if he had the means) I have conferred long with him
of the importance of this business, and of the consequence thereof, for the
ruin of the Catholic religion in this realm; making him to understand, that
it did not only concern the interest of the king my master, but also his
own; giving him thereby means Iunius, for that he was a subject, and borne in
the Netherlands: so as the next day he went to a house of the queens, called
Moncheaux, whereas the court then was, whereas he wrought in such sort, as
presently after the king and queen sent a letter to the provost of their
household, to commit the said ambassadors of the Lutherans to prison, seizing
upon their letters, papers, and instructions: the which had been executed, but
that during the contestation there arrived one of the couns^ll, who was of
opinion, that they should surcease the execution, until they had a new
commandemen^: So as although they have since sought to repair this error, yet
the said ambassadors hold themselves to have received such an escorne, and
their masters so great an injury, as I see all the practice is thereby broken,
and not to be repaired: besides they find themselves newly agreeued, for that
they have had but cold The queen mother.
in the world, the more I negotiat here, the more constantly I believe what I
have often written unto your highness, that there is neither trust, assurance,
friendship, nor resolution in her. And so he ends his letter with a discourse
of the queen mother, and of matters of France, the which I omit for brevity
sake, for that they concern not our subject. It was written at Paris the 18 of
August 1566.

And by a second letter he writes unto the Gouernesse, as follows.

Madame, The advertisement which your highness has given me touching the
affairs Another letter from the (...) to the regent. (...)* Egmo^t, and (...).
of the Netherlands, confirms me in the opinion which I always had, That
this tumult could not be without the intelligence and support of some great
men, and namely of those three which carry so good a show: for as your
highness has carefully and with great discretion weighed all things, so you
must believe, that from those three all the mischief comes. I have not failed
to advertise his Majesty of all things, touching this action: and (...)
assured, that as your highness has recommended it unto his Majesty, he will
not forget to entreat them as they deserve, and according unto your
recommendation: and they may be assured that they shall be the first, whom his
Majesty will undertake, not to grace them (for they have not deserved it) but
to punish them as their rebellion does merit: yet your manner. And your
highness must rest assured, that if you have a desire to make them receive

Also, Madame, whereas you desire to be advertised, in what assurance we are
of the succors of France, I am forced to say, that they make us many promises,
but I fear they will serve us but to little purpose, and in the end all will
be but words, they having neither will nor means to succor us, as they
promise. Besides the Huguenots here are strong and look big: I will not omit
any thing that is possible to be done, whereof I will advertise your highness,
upon all occasions. But above all, I beseech you govern your self with great
dexterity in the behalf of those three that I have named. From Paris the nine
and twentieth of August 1566.

These letters show sufficiently in what sort they would entertain these
noblemen, namely, the prince of Orange, and the earls of Egmont and Horn,
seeing that they held themselves assured in Spain of the marquess of Berghes,
and the baron of Montignie, and that in their opinions (after they had
dispatched these) they would easily prevail over the earls of Hoochstraten,
Culenbourg, and Berghen, the lord of Brederode, and other of the chief nobles
of the confederats, using as their instruments therein other noblemen, as the
earls of Megen, Ba^lamont, and his five or six sons, Noircarmes, Bea^oir,
and others, whom they had at their devotion, hating and envying the other three
noblemen, and all the confederats.

The resolution then being taken in the counsel of Spain, that there was no
means more Charles the kings son, and their natural prince, they would
presently yield him all obedience. But those that bare an inueterat hatred unto
the country, as the cardinal of Granuelle and his like, excused him of so
heavy a burden, by reason of his youth: then the duke of Medina-Celi was
named, but the Duke of Alua was preferred before him (notwithstanding the
privileges of the country, which admit no strange governor, but one that is
borne in the country) as an ancient captain, of good experience, and fortunat
in war, to whom this charge was Charles being much discontented, could not
contain himself, but burst forth in some words of dislike against the duke;
whereby he discovered the love he bare unto these countries, being his
inheritance, and the fear he had that the duke would oppress them too much:
saying unto him, Beware that thou do not oppress my people, least The
prince of Spaines speech to the duke of Alua.
I be revenged. To whom the duke answered, I thank God I have a ^aster for
the remainder of my life, and am not to be commanded by you.

These noblemen* the prince of Orange, the earls of Egmont, Horn,
Hoochstrate, and Lodowike of Nassau, having seen these letters, and well
considered of those which the baron of Montigny had written out of Spain to
the earl of Horn, his brother, containing the kings coffeehouse, touching
the troubles happened in the Netherlands, aduertising them The earl of Egmo^ts
speech
Francis d'Allanas letters, that they ought not to oppose themselves to any
thing that it should please the king to command, the which he said, he did not
find tolerable in conscience, but that they ought to acquaint him with all
affairs, that being better informed, he Francis d Allanas letters, the which
she denied constantly, until that being vanquished by his own hand, she said,
That they must not take it, nor interpret it in that sense they did.

The earl of Horn soon after the conference at Deuremonde, went likewise to
Brusels, where (for that he understood that all his actions were ill taken) he
gave an account of all his dealings in Tournay and Tournesis, unto the
Gouernesse, the which he left in her hands in writing: And for that he found
that they distrusted him, he retired from Brussels, and went to his castle of
Waert, from whence he writ unto the king, dated the twentieth of November, all
the estate of his actions, justifying himself of many things wherewith they
charged him to his Majesty, setting down the reason why he had absented
himself from court, and retired The duchess arms, and forbids all exercise
of the religion.
did also arm, making a diligent search, and punishing all those that had
assisted at the breaking down of images, forbidding the preaching absolutely,
and all exercise as well public as secret of the religion; commanding
generally that the edicts concerning it, and the Inquisition, should be put in
execution, according unto the kings letters, the which she durst not attempt
before, fearing to spoil all, until that the noblemen were separated from
their confederation, and retired to their houses, being pacified by her letters
of assurance.

Among other towns of the Netherlands, which had taken unto them the free
exercise of the But they knowing that this garrison was only to suppress
them, excused themselves, offering Noircarmes to besiege the town, with those
troops of horse and foot which she had gathered together long before.

For the effecting of which charge Noircarmes approached with his forces,
spoils the country round about, and brings them those discommodities, which
are incident to war: He takes the Borough and the Abbey of S. Amand, betwixt
Valenciennes and Tournay, whereof the Protestants were seized, and there showed
how he would use them whom he afterward besieged. The town being of all
parts invested, he pressed it all he could, and kept Noircarmes, they sent to
entreat the other neighbor Valenciennes besieged.
towns, not to fail them at their need, and namely the gentlemen, under whose
assurance they had taken arms. But the nobility fainting in their extremity,
some of the people assemble to aid them, especially they of West-Flanders go
to field, but wanting commanders, they marched not like soldiers, busying
themselves in spoiling of churches, and running after priests; they had not
marched far, but they were discovered by the seigniour of Rassinghem,
governor of Lille, Douay, and Orchies, who sent some horse with a troop of
harguebusiers, drawn out of the neighbor garrisons, who easily brake them,
being all foot, and charged them in an open champion: Some thought to save
themselves in the 1567
them, that being joined together, they might by that means put themselves
into Valenciennes. But Rassinghem, who had all night advertised the commons
(the which were enrolled for such accidents) and the garrisons of the country,
he had by six of the clock in the morning, near two thousand men of the said
commons, and three hundred harguebusiers, and a hundred horse together, who
notwithstanding were not troubled to hazard any thing in the combat: for
Noircarmes was in front with ten ensigns of foot, and six hundred horse, who
charged them in such sort, as a third part remained upon the place. The
nimblest footmen were the happiest, for they saved themselves in Tournay:
whereas afterward

Noircarmes seeing that their neighbors misery did not move the
Valenciennois, he drew out of Douay, Arras, Tournay, and other places, all the
canon he could, the which he planted before the said town of Valenciennes,
and in a short space made such a breach, as the poor besieged, seeing
themselves without commanders, and without soldiers, but some light French
foot, being abandoned by the nobility, and without all hope of any help or
succors, together with the threatening letters which the Duchess had again
sent Valenciennes yielded.
unto them, having endured three months siege, upon many goodly promises,
they yielded Noircarmes the fourth of March (against the opinion of the French
and some others) by composition, the which was not kept: For as soon as
Noircarmes was entered into Noircarmes breaks his faith with them of
Valenciennes.
the town with his troops (as he was a cruel man, and exceeding covetous) he
kept the gates of the town shut for some days, that he might with more ease
see the French soldiers hanged, with the ministers, and the richest Protestant
merchants, confisking their goods: among which the two Michels Herlin, father
and son, were of the chief; reading whose judgment, as the clause of
confiscation of their goods was the conclusion, the father answered, This is
the sauce: and so those two notable persons, and of the richest of the town
lost their head, whose goods, especially their gold, silver, plate, jewels, and
the richest mouables Noircarmes did appropriat unto himself.

The taking of this town did much amaze the other places, for Cambresis was
abandoned, Mastricht yielded, and in a manner all the other towns received the
kings garrisons. Anthony of Bomberghen, who had seized upon Boisleduke, and
detained prisoners there the seigniors of Merode and Petersheim, with M. I.
Schyff, cha^cellor of Brabant, being sent by the duches thither to settle
things in good order, after that he had caused his soldiers to be paid, he
retired, hearing

The seignior of Thoulouse with some other gentlemen Protestants, by the
intelligence of Peter Ha^k, bailif of Middlebourg in Zeeland, had an enterprise
upon the island of Walchren, being embarked at Antuerpe: but the ma^hants ship
of Antuerpe having seen them imbark, departed before them, and arrived first in
Zeeland, giving advertisement of the said enterprise,

In the mean time the people seeing the hot pursuits of the clergy to
increase daily, to their great loss and prejudice, and that the Gouernesse
(seeing that she had won the game by the disjunction of the nobles) made no
account of their sighs and complaints, they resolved to The people of the
N^therlands compl^ine unto the king of Spain
appeal to the king, sending him a supplication full of tears, to move him
to take pity of his people, who demanded nothing but to be maintained in the
liberty of their consciences. And to make it known unto his Majesty, how much
they desired to advance his affairs, they offer him three millions of florins,
so as it would please him to entertain the transaction in his full force. And
withal they employed certain princes of Germany to be suitors in their
favor. come within the town. For which cause the baron of Brederode wrote
another letter out of Antuerpe, unto the regent, bearing date the 8 of
February: saying, That not their petition, but the Inquisition, and new
devises, that men sought to bring into the country, together with the long
delay made to answer their request, were the true and only causes of the
^roubles in the country: and that she might know that his intent and meaning
was no other, than only to propound some means of peace and unity, and for
that she would not suffer him to come at the court, he sent her two requests
from the confederated gentlemen: wherein they showed* The confederated
gentlemen's requ^sts.
how that in August before, the country being full of troubles, and the people
in every place ready to rise up in arms, by means of the good resolution
then taken, all was pacified, wherein they well and truly acqui^ed themselves.
And although it fell not out so well in some places, it was the fault of those
that were not well addicted unto the service of his Majesty;

The request sent by those of the reformed religion, unto the gentlemen, which
they sent with theirs unto the regent, held in effect a great complaint of the
miserable persecution and wrongs done unto them in every place, contrary to
the promises and securities made unto them: wherein also they said, That the
said gentlemen had sought to beg^ile and deceive them, unless they could show
them, that they had such express charge and commission from the regent, and
the lords of the order of the Golden Fleece, and if that no promise would be
holden

Whereunto the regent answered with a more proud and haughty style, than she
had formerly The Gouernesse answer.
done: That she could not conceive what noblemen, nor what people they were,
that had presented this petition, for that many noblemen confederats held
themselves satisfied, as well for that they had caused the Inquisition and the
edicts to cease, as by reason of the assurance

And for answer to that which they said, That she had not kept that which she
had accorded, she said, That all that was grounded upon a false and too large
interpretation of her words, and that rightly many magistrates had never allowed
it: but that she had not gone against her promise

To this answer of the duchess there was a certain reply divulged, by the
which, among others, A reply and distrust of the Protestants.
the nobles laid all the blame of that whereof the duchess accused them by her
answer, upon the secret instructions which she had sent unto the private
magistrates, touching the observation of the kings intention: whilst on the
other side, she caused the assurance given unto the nobles, and the
Protestants, to be published: who notwithstanding knew well by the said Among
others, that cont vander Berghen had written unto president Vigilius, letters
full of excuses,

As these complaints of the nobles answers, replies, cares, and distrusts,
continued among them, they sought to provide for their affairs as well as they
could, especially the Catholics, who made themselves to be feared by the
forces they had levied, and by the kings authority. The earl of Egmont
running throughout all the towns of Flanders, labored to make the preaching
to cease. The earl of Megen being at the request of the Catholics, and by the
gouernesse command, entered into Vtrecht with his regiment of foot, the next day
he fortified the garrison of the castle with three hundred men. And to stop
the courses of them of Vianen,

In the mean time the Gouernesse was counseled to propound a new oath to al
governors A new oath propounded by the duchess.
of provinces, knights of the order, counselors of state, and other noblemen;
by the which among other things they did promise and swear, to remain faithful
and obedient servants unto the king, and with all their power and means to
maintain, defend, and preserve the Catholic, Apostolic, and Romish religion,
and to root out, and help to root out, all new doctrine and religion: to
punish and chastise all breakers of images, and robbers of churches. Which oath
was taken before the duchess, by the duke of Arschot, the earls of Egmont,
Mansfield, Megen, Torre, who was sent expressly unto him, to persuade him by
many reasons: Whereunto he answered modestly, That the Gouernesse had no cause
to doubt of his faith and loialtie, and that he was content to go unto her
highness, to demand the causes of her distrust, and to justify himself of
all matters wherewith he might be charged. This new oath was not offered for
any other cause, but to discover who would refuse it, who thereby should be
taken for favorers and supporters of the Protestants. And also to curb them,
that either for

The duchess being thus assured by this new oath, and having all the towns of
the Netherlands The duchess plais her part.
reduced by their governors under the kings obedience, and the public
preaching abolished, except in Antuerpe, then she unmasked her self, and began
to play her part openly. All that could be taken and convicted to have carried
arms, broken images, and spoiled churches were hanged. Those that were absent
were adiorned to appear within a short time, if not they were declared rebels
and their goods forfeited: the which made an infinite number retire into war to
the priests and monks, than the Papists did to their companions. The prince of
Orange Philip of Launoy, lord of Beauvoir, with four hundred men of her guards
accompanied with la Motte-par-Dieu, who had two companies of the earl of
Egmonts regiment, besides four hundred men drawn out of the garrisons, and
Hans of Grave, provost marshall of Brabant, with five hundred horse, to
surprise them before they were stronger; who finding them scattered and out of
order, defeated them soon: many cast themselves into the The Protestants
defeated at Austerweel.
taken, were afterward hanged, or otherwise executed. The seigniour of
Thoulouse their leader, was slain there, and they took one which carried a
list of such as should assist at certain enterprises, whereby they discovered
some practices.

The magistrate of Antuerpe hearing that the Duchess troops marched against
them of Auste^, re^ring least their bourgesses should sallie forth, and receive
some harm, they caused ^e bridges at the port of Austerweel, and at the red
gate, to be broken; which gates they kept shut, placing the three companies
which they had raised for the guard of the town, along the rampars of that
quarter, doubling the watch, and having lanternes and lamps light A tumult in
Antuerpe.
therefore they entreated them not to stir. But this people being half
mad, intending to go, brake down the red gate, threatening the prince and the
earl, if they suffered them not to go, calling them traitors, yea there was a
Clothworker so rash, as to offer his harguebuse to the princes breast: so as
these two noblemen in this tumult, were in great danger of their lives, Eerhof)
the which they brought unto the Mere, and planted them upon all the approches,
to withstand all force that should come against them: The prince fearing some
great inconvenience, caused every one to retire to his house, and commanded
the artillery should be carried back to the accustomed place, so as by his
good reasons and persuasions the Michaels place, the said reformed did also
assemble together in arms: and to make the Catholics and the strange nations

The 17 of the month the magistrate having given thanks unto the principal
merchants, and The magistrate excuses himself to the Gouernesse.
to the nations, to every one in particular, for their good endeavors, he sent
deputies to the gouernesse, to inform her of all that had past, beseeching her
to interpret in good part the accord which had been made and concluded among
them the which they said they had found expedient, not to diminish any thing of
the kings authority, but for the preservation of the

This tumult in Antuerpe heartened and much encouraged the regent and the
Catholics, together with the victory gotten at Austerweel, and to the
contrary brake and disannulled all the proceedings and pretenses of the
confederated gentlemen, and the Gueux, who perceiving themselves to be void of
means to become masters of Antuerpe, and consequently of diverse other towns,
marking the strength of the Catholics within Antuerpe, and thereby gessing
their strength in other places, the most part and the chiefest of them
resolved, as also the consistories to yield unto the time and Gods secret
judgment. At that time the lord of Brederode was in the town of Amsterdam in
Holland, wherewith the magistrate being discontented, and ill assured (for that
the chief of the reformed religion were continually with him, Torre) being
then at Vtrecht with the earl of Megen, whose men he had caused to be
furnished with victuals and munition, by the duchess commandment, as also he
had furnished duke Erick of Brunswick with certain ships of war, to come into
the Netherlands) commanding the said Torre to charge them in the behalf of his
Majesty, and her highness, to cause the said lord of Brederode to depart out
of their town, the which was in trouble by his presence: and in case they were
not strong enough to effect it, that his Majesty and her highness would
assist them with forces and means. And for that this business might not admit
of any delay, that by provision they should employ the person and soldiers of
the earl of Megen. the said town, and to remain therein, observing all that
shall pass carefully, and especially the

According to which commission, the secretary being come to Amsterdam, and
having acquainted the magistrate with his charge, answer was made him, That they
would in all things obey his Majesty and her highness, but that they found
great difficulty in her highness letters, whereas she made mention of the
earl of Megen, for that he doubted not but the lord of Brederode would call
for a copy before he would resolve to retire, the which would incense him the
more. They must also impar it first unto the asse^bly of their great counsel
(which they call Vroetschap) consisting of 36 persons, whereof some were
Protestants, who might make report thereof unto their brethren, yea unto the
lord of Brederode. Whereupon, after much consultation, it was resolved to
impart it unto the counsel, and presently to go unto the said lord. Torre,
being accompanied by two aldermen, went unto the lord of Brederode: being
entered The secretary Torre goes to the lord of Brederode. The lord of
Brederode complains of the duchess.
into the chamber, whereas he was accompanied with seven or eight gentlemen,
among others were William of Blois, called Treston, and Roseberg his Drossard
of Vianen: after the complements were done, la Torre being well advanced in his
speech, the lord of Brederode interrupted Torre had no need to use any long
speech, being sufficient to show him his commission: the which Torre having
refused, saying, That he had no such charge, the lord of Brederode said unto
him, after some other speeches touching his credit, That he was not so honest a
man as he made himself, to be so lightly believed without seeing of his
commission. Which words did so move la Torre, as after that he had maintained
Torre retired.

The chief among the Protestants could not digest this commandment given to
the lord of Brederode, and feared that la Torres charge was to expel him by
force; so as they kept a guard of above a hundred men before his lodging,
having most of the bourgesses at his devotion; and besides, many arrived out of
Friseland and from Vtrecht, attired like merchants, mariners and pesants: so as
the magistrate feared, that the Protestants would grow so strong, as they would
become masters of the town. Whereupon they sent unto the duchess, to entreat
her to send some man of countenance and authority, who might moderate matters:
for that they found it not convenient to attempt any thing by force. La Torre
was in no less perplexity, and durst scarce show himself, fearing to incense
the Protestants, and to give them occasion of some tumult: but set spies to
observe what men haunted the said lord, whereof he did Sandeli^ went and came
often to the Secretary Torre, the Protestants entered into jealousy, that they
practiced some matter against them: by reason whereof, some gentlemen Frisons
belonging to the said lord and the Seignior of Treslon, went with the consent
of their lord, the seventeenth of March to la Torre his chamber, where they
seized upon all his papers; among the which they found his la Torre should
think fit; and among others, the letter which the duchess had written unto
him, whereas she made mention of the earl of Megen, to force the said lord to
retire. All which papers were brought unto the lord of Brederode, and presently
spread abroad among the people. La Torre was for some days stayed in his
lodging; and there had happened some great alteration, if some of the chief
bourgesses, that were Protestants, had not promised to go unto the magistrate to
prevent it; the which they did: requiring, that the accord made betwixt them
the eighteenth of January, by the prince of Orange, might be entertained in
all points: That by their advice two captains and two lieutenants might be
over and above appointed

The magistrate was much troubled at this request, knowing well, that the duches
would never suffer, that the lord of Brederode should have any authority within
the town: wherefore they knew not what to determine upon these demands. In the
end they themselves drew five articles: the first was, That two on the
magistrates behalf, two in the name of the Protestants, What the magistrate of
Amsterdam granted to the Protestants.
and two for the sworn companies should go at the towns charge, unto the
prince of Orange, to have his advice touching that which was required.
Secondly, That at the same instant there should be at every port a bar or
trauers made with a new lock, whereof one of the nine deputies of the
companies being in guard, should have the keys, the which at noone and at
night should be brought unto the town cofer, whereas the keys of the town
gates are kept, to which Baldwin Reyersz, lieutenant to captain William
Pouwelsz, in whose place they should appoint another, that were pleasing to the
commons, at the discretion of the captain, the bourgomasters, and the said
nine deputies.

The deputies of the bourgomasters of the Protestants, and of the sworn
companies, went unto the prince of Orange, who answered them by an apostile on
the 26 of March, that for the quiet of the town of Amsterdam, he thought it
good, that the accord made the 18 of January should be entertained: and as the
duchess consent was very requisite therein, that the deputies should do well
(for their greater security) to sue for her highness agreation: That he also
found it good, that the said 400 me^ were levied, as it was required: That he
would send one expressly unto the lord of Brederode, to let him understand his
will: That promises and oaths should be reciprocally made, as it was required,
to avoid all distrust: That in like sort he found it convenient, that the
locks and keys should be made, and governed as the magistrate had set down:
That he found it not unfitting, that the ships of war should be so placed and
entertained, if it Baldwin should be displaced, and another chosen at the
discretion of the bourgomasters, captain, and deputies.

This answer of the prince touching the affairs of Amsterdam, was received by
both parties for a law, and confirmed reciprocally by oath: according to the
which, a new captain, two A petition si o^ them of Ant^erpe to the Gou^e.
of the month, tending to a convocation of the general estates, to remedy the
troubles. And in preaching (which they said was the only cause of the troubles)
might cease, granting a general pardon for all that which was past, and
wherewith his Ma. found himself grieved, except murders, robberies, thefts,
and spoils, seeing they could not punish the other without the total ruin
and desolation of the town and of the country it self. To prevent the which,
and to bring them that are gone astray into the right way, and to the true
religion, that it would please his Majesty to use his accustomed clemency and
natural bounty. Which pardon might be speedily granted by her highness, with
his Majesty's good liking; and if she cannot grant it, that it would please her
to give them respite for three or four months, during the which they might
retire out of the country with their goods, wives, children and families: and
that they

To which petition the Gouernesse answered, That she had received letters from
the king, The ducasse answer.
by the which she was expressly forbidden to enter into any capitulation or
treaty with any towns of the country, although it were with his Ma. good
liking, yet she would consider of their petition. But above all (to prevent his
Ma. indignation) it was necessary that they should receive the garrison which
she would send them, to show their obedience thereby unto his majesty. Whereupon
the deputies made a more ample declaration the (...) of April, with many
allegations, for the justification of the said town, but chiefly to excuse the
receiving of a garrison propounded by her, for fear of a greater inconvenience.
Yet the duchess persisted by another long apostile, savoring of nothing but
extreme rigor, shadowed with many shifts, which were (viz. of the reformed, and
of the confession of Ausbourg) before them, who^ they gave to understand, That
for the preservation of the town, and not to incur the K. indignation, and
to prevent all other inconveniences, it was necessary to surcease the
preaching, and the exercise of their religion, until that by his Majesty, with
the advice of his counsel, and the states of the country, it should be
otherwise decreed: and therefore that the said ministers should retire out of
the town, giving them a good pasport. Wherein they were so fully persuaded, as
well by good reasons as by threats, as in the end they declared, that they were
ready to obey, giving them a good and an assured safe conduct to retire out of
the town and country: according to the which, some of the ministers departed
the same day, and others the next: and which the Protestants had caused to be
built, razed by their own consent, and their magistrates,

The bourgomasters and superintendents of Amsterdam hearing, that the preaching
ceased throughout all Brabant and Flanders, the 17 of April gave them of the
reformed religion to understand, That it was likewise expedient to surcease all
preaching and exercise of their religion in the said town, until the king had
otherwise decreed, to avoid his Ma. indignation, and other inconveniences that
might happen unto the said town. The Protestants contradicted the magistrates
for a while, alleging their former agreements: but in the end they must of
force obey, and received the garrison which the Seignior of Noircarmes brought
them. The prince of Orange seeing the retreat of the ministers out of Antuerpe,
having tried the inconstancy of the Seeing he would not resolve with him and
others to stop the entry of the duke of Alua into The prince of Ora^ges speech
to the earl of Egmont, bidding him farewell.
the Netherlands, (who was now in Italy) as it had bin propounded in their
assembly at Deuremonde, that he should be the bridge whereon the Spaniards would
first march, to plant their tyra^nie in these parts:

The lord of Brederode being in the town of Amsterdam, was also advertised by
the prince to stand upon his guard, and to look to his affairs. Whereupon he
also resolved to depart, and to leave the said town and his places. The
Protestants would gladly have retained him for their head and commander, with
the troops which he had in his town of Vianen, and therabouts, but he would
not trust to it, seeing that the prince himself did not trust, but had
advertised him. Wherefore the superintendents of the town having furnished him
with ships, victuals and money in loan, he retired the 27 of April about
midnight, being accompanied by many gentlemen and other confederats. He went
toward Embden, and from thence into the country of Cont Ioos of Schouwenburch,
whereas the 15 of February the year following 1568 he died in the castle of
Haremburch, of the jurisdiction of Reockelinghuysen, and lies buried at
Reinold, lord of Brederode, of Vianen, Almeyden, etc. knight of the order of
the golden Fleece, and one of the brauest men at arms in his time. And as for
him, enjoying the same possessions, he was captain of one of the kings bands
Peut estre. And after his retreat out of the country, he would usually say,
Lord preserve my soul and mine honor. He had to wife the lady Emilia,
contesse of Nieuwenar, who a year after his death married again with the
Palatine Frederic, prince elector.

His soldiers, which were at Vianen, and the forts thereabouts, went forth
with their colors flying the eight and twentieth of April, before day,
passing by Amsterdam; where they spoiled and ruined the cloister of the
Chartrons Monks: then taking their way along the dike of Sparendam, they went
to Egmont, where they spoiled the abbey; and passing Meghen not able to
overtake Brederodes men, retired toward Vtrecht, spoiling the countrymen,
under color that they had lodged them as they passed.

There were yet remaining in the town of Vianen three companies, under the
Seignior of Vchtenbroec, Nyuelt, and Renesse: on the six and twentieth of
April they went forth to skirmish with them of the fort of Vaert; but they
were well encountered, and some of them Erick of Brunswicke was about Vianen,
wasting and spoiling the country; wherewith the garrison Vianen abandoned.
and bourgesses were so terrified, as upon the third of May they did abandon
it, and fled some here, some there: The duke entered it upon the fifth of the
month, his soldiers committing all the insolences that might be: he caused
the gates to be taken down, and left the place open.

Some gentlemen thinking to retire by sea out of Holland, to go to Embden,
were by the disloyalty of their mariner (being cast upon a bank of sand
betwixt Harlingen and Staueren) betrayed and delivered to captain Muyert of
Cont Arenberghs regiment, who carried Thierry and Ghisbrecht, barons of
Batenbourch, Siurd of Beyma, and Hartman Galama, gentlemen of Friseland, the
which were afterward sent to Brussels by the duchess commandment.

The 28 of May the Gouernesse seeing her affairs so successful in the towns
of Antuerpe and Amsterdam, caused a most rigorous proclamation to be made, the
which chased many Protestants out of the country; and the 13 of June following
she caused an instruction to be made for all the provincial courts,
containing, how they should proceed against the Protestants. She did also write
unto all the towns, how the magistrates should govern themselves, to restrain
the people from retiring out of the country; and did also make an Edict to that
end.

As the persecutions began now to grow more violent against the Protestants,
and that there An apology made by the Protestants.
the carrying of arms, and upon the breaking of Images, they did answer
pertinently to every point, as well by lively reasons as examples, both out of
the holy Scriptures, and profane hystories, both ancient and modern. Whereby
they concluded, that the nobility cannot be justly taxed for their behavior
and proceeding in the presenting of the so tyrannously and barbarously against
them, and by their advice was so judged by the king himself.

By these means the Regent got the masterie over the Netherlands: so that in
all the seventeen Provinces there was no resistance made against her; and the
gentlemen, truly called Gueux (that is, beggars) were with diverse other men of
good quality and reputation (that had means to live in good sort within their
own countries) forced to be beggars and strangers in foreign nations, being
many thousands in number, and yet (during their absence) they never left off
their manner of Netherlands apparel: which they used there, in hope one day to
return home again. They that stayed in the Netherlands, were imprisoned,
hanged, and put to death; others lived in miserable and continual fear and
sorrow; and most of them driven to poverty, as in the history ensuing shall
be declared. Such are the judgments of God, and yet just, good and true.

FERDINANDVS A TOLEDO DVX ALVA MAR: CORIAE GVBERNAT: ET CAPITA: GENER BELGICAE.
FERDINANDO ALVARES, OF TOLEdo, duke of Alua, Lieutenant Governor and Captain
General of the Netherlands for Philip the second, K. of Spain.
To bring the Belgians (that heretics were thought
An^ rebels) in subjection, all practices I sought
To put invre, and ruled by force and cruelty:
Constraining them by mere deceit, by fraud, and subtlety,
To build up castles great, and make strong citadels,
That served for to bridle them, because they ^re rebels.
The earls of Horn and Egmont I in Brussels did behead,
And no man durst appear to aid them in their need.
Of each man's moueables the tenth part I did crave,
And not content, the twentieth and the hundredth part would have.
And when I had the Netherlands turmoyled and tossed,
Through my default, the king my master in the end them lost.

THE NINTH BOOK.
The Argument.
THe duke of Alua arriues in the Netherlands. He creates a Counsel of the
troubles, to whom he gives absolute power, reducing the Netherlands into a
pitiful estate. He assures himself of Gand. Cont Horn abused by Cont
Egmont, are both prisoners. He builds up the castle of Antuerpe, where he
sets up his proud statue. The duke of Alua proceeds by commission to
apprehend the prince of Orange, whereunto the prince answers. Articles set
down by the Inquisition of Spain to ruin the Netherlands, and confirmed by
the king. An enterprise to surprise the duke of Alua. The prince of Oranges
first apology against the dukes citation. Cont Lodowic the princes brother
enters with an army into Friseland. The prince of Oranges petition to the
Emperor. Cont Arembergh slain, and the Spaniards defeated in Friseland by
Cont Lodowic. The sons of Batenbourg and others executed at Brussels, and
soon after the earls of Egmont and Horn. Cont Lodowic besieges Groningen,
is defeated, and saues himself. The prince of Oranges army to come into the
Netherlands. The duke of Alua meaning to hinder him, encampes by Maestricht.
The princes army is dispersed, without doing any thing. The duke of Aluaes
general pardon. He brags to have conquered the Netherlands, and prints a book
of it. The collection of the tenth penny, where Brussels opposes, and in the
mean time the Isle of Briel is surprised, whence grew the second troubles in
the Netherlands. Mons in Henault surprised by Cont Lodowic. The prince of
Oranges second army. Cruel wars betwixt the Protestants of Holland and
Zeeland, and the Spaniards. Genlis defeated, coming to succor Mons. The
prince and the duke of Alua front one another with their armies, near unto
Mons, and do nothing. The prince having dismissed his army, comes into
Holland, being called by the States of the country. Mons yielded to the duke of
Alua. He makes cruel wars throughout all the Netherlands. He sackes Macklyn,
Zutphen, Naerden, and other towns. He besieges Harlem, which in the end
yields to the mercy of the barbarous Spaniard. The Zeelanders make sharp
war at sea against the Spaniard. Middlebourg besieged. The baron of
Batenbourg defeated and slain. The duke besieges Alcmar: The Spaniard forced
to leave the siege with shame. Ramekin besieged and yielded to the prince of
Orange. Gertruydenberg surprised by the prince. The duke of Alua seeks to be
revenged of the West-Frisons. His army at sea is defeated. Cont Bossu his
Admiral taken prisoner. The duke seeking to vanquish by temporising, besieges
Leyden. The prince comes into Zeeland. Cruel war against the Spaniard. The
duke seeing his unfortunate success, labors to be called home, and retyreth
with Dom Frederic his son.

THe king of Spain fearing least the Protestants Religion in the Netherlands
should increase too much, imagining, that the duchess of Parma, his bastard
sister, gouernesse of the said countries, was not rigorous enough to persecute
them (although by her dissembling and cunning practices they were in a manner
all subdued) and so the Inquisition of Spain, yea, the Romish Religion should
not only prove contemptible, but also come to ruin, as in Germany, England,
Scotland, and elsewhere: for the preventing whereof, and that the reformed
Religion should take no deeper footing (meaning to proceed by fire and sword,
according to the project which was laid at the enterview of Bayon, having no
respect to the privileges of the country, so solemnly sworn by him at his
joyous entry, which admit no strange governor, of which oath he had procured
a dispensation from the Pope) he sent for Governor of those countries, Dom
Ferdinando Aluares of The duke of Alua sent Governor into the Netherlands.
Toledo, duke of Alua, knight of the Order, a Spaniard, and a mortal enemy to
the nobility of those countries, whereof he made him his lieutenant,
governor, and captain general; giving him for marshall of his army, Chiapin
Vitelli, a gentleman of Rome, and Gabriel Serbellon,

For this cause, as if it had been for some holy war, by means of the
Inquisition, and spirituality of Spain, a great sum of money was given unto
the king: and presently letters were dispatched and sent unto the governors of
Naples, Sicilia, Sardinia, and Millaine, to command them to send their old
garrisons of soldiers into Lumbardie, that they might be ready to march with
the duke of Alua into the Netherlands: which duke (accompanied with diverse
noblemen and gentlemen of Spain, and other Spanish soldiers, as also with his
two sons, Dom Frederico, and Dom Ferdinando de Toledo) took shipping at
Barcelona, and with his galleys arrived at Genua upon the 17 of May, where he
fell sick of a tertian fever, and a plurisie. From thence he went to
Alexandria de la Paillia, where Dom Gabriel della Cneua, duke Ambrose, lying in
the Alps between Germany, France, and Italy, which is called the Rethees. The
number of soldiers that were mustered there to go into the Netherlands, were
first the regiment of Naples, or the third part of all the garrisons there,
being 19 companies of Spaniards, in all 3230 men, their colonel being Alonzo de
Vlloa; the regiment of Sicilia, being 10 companies, in all 1520 men, conducted
by Julian Romero, an old soldier, well known in the Low countries, as also in
England; the regiment of Lumbardie, of 10 companies, in all 2200 men, their
colonel Dom Zauzio de Londogue; the regiment of Sardinia, being 10 companies,
whereof four were new soldiers, by them called Bisoignos, which came out of
Spain with the duke, were 1728 men, their Dom Gonsale de Braccamonte: their
number all together making 8678 men, besides their boys, which were many, as
also diverse voluntary soldiers. The duke took order, that every company of
soldiers should have 15 musketeers, all Spaniards, which as then were more
used than ever they had been before. Their horsemen were five companies of
light horse, all Spaniards, each 100 apeece, three companies of Italians, and
two of Albanois, a kind of people dwelling in Naples, which came out of Albania
in Grecia, driven from thence by the Turk, and as yet speak the Greekish
Tongue. With these there were two companies of Spanish petronels on horseback,
altogether 12 companies, making 1200 horse. This muster was taken the second of
June 1567, and to these, being in Burgundy, there joined four companies more,
which made 400 horse.

This muster thus made at S. Ambrose upon the third of June, were divided into
three battles, that they might be the better provided of victuals, order
being taken, that where the auantguard lodged and departed in the morning,
there the maine battle should lodge at night, and that being gone from
thence, the rereward came thither: after them followed a great number of wives,
whor^s and boys being by good order divided into several parts, as into the
gentlewomen and captains whores, the rich whores, and the soldiers poor
wives and whores, with good and convenient discipline amongst them, for the
which the duke was much commended.

While the kings army marched along, the king of France assembled a great
number of soldiers in France, and 6000 Switzers, to withstand the danger that
might fall out. The like Chiapin Vitelli, marquess de Cetone, the master of
the Ordnance Gabriel Serbellon, the enginour to devise castles and forts,
captain Pachiotto, and others. The duke being in Sauoy, stayed there until
the beginning of July, by means of letters sent by the Regent, the duchess of
Parma, out of the Netherlands, unto the king, being as then sorry, that she
had made so great complaint of the nobility and people thereof, and for that
cause wrote unto the king, to certify him, that all was done and pacified in
the Netherlands, the off^ndors partly punished, partly imprisoned, and the rest
driven away, and banished out of the country, and most of the towns planted
with garrisons, and that it was to be feared, that the customs and manners of
the Spaniards in

These and the like persuasions were by her used, to cause the king, to call
the duke of Alua

Thus the duke passed forward, and marched within seven miles of Geneua, which
was likewise in fear to be assailed by him: but for that they were so well
provided of soldiers, and had the Switzers to friend, he let them alone. From
thence he passed through Burgundy and Lorraine, and entered into Lutzenbourg,
where the earls of Lodron, Ouerstein, and Schouwenbourg met him with their
regiments of Dutch soldiers of footmen, and some horsemen. There likewise came
unto him twelve thousand Ruyters, that had long been Behold that great
Lutheran: The which the earl himself might very well understand, but he
dissembled it, and presented him with two goodly horses of great price, whereof
the duke made no great esteem, entertaining the earl and the rest but coldly,
carrying a sad countenance, and more than a royal gravity: Which should have
made the noblemen, especially the earl of Egmont, to bethink themselves,
Vigilius, and the cardinal Granuelle feared exceedingly, for that Egmont's
forsaking of them had been the only cause of their victory and triumph over
the nobles and the people) that with their common forces they might have
repulsed the duke of Alua at his first entry: the which had bin easy to
effect, for that they should have been seconded from all parts; besides,
Egmont was general of all the foot in the Netherlands, Egmont had not yielded
the only honor unto God of those two goodly victories of S. Quintines and
Grauelingues, having often braued it more than was fit, to the contempt and
disgrace of them that lost them, not acknowledging, that it was God

The duke of Alua being arrived at Brussels the eight and twentieth of August,
was honorably received of the Regent, which informed him of all things at
large, and showed him by what means and how (according unto her opinion) he
should pacify the country, and bring the prince of Orange, and other noblemen
and gentlemen that were sted,

The duke being in the government, he caused all his soldiers to lodge round
about him in the nearest towns; as the regiment of Naples in Brussels, all
Spaniards; the regiment of The begin^ (...) the (...) of Alua's (...) ^ment
(...) ^nous.
the earl of Lodron in Antuerpe, discharging many of the Wallons, whom he
mistrusted. He took the keys of the gates from the townes-men, whereof they
of Gand, by a request presented unto him by the earl of Egmont, made
complaint, which put the duke in a great rage, and said, That he would do what
he thought best to be done for the kings service, and not otherwise. And
presently as soon as he saw himself established in the government, in steed
of moderating the proclamation, and other things requested and sought by the
lords and gentlemen of the Netherlands, he ratified, confirmed, and ordained
the old proclamation and the Inquisition to be^d and executed in the same, and
in steed of assembling the general states, The (...) or (...) of the ^bles.
de Barlamont, and Noircarmes, the preside^ts of Fla^ders and Artois, but the
chief and principallest of them were the Licentiat John Vergas, doctor Bois
del Rio, the Fiscale of Burgundy, John de la Porta aduocat Fiscale, the
counselor Jacob Hessel, the counselor Belin Brese, advocate Fiscale of
Mechlin, and du Bois, attorney general, whereof the duke himself was
president, but in his absence Vergas sat as president in his place: of whom it
is reported, That for rauishing an orphane child committed to his custody, he
was banished out of Spain; a man above all others most stern and cruel,
seeking nothing but riches and blood: But the Spaniards said, That the cankered
wounds of the Netherlands had need of so sharp a knife (as Vergas was) to cut
away their dead flesh. The secretaries were Vlierden, la Torre, Prae^s and
Mesdagh. The first two or three months the duke and the lords assembled and
sat in counsel every forenoone and afternoon, all being directed by the duke
himself, whose meaning was, that the opinion of the counsel should be but
consultiue, as Anthony van Stralen, which was signed only by the aforesaid
president Vergas, doctor Boys del ^io, and Secretary de la Torre.

And by this counsel, and by the duke himself, all power and authority was
taken from The tyranny of the duke of Alua and his bloody counsel


By means of this bloody counsel, the authority of the counsel of estate
was likewise wholly diminished and put down, which had scarce a place
permitted them in the court All authority taken from the general states by
the bloody counsel
to assemble together: but sometimes the said counsel of estate were sent for
into the de Medinace^ came into the Netherlands, they began again to assemble
in their accustomed chamber, and to consult together: So that during this new
manner of counsel, the ordinances of the counsel of estate were not once

Having laid this foundation, he began to imprison all sorts of people, by
reason of the troubles past, much more than the Gouernesse had done, causing
them to be executed with all sorts of torments and punishments, according to
the tenor of the Edicts. The which many seeing, being terrified with such
cruelties, they retired out of the country, choosing a voluntary exile: the
which he caused to be called by proclamation, and if they did not

The counsel of the troubles being once established, it was not long idle, but
began to proceed presently by apprehensions, executions, confiscations, and
banishment of persons, The pitiful estate of the Netherlands.
the which were never convicted, no not accused, nor once suspected for the
troubles or Religion: he caused the children to be rebaptized, which had been
baptized at the preaching, and remarried them at the Romish church, which had
been joined together by the Ministers,

This counsel of the troubles made a proclamation in the kings name, That all
that pretended

The duke of Alua for his greater assurance, in the beginning of September,
took away the keys from the magistrate of the town of Gand, putting the
town in guard to Colonel Alphonso, a Spaniard. The Gantois complained to the
earl of Egmont, governor The duke assu^es himself of Gand.
of Flaunders, who acquainted the duke therewith, and he made him no other
answer, but what had been done, was for his Majesty's service.

The general Estates of the Netherlands being assembled the foureteenth of
September, in the town of Brussels, at the earl of Culenbourgs place (where
the year before the banquet of the confederate noblemen was made, at the
delivery of their petition) to see the dukes authority and commission, he
sent for the earls of Egmont and Home to come to court, to confer with them
of some matters concerning his Majesty's service,

These two noblemen being come to court the nineteenth of the month, they
caused them to retire into a chamber apart, saying that the duke would come
speak with them; whither Don The earls of Egmont and Horn prisoners.
Frederic of Toledo, and many Spaniards entered armed, and they were commanded
to deliver their swords, and to yield themselves prisoners in the kings name:
and notwithstanding all their protestations, that they were not bound to yield
them unto any one but to the king himself, yet they were taken from them, and
they given in guard to captain Julian Romero. Afterward the duke sent them
both prisoners with a guard of three thousand horse and foot, to the castle of
Gand. Cont Charles of Mansfield was then also in court, when as these two
noblemen were committed prisoners, but his father sent to advise him to retire,
fearing least the like should happen unto him, for that he had been one of
them that had signed the petition of the noblemen.

At the very same time Anthony of Stralen, bourgmaster of Antuerpe, was taken
prisoner by the earl of Lodron, who presently caused all his goods to be
seized, inuentaried and sealed up. The like was done to John of Casenbroot,
seigniour of Backerseel, chief counselor to the earl of Egmont, by the
provost of Spelle, and put in prison at the port of Couwenbergh at Brussels,
but his secretary found means to save him.

The duke of Alua commanded the earl of Egmont, being prisoner, to write
unto him that was his lieutenant, and governor of the castle of Gand, That
upon the sight of the letter he should go forth with his garrison and
mortpaies, and suffer captain Salnias to enter with his Spaniards, the which
was done. So many imprisonments of great and small (the brute whereof did fly
suddenly over all the Netherlands) executions and cruelties, made many
(although

The 24 of December he laid the first foundation of the proudest citadell in
Europe, in the town of Antuerpe, on the side of the suburb called Kyel, along
the river, which was the design The castle of Antuerp built.
and invention of his enginour Pachiotto a Sauoyard, compassed in with five
mighty bulwarks, The duke of Aluaes proud image.
of the country, very curiously wrought by one James Iongelinck an excellent
Statuarie: at the foot whereof was graven Ferdinando Aluares de Toledo, Albae
Duci, Philippi secundi Hispan. Regis apud Belgas praefecto, quod extincta
seditione, rebellibus pulsis, Religione procurata, Iustitia culta, Prouincias
pace firmauit, Regis optimi fidelissimo Ministro positum. And lower was graven,
Iongelingi opus ex are captiuo. For that this image had been cast of the
metal of certain artilerie which had been won from his enemies.

This proud piece of work was not set up until the year 1571: and afterward
as too profane) it was taken down by the great commander of Castile,
Governor of the said countries

After the duke of Alua had so well settled his affairs, as he thought there
was no enemy to be feared within the country, and therefore had no need of so
great forces, he sent by the commandment of the king his master, to succor
them of the house of Guise in France, against the princes and Protestants of
the realm, the earl of Arembergh with twelve hundred

The duke of Alua thinking that he had now surmounted all difficulties, being
not content with the fleece of such as were retired out of the country, but he
would have the skin withal, yea and all the flesh: he caused Julian Romero to
seize upon the earl of Buren, eldest son to the prince of Orange, being at
school in the University of Louvaine, against the privileges of the du^ hie
of Brabant, and of the said University, notwithstanding the protestations of
the rector, and of doctor E^bert Leom a lawyer, schoolmasters to the said
earl, who was carried from thence into Spain, and there kept p^soner unto the
year 1595, that the king sent him into the Netherlands, with cardinal Albert
of Austria.

After that this young earl had been thus carried away, the duke of Alua
required by the Attorney general of the great counsel, that the prince of
Orange, and cont Lodwic his brother the earls of Hoochstraten, Vander Berge,
Culembourch, the lord of Brederode, and others* should be called to answer
personally to such things as should be propounded on his Majesty's behalf,
touching the troubles, by virtue of a commission granted in that respect,
touching the prince of Orange, whereof the copy follows.

Philip by the grace of God king of Castile, etc. To our first usher or
sergeant at arms hereupon required, greeting. We have been given to
understand by our loving and faithful 1568 A commission to apprehend the
prince of Orange.
counselor and attorney general, how that ^illiam of Nassau prince of
Orange, who had received from the deceas^d emperor Charles the fifth, our lord
and father, of famous memory, own private authority, and beyond the charge
given him in that town, suffered and allowed the free exercise of al sects
indifferently, giving them leave to build many temples and consistories

This commission was proclaimed by a sergeant and six trompets, and the
relation of the adiournement was set up in the court at Brussels: whereunto the
prince of Orange, after that he had been advertised, answered the attorney
general by his letters, as follows.

Master Attorney, I have received the copy of an adiournement the which you
have caused The prince of Oranges answer to the commission.
to be executed by a public proclamation, finding my self grieved with the
accusations contained therein, as a noble man of my quality ought to do,
desiring nothing so much (as I hope I shall make it appear) than to have
means to contest and answer for my self: having no intent to leave an
impression in the hearts of the ignorant, that I have not discharged mine
honor, and the duty which I owe unto the king, and that I have acquitted my
self ill and undutifully of those charges, estates, and offices, wherewith it
has pleased his Majesty heretofore to grace me* but rather I hope by the
discourse and relation of my defenses, to show, that the good, long, and loyal
services, expense and losses which I have incurred by reason thereof, shall
much exceed my bonds and rewards: Having therefore cause to desire

And the pretended accusation of heresy being at this time odious, and in a
manner necessary Henry against Robert king of Sicilie, was declared void, and
of no force, together that the said emperor was accompanied with a mighty
army, suspected unto king Robert, as at this present the duke of Alua is with
a Spanish army, carrying us the affection, which every man knows. The which
may suffice to discover the nullitie of your citation and adiournement, Robert
king of Sicilie; for as much as the Knights of the Order, according to the acts
and constitutions of the said Order, cannot be adiourned, but before the
chief of the Knights of the Order and their brethren, for any fact (how foul
soever) that they shall commit: Neither can they proceed to the apprehension,
seizure, nor detention of the said Knights of the Order, before it be first
decreed by the advice of his companions and brethren: and in that case they
must be presently put into the guard of the college and company of the said
Order, and not rigorously entreated, as they have done our cousins and
brethren, the earls of Egmont and Horn, whom they have imprisoned: suspect,
and not to be allowed, yea and to a more strict and rigorous prison, than we
are tied William of Nassau.

This answer made by the prince to the attorney general, was accompanied with
a letter to the Duke of Alua, the tenor whereof was as follows.

My Lord, As my actions may well testify, that since my youth I have desired
nothing more, than to employ my self in the service of the emperor of famous
memory, and since of the king my master, I did hope that his Majesty being
advertised by me (as also the Duchess of Parma then Gouernesse was) that I
was come into this my county of Nassau, for certain urgent affairs of mine,
respecting my faith and loyalty, would have done me the favor to command
me wherein I might have done him service, as I had always offered by my
letters: or at the least, that I should have understood from you, what his
Majesty's

And as I have been always expecting his Majesty's commandments, I have
been advertised, That they began to proceed against me, by seizure of my
seigniories, lands and goods, and which is worse, by proclamation in the name
of the Attorney general, full of false and insupportable slanders; and
afterward by the apprehension of my son, whom I had left at Louvaine, that
he might be hereafter the better able to serve the king and commonweal,
whereat I was much amazed, and it seemed strange to me, that they should proceed
in have to the said Attorney general, and before the expiration of the hasty
time limited me, to show him the nullitie and other reasons I have against his
adiournement, to the end the William of Nassau.

During all the duke of Aluaes proceedings, and according to the twelve
articles concluded in the year 1556 by the inquisition of Spain; the said
Inquisition pronounced in form of advice generally against all the
Netherlands, the sixteenth of February 1568, and confirmed by the king the six
and twentieth following: which articles we have thought good to insert

The most sacred office of the Inquisition, so often attempted in the
Netherlands by his majesty, and hindered until this time, shall be instituted
and advanced by this manner, which is most expedient.

1 They must persuade the emperor, being gone astray, and wickedly
confederated with Articles concluded by the Inquisition of Spain against the
Netherlands.
heretics, that he resign his kingdoms unto his son, with the whole
administration of the Netherlands.

2 That the emperor with his two sisters, having given over al affairs,
leaving the Netherlands, shall retire into Spain to us, being assured that
they shall never return more to do any harm.

3 These being dispatched, we must also draw the king to us, and keep him for
ever, that he part not, and not suffer any Flemings to have access or
conference with him.

4 That the king write unto and command the clergy of the Netherlands, that
with the Inquisition they should accept of 15 new bishops, the which should be
free from all secular jurisdiction, yea in cases of treason.

5 The subjects of the Netherlands through their malice and way wardnesse, will
revolt, and move seditions and tumults pleasing to all, but to our company.

6 The princes and noblemen, heads and authors of these factions, with the
subjects, must be taken away, and the others reduced unto reason.

7 They shall hire at our charge thieves and spoylers of churches and images,
whose offenses

8 That all commerce, negotiation, liberties, and privileges, shall be rooted
out, and that all be reduced to extreme poverty, whereby the realm shall be
permanent for us.

9 No man of all those countries (except he be of our faction) shall be held
worthy to live, and finally all to be rooted out, and all goods, possessions,
arts and trades, and all order to be taken away, until there may be a new
realm and a new people.

10 In this action the wise and valiant Duke of Alua shall be employed in
person, whereas any other, were he of the blood royal, or a prince, should be
of no esteem: so as being suspect, yea in the smallest matters, they must be
dispatched.

11 No contracts, rights, promises, donations, oaths, privileges, and solemn
assertions of the Netherlands shall be of any force for the inhabitants, as
being guilty of high treason.

12 But above all, they must be careful, that in such grave matters, of so
great importance, they proceed not suddenly, and with violence, but moderatly
and with good order: to the end that the princes, nobles, and subjects, may
mutine, and that one may persecute another, so as the executioner may fall into
the snare, for there is not in Christendom a more foolish and indiscreet
nation, nor that is more easily abused, than is the Flemish, God punishing
their infidelity by this means.

These articles were sent out of Spane in Latin to James Hessel, Attorney
general of Flanders,

The office of the most holy and most sacred Inquisition, required by the
presence of his royal Majesty, to resolve upon the most abominable
defection, Apostasy, and heresy, committed The sentence of the Inquisition of
Spain against the Netherlands.


His royal Majesty having seen the information made by his commandment,
upon the The kings con firmation of the sentence
execrable crime of Apostasies, heresies, and seditions committed by his
subjects of the Netherlands: Having also seen the muniments and documents
autenticall and worthy of credit, added to the said information, by the
officers of the holy Inquisition sent into the Netherlands: Having also seen
the holy advice and resolution of the most holy and sacred Inquisition here,
with the pregnant reasons inserted thereunto, administering, and doing right and
justice in this behalf, using his royal and absolute power, says and
decrees: That all and every subject of the said Netherlands, and the whole
body thereof (those only excepted, which are noted in the said informations,
whose names we will send in time to be kept in the records of our Netherlands)
as well for their public and manifest Apostasies, heresies and defections from
God,

Behold in truth a most cruel and rigorous sentence. We read of an emperor
that wished all the people of Rome to have but one head, the which he might cut
off at one blow. What they had no feeling of their religion, nor knowledge of
our Lord and Savior Jesus

These cruel proceedings caused daily more and more fear and terror in the
people, and forced many to fly out of the country, and diverse wild headed
fellows forsaking all their goods, and some their wives and children, went and
kept in the woods in West-Friseland and other places, and there set upon
priests and monks, which they got by night, and having taken them took all
they had from them, and cutting off their ears and noses, let them go: for
which cause A sentence for the rasing of Culembourgs place in Brussels.
the earl of Culembourg) gave a sentence against the house of the said earl,
ioining to that of the earl of Egmont, behind the sand hill in the town of
Brussels, condemning it to be pulled down and rased to the ground, and never
to be built again, with an inscription graven in a square stone of marble set
upon a pillar in the midst of the place, written in four languages, Regnante
Philippo 2. Cathol. Haspan. Rege in his suis inferioribus Germania regionibus,
gubernance vero Ferdinando Aluares de Toledo Albae duce, etc. Florentij de
Palant quondam domum solo aequari sancitum est, o^ execrandam memoriam repe^tae
in ea coniurationis aduersus religionem ecclesiae Catho. Romans Regiam
Maiestatem, and ipsas regiones, Anno salute 1568, 5 Calend. Iunij.

Mean time the regent the duchess of Parma, had wrought such means, that
she had obtained The regent duc^sse of (...) out of the Neth^nds.
leave of the king to depart out of the Netherlands, and for her good service
was by the king rewarded with gifts, as a great sum of money, and a yearly
pention during her life and for that cause preparing her self to travel unto
her husband into Italy, did by writing take her leave of the states and the
whole Netherlands; in her letters, showing how she was received anno 1559, and
for that cause she said she could have been content to have yielded up the
same in the like assembly of the general states, as the gouernor^ and regents
before her had done: but for that the king had expressly forbidden the assembly
of the general states, during that troublesome time, unless he himself were
personally present, that could not be done according to her desire: whereby she
was constrained to do it by writing, praying them to take in good part, and
judge the best of her labor, industry, care and diligence used in the said
government, much complaining of the trobles and vprores happened in the two
last years of her government, yet by Gods grace, and by the aid and
assistance of a great number of the good subjects of the Netherlands, before
the end of April she said she happy and flourishing estate, which she with all
her heart desired: once again praying them to take her proceedings in good
part, withal wishing and counselling them, to keep and observe

About this time there was a certain enterprise taken in hand by the fugitive
gentlemen, against the person of the duke of Alua, at such time as he in Lent
meant to go in devotion from An enterprise to take ^he duke of Alua
Brussels to the cloister of Groenendale, in Somen wood: the principal doers
thereof being the lord of Rysoire, and his brother the lord of Carloo, of the
house of Noot, and others (this lord of Carloo kept in the said cloister, in
habit of a monk, for fear of the duke, as he said) they had gotten ready
six or seven hundred horsemen, most part of them keeping in the Dohan not far
from thence; within and about Brussels they had about 500 foot men, whereof a
soldier, that sometime had served the lord of Likes, told the said lord, who
presently gave the duke intelligence thereof, at such time as he was fully
purposed to go to perform his devotion, which the duke would scarce believe,
and for that cause was hardly to be persuaded not to go: but the soldier
naming his captain to be one of the earl of Egmonts horsemen, the said
captain was presently apprehended and committed to prison, and being sharply
examined, would not disclose any thing touching the said conspiracy, and for
that cause was with variety of rigorous and bloody invention cruelly tortured,
and put to death: and so the said enterprise went not forward, and yet no more
men troubled nor molested for

In the mean time as the prince of Oranges process was handled before the
duke of Alua by incapable commissioners, without any lawful form of
proceeding, by the instruction and deduction of which process, the princes
iustifications did not appear. To the end that posterity might know by what
reasons he could justify and purge himself from the false and slanderous
accusations of the duke of Alua, under the name of the Attorney general (who
was then but a simple man, and a drunkard, called John du Bois, a peasants
son) and also to show the grounds of the alterations, which have happened in
the Netherlands, the said prince set forth a discourse for an advertisement to
all the world of his innocence, and of the wrong which the duke of Alua did
him: which discourse was entitled, A Justification of the Prince of Orange,
against his slanderers: the which for that it was published in print, I
forbear to relate here.

The earl of Hoochstraten being cited in like manner by the attorney general,
and accused almost of the like crimes that the prince of Orange was, answered
thereunto after that he was retired, first by letters unto the duke of Alua,
and then by an answer unto the attorney general, and in the end by an ample
discourse of his actions in the service of the king and country, to serve him
for a justification: where among other things to confirm his declinatorie
exceptions, set down in his answer, he produces four articles, drawn out of
the laws and ordinances of the good duke Philip, the first instituter and
soueraign of the order of the golden Fleece. Where he sets down in what cases
a knight cannot be deprived of his order, and why he Production of five ^cles
of the privileges of Brabant
Joyous entry of the Prince to the Duchy of Brabant, concluded in old time by
a perpetual contract betwixt the duke and the three estates of the said
country, and solemnly sworn by them for an inviolable law.

First, that we shall be to them, that is, to all our vassals and subjects of
our country of Brabant, hereafter specified, good and upright iusticers, and
loyal lords, and not suffer any force Art. 1.
or violence whatsoever to be done unto them: nor entreat them, nor suffer
them to be entreated shall grow through their fault or negligence, only the
judges may prorogue the day of pleading

Item, that we shall never bind our selves as duke of Brabant and Limbourg, for
causes touching Art. 3.
the jurisdiction and seigniories of the said countries, to make war with any
one, or to make or cause to be made against any one, reprisals or seizures, but
with the advice, will, and consent of our towns and country of Brabant: and
that we shall not suffer any other causes, nor shall not seal any, whereby our
countries, limits, and towns, nor any of the said countries, or their rights,
liberties, and privileges, may be violated or diminished, or our countries and
subjects damnified in any sort.

By the which seven (the chancellor and the counselors of the counsel of
Brabant) or others Art. 5.
presently added unto them, or that by succession of time it shall please us to
add unto them:

Item, Whosoever shall be taken in our said countries of Brabant, and beyond
the Meuse, Art, 17.
we shall not our selves lead, nor suffer them to be led prisoners out of our
said countries.

Item, That hereafter the officers, by themselves or by their sergeant, shall
not in our towns, Art. 10. of the second addition
liberties, and villages of our country of Brabant, draw any one out of his
house, nor take him

The said earl of Hoochstraten did also produce an extract of three articles
drawn out of the Joyous entry of king Philip in the year 1549.

Having heard, read, seen, and understood, all the Ioious entry of our lord
and father, with the letters of adiunctions and additions thereof, together
with other adiunctions, letters and The articles of king Ph^oious entry.
concessions of our great grandfather, touching the last article thereof, with
the alterations and moderations thereof; and what is added thereunto, according
to the contents of the act, and Art. 1.
lord and father bare to all the country of Brabant, and to the inhabitants,
vassals and good subjects thereof) to entertain and observe their rights,
privileges and liberties, customs, uses, and also prescriptions, in respect
of the many great and faithful services and favors, done to the duke and
duchess of Brabant, our predecessors, and many others to our lord and father
the emperor, as good subjects are bound to do unto their natural lord, and as
we trust they will hereafter do to us: We have in this our reception and
inuestiture unto the seigniory of the said country, given and granted in the
town of Louvaine, with the priuitie and consent of our said lord and father,
and of our certain knowledge and mere motion, do give, grant, and consent
unto the privileges, articles, cautions, and assurances of law which follow.

Item, We confirm and ratify to all our prelates, hospitals, cloisters,
barons, knights, Art. 57
towns, and liberties, and to all other our good subjects of our country of
Brabant, and beyond the Meuse, all their rights, liberties privileges,
charters, customs, uses and prescriptions, as well those which have been
given, granted, and sealed unto them by our predecessors dukes and duchesses,
as also those which they have enjoyed, kept, and prescribed. Yea that which was
granted to the three estates by duke Philip our great grandfather, at the time
of his entry. In like sort two other letters of our said great grandfather,
the one in the year 1451, the 20 of September. and the other in the year 1457,
the 18 of Nouemb. And moreover the two additions of our lord and father the
emperor, the one given at Gand the 12 of April 1515, and the other at Brussels
the 26 of the same month and year. Promising them all in general, and every

Item, We do promise them for us, our heirs and successors, that we shall not
allege nor pretend, Art. 5^.
no^ cause to be alleged, that we are not bound to entertain the said
liberties, rights, privileges, charters, customs, uses and prescriptions, the
which we have heretofore confirmed and ratified, under color that we have not
given and granted them, or promised them by some

And for that we will and desire that all the points, articles, gifts, and
promises, confirmations and ratifications, above mentioned, may remain firm
and stable, without any breach, we have faithfully promised, and have sworn
upon the holy Euangile, personally for us, our heirs and successors, to hold
them to all in general, that is, to the prelates, monasteries, hospitals,
barons, knights, towns, and liberties, and to al our good subjects of the said
countries of Brabant and beyond the Meuse, and to their successors firm and
stable after the decease of our lord and father, and never to do, nor suffer to
be done, any thing contrary whatsoever. And in case that we, our heirs and
successors, should or would do any thing to the contrary, by our selves or by
any other, in all or in part, in any sort whatsoever; in that case we consent
and grant to our For the effecting whereof, we will, command, and declare,
that all officers that shall be made contrary to this our Joyous entry shall be
presently displaced: and moreover that all that shall be hereafter attempted
contrary to that which is above said, shall be of no force. And all without
fraud. In witness and perpetual confirmation whereof, we Emperor and Prince
have caused our seals to be set to these presents. Given in our town of
Louvain the 5 of July in the year 1549. Of the empire of us Charles the 30, and
of the realms of Castile and others 34. Signed, Charles and Philip, and
underneath, By the audiencier and chief Secretary, Verreyken.

The earl of Hoochstraten produced all those articles of the order of the
Golden Fleece, and of the Joyous entry, and privileges of Brabant, to justify
his declinatory exceptions, against the citation and unlawful proceeding of
the attorney general, and to show what wrong the duke of Alua did unto the
honor and reputation of the king his master, and to his own (as knight of the
said order, having sworn the articles) to suffer and to command the attorney
general, to use such kind of proceeding, as well to his person and the prince
of Orange, as to the earls of Egmont and Horn, prisoners, and carried directly
against the said privileges out of the country of Brabant, to the castle of
Gand in Flanders. At that time certain Italian merchants The duke of Aluaes
money staid in Germany.
sent toward the Netherlands from Francfort ma^t certain balls of silk, in
the which there was a hundred and fifty thousand crowns in money, appointed
for the duke of Alua. This was Frederic prince elector, Palatin of Rhin, who
stayed them, under color that the customs upon the river were not duly paid:
the merchandise was restored, but the money kept whereof complaints came unto
the emperor, yet he was glad to agree with the said prince Palatine.

The prince of Orange and the earl of Hoochstraten, having (as we have said)
published their iustifications, the which were neither publicly answered by
the said attorney general, nor yet produced in their process, but they
proceeded against them and their goods by contempt, having no other means of
defense, but to go and submit them unto the mercy of the duke of Alua: the
said prince understanding also in what manner his son had been taken from
the University of Louvaine, and transported into Spain, contrary to the
privileges,

The emperor, who would gladly have seen affairs managed after another sort,
writ very honorably to the king and the duke of Alua, and so did the princes
electors in like manner: Lodowic his brother to levy men in all parts, and to
frame a goodly body of an army, and so to enter jointly together into the
Netherlands, for to recover that by force which was Lodowic led into Friseland,
carrying in their ensigns this device, Recuper are aut mori.

The lord of Villers of the house of Longueuille, brought him 3000 French foot,
which the Protestants of France sent to his succors, who went to make an
attempt upon the town of Ruremonde in Gelderland, situated upon the river of
Meuse, thinking to surprise it, and to take it without any resistance. But
finding them within upon their guards, they fired the ports, thinking to have
it by force: but they defended themselves so well, as the lord of Villers
(fearing that if he staid longer, he might be compassed in behind) was forced
to leave it, retiring Sancho d'Auila, with a small army, to keep the lord of
Villers from attempting any thing upon that quarter of the river of Meuse, and
to keep him from joining with the rest of the princes troops: who meeting him
betwixt Dalem and Erckelens with his troops, they charged and defeated him.
Villers and the seignior The lord of Villers defeated
of Dhuy were taken prisoners, a great number of their men were slain, and the
rest were put to rout, the 25 of April. The fury of the victors was so great,
as without any respect they flew the governor of Heynsberg and his lieutenant,
being come to Dalem, to summon these French troops to retire out of the limits
of the duke of Iuilliers his prince. The prince of Oranges intention was to
assail the duke of Alua in diverse parts at one instant, and to make him so

The seigniour of Coqueuille a Norman gentleman of the religion, being upon the
frontiers of Arthois, with the captains Vaillant, and S. Amand, and some 600
foot and 200 horse, most part of them being come out of England, having fled
out of the Netherlands, and others that Coqueuille defeated at S. Valery.
they had gathered together, and were joined at S. Valery, at the mouth of the
river of Some: the duke of Alua writ unto the French king, That the prince of
Condes men sought to trouble him in his government of the Netherlands. Whom the
prince disauowing, the king sent the marshall Cosse, who besieged S. Valerie,
and took it by assault. Coqueuille was taken with some others but the most
part slain, such as could save themselves, were taken by the provost marshall,
sent into the Netherlands, and executed by diverse punishments. Coqueuille lost
his

Valentin de par Dieu, seigniour of la Motte, sergeant mayor of the regiment of
the earl of Roeux, pursued the Protestants with all violence in base Flanders,
and took the seigniour of Hanescampe, a gentleman of Bethune in Arthois, who
was afterward excuted by the sword in Brussels. In the mean time cont
Lodowic, accompanied with cont Adolph of Nassau, his brother, with cont loos of
Schouwenburch and others, being in Friseland in the country of Groningen,
took the fort of Dam near to Delfziel, and the great castle of Wedde, with
many other places, which gave a good encouragement to the princes army. The
duke of Alua (after a peace concluded in France) had called home the earl of
Aremberg with the bands of ordnance, which he had sent to succor the king
against the Protestants: being retired,

The duke of Alua having gathered all the forces he could together, to make
head against Lodowicke, sent Cont Arembergh, who being come into the country
of Groningen, was advised not to charge the Protestants, until that the earl
of Meghen were arrived with his troops, that having joined their forces, they
might charge them together: Some Spanish captains being impatient and
discontent with this delay, began to murmr against him and to brave him, yea,
to tax him of cowardice, calling him Lutheran; for that they found themselves
(so said they, not knowing the passages of the country) strong enough, and the
more vehement they were, for that they understood Cont Lodowicke was retired:
but it was to have more ground to put his army in battle; and that to go
and charge him in his camp, they must march close and in a long rank, by
reason of the marshes that were on either side. Arembergh answered them, That
seeing they had a desire to fight, he would make them see their enemies, and
let them know that he was a faithful servant to the king, and no Lutheran,
the which he would maintain unto the last drop of his blood. Cont Lodowicke
had caused a squadron of a thousand harquebusiers to advance, with the which
the Spaniards went bravely to skirmish; but the approaching night parted them,
Cont Lodowicke retyring a little further back. The Spaniards thinking that he
sled, made have to follow him: but the earl turning head, charged Arembergh^
squadron, and then all their troops, Cont Arembergh defeated and slain.
whereof he defeated ten companies of Spaniards, and five of Germans.
Arembergh having defended himself valiantly a long time, was in the end beaten
from his horse, crying out, that they should save his life, but he was not
understood, being shot through the body, Adolph of Nassau, brother to Cont
Lodowicke and the prince of Orange, was slain. The Germans that could escape,
saved themselves in Groninghe. The duke of Alua lost in this defeat a thousand
six hundred men, six pieces of artillery, with the munition, and a great sum
of money, appointed for the payment of this army, the which he esteemed a
greater loss than the death of the earl of Arembergh.

This defeat happened on the four and twentieth of May 1568, betwixt the abbey
of Heylegerlee and the village of Wynschote, in the country of Groningen. The
earl of Arembergh, Barbanson, governor of Friseland and Oueryssel, knight of
the Order of the golden Fleece, a brave knight, was interred in the church of
the same abbey; and Cont Adolph of Nassau, a young nobleman of great hope, in
the chapel of the castle of Wedde.

The loss of this battle did wonderfully incense the duke of Alua, whereof
he would revenge himself upon many gentlemen that were prisoners in the
war, and other noblemen. And to draw more into his power, he made a
proclamation upon the twentieth of May in the town of Brussels, against all
those that were retired out of the country by reason of the troubles,
commanding them to appear at a certain day prefixed, upon pain of
confiscation of body and goods: few returned, and they sped ill: but the
greatest part remained Ghisbrecht and Thierry, barons of Batenbourg, young men,
brethren, when as neither the emperors letters, nor the intercession of some
princes of Germany, nor the great expenses of the lady of Batenbourg their
mother, to redeem them from death, could not prevail any thing.

Whilst they executed such as died constantly in their Religion, the drums
sounded Executions done by the duke of Alua.
continually, to the end they might not hear what they said: but if any of the
Romish Religion died, they were silent. The next day, being the second of the
month, he also put to Quentin Benoit, baylife of Engien, and Cornellis of Me
minister. Afterward he caused to be executed in the castle of Viluoarden, the
Seigniors Anthony van Stralen, bourgomaster of Antuerpe, and John of
Casenbroot, Seignior of Backerzeel, after that they had tortured him almost in
pieces, to understand the secrets of the earl of Egmont, whose chief
counselor Macklin and some others.

Then he caused the criminal process, begun by John du Bois, attorney
general against the earls of Egmont and Horn, to be ended: whom he caused to
be brought in wagons from Gand to Brussels under a sure guard of three
thousand Spaniards, where they were lodged that night in the Bakers hall, upon
the market place, and the next day their sentence of death was pronounced unto
them: whereof that of the earl of Egmonts, was thus in substance: The duke of
Aluaes excellency, marquess of Coria, governor, lieutenant and captain
general for his Majesty etc. having seen the informations and pursutes of the
attorney general, the testimonies, depositions, and letters missiue exhibited
by the said attorney against the admiral earl of Egmont, the confessions,
denegations, allegations and documents, serving

The sentence against the earl of Horn was almost of the same substance,
only certain points excepted. And the two sentences were sent unto the two
earls to prison by the Secretary Misdach, at one of the clock after
midnight, being both of them in their beds.

The earl of Egmont would never have believed they would have given so cruel
a sentence against him: for hearing it read, he said: Behold a very rigorous
sentence. I do not think that in all my life I have so offended his Majesty,
to deserve this usage, yet I will take it patiently, and pray unto God, that my
death may be an expiation of all my sins: and that thereby my dear wife and
children may incur no blame nor confiscation: for my services deserve so much
favor: seeing it so pleases God and the king, I will take my death patiently.
Afterward he writ a letter unto the king, the which he delivered to doctor
Rythonen bishop of Ypre, entreating him to send it unto his Majesty, the which
he promised: the contents whereof were as follows.

My liege, I have heard the sentence which it pleased your Majesty to give
against me, pronounced: The earl of Egmonts letter ^o the king of Spain.
although I have never pretended nor thought to do any thing that was against
your Majesty's service and the catholic religion. But I take all that it
shall please God to send me, in good part. And if (during these troubles of the
Netherlands) I have any way erred,

The earl of Horn hearing his sentence, cried out upon the earl of Egmont,
saying: O my cousin, you are the cause of all this mischief: but there is no
remedy but patience. At the first he would not confess himself to the said
bishop of Ypre, saying that he had confessed himself unto God long since: but
the bishop importuned him so much, as in the end he did it for a fashion.

The earl of Egmont being assured to die (whereof at the first he could not
persuade himself) and had written unto the king, he desired them not to suffer
him to languish long in the distress and apprehension of death. So the fifth
of June, on Whitson eve, he was led by Julian Romero, master of the camp, and
captain Salinas with nineteen ensigns of foot, he having the bishop of Ypre
on the one side of him, went willingly (without being held) unto the The death
of the earle^ of Egmont and Horn.
were executed (for that from the day that they were committed, they did never
see one another) and when they answered him yea, he said alowd in Spanish:
Esemplo os este Senores, para che cada vno aprende como deue seruir y contentar
a sus maiores: y os ruego mucho che tomeys de chado en nuestras muertes: y nos
pardoneys, si algo con nuestra passada vita, os hemos escandaliza dos, pues
somos mortales y caducos, y nos adiudeys con vuestras Oraciones: and so he
presently disposed himself to death, and was soon executed. Their heads were
set up opposite one to another upon two poles, tied to the side of the
scaffold, where they continued until three of ^he clock in the afternoon; a
pitiful and fearful spectacle: and therein the earl of Egmonts words were
verified, when as he sent for the earl of Horn to come to court, assuring
him, that he should have no worse usage than he himself. The bodies having
the heads sowed to them again, were put into hearses, and embalmed: that of
Egmont was carried to S. Clares church, and that of Horn to S. Guydules, and
afterward interred in the town of Were, and Egmonts in his borough of
Sottingham. The earl of Egmonts servants set his arms in mourning manner
(according to the custom) over the porch of his house, but the duke of Alua
caused

The emperor Maximilian the second, before the death of these noblemen sent a
gentleman to the contesse of Egmont, to comfort her, and to assure her, that
her husband should have no harm, for that he would entreat for him. But the
duke being advertised thereof made have of his execution, and the same night
that the gentleman arrived, sent to insinuate the sentence unto them, and the
next day caused them to be executed.

The death of these noblemen did perplexe many, being the more terrified, every
one judging, that their blood which was shed, would not be stanched by their
death, but that it threatened greater calamities unto the country: So as some
pricked by their own consciences; others distrusting their innocence, fearing
through the frauds and treasons of their enemies reason of their tyranny: of
which fear he would free himself, before he would frame the

It shall not be amiss in this place to declare the deaths of the baron de
Montigni, brother to the earl of Horn, and of the marquess of Berghen, both
knights of the order of the golden Fleece; which two lords were thought to be
the fittest and wisest persons in the Netherlands, to be sent into Spain,
there to certify the king particularly touching the state of the country; and
for that cause were sent by the Regent, the duchess of Parma, and the
Netherlands, as ambassadors unto the king, as it has already been declared:
who being in Spain, and having informed the king of all things at large, were
well received and entertained of him. But after that, when news was brought
into Spain of the breaking down of the Images, Rigomes, prince of Eboli, his
old friend, and one that was very great with the king, to whom he made
complaint, That his good and faithful service was not only little or naught
esteemed, but that it was suspected, protesting that he had The death of the
marquess o^ Berghen in Spain.
the 22 of May 1567. But this his confession was of no weight, to repress nor
withdraw his enemies, more than a year after, to summon, charge, and condemn
him by the duke of Alua and his bloody counsels means, to be a traitor, and
all his goods confiscated to the king.

The lord de Montmorency, baron de Leuzi and Montigni, governor of Turwin and
Tournay, knight of the order of the golden Fleece, and brother to the earl of
Horn, a wise, Nesse, being the kings chamberlain, and both carried to the
castle of Segobia, where the baron de Montigni was put into a small high tower,
with one of his servants called Arthur de Munter, a Luycknaer, and eight
soldiers appointed to guard him, which used him most shamefully: being thus
committed to prison, he desired diverse times, that he might have law and
justice, as belonged unto a lord of his quality: upon which his request,
receiving no answer nor resolution, he sought means to break and escape out
of prison, whereunto he had won a Spaniard (one of his guard) to consent, and
some of his own servants, as his Secretary Anthony vander Becque, and another
gentleman of Pruseland, called John Hanowe, his steward John le Moyne, and his
cook, that baked his bread after the Netherland manner: those he wrote unto by
letters sent them by means of the said Spaniard of his guard, and they
answered his letters again, which they baked in his bread, and so conveyed
them unto him: mean time he got files, wherewith he filed certain iron
bars, and in a cofer had ladders John le Moine neglecting his time to deliver
the last bread, being over busy and earnest to take his leave or last farewell
of his whore; whereby the bread that had the letter in it, was not delivered as
it should be, but came to the hands of the captain of his guard, which brake
or cut it up, and found the letter in it, whereby the whole enterprise was
discovered: for which cause all his servants were committed to prison, and
condemned to die, and to that end had their confessors often sent unto them,
expecting nothing but death. But many men took compassion on them; so that the
Spaniard of the Dom Sebastian, king of Portugal passing by the prison, the
said prisoners making a great noise both with their chains and cries, she
asked what they were, and was certified, that they were Flemings, imprisoned
only, because they sought to have gotten Montigni (daughter and sister to the
prince of Espinoy and Dauitourgh, of the house of Melun) that she should allow
them every one according to his place, a certain yearly pention out of his
lands during their lives, in recompense of their service and troubles endured
for his sake. They being so discharged, and come into the Netherlands,
Montigni, but also to the duke of Alua, that had forbidden her to give them any
thing, at the last got nothing, but were upon pain of hanging banished out of
Brussels.

After that, the duke of Alua caused the said lord de Montignies process of
life and goods to be made, as he had done against the other lords, wholly
without his knowledge, appointing a counselor to answer for him, that never
spoke with the said lord de Montigni, nor yet could get any instruction or
information out of Spain from him, he himself not once understanding thereof.
And when Annavan Austria, the emperor Maximilians daughter, passed through the
Netherlands to go into Spain, to marry with the king, the Contesse of Which
the duke of Alua understanding, presently sent letters into Spain, and
procured the The baron de Montigni poisoned in Spain
in the Netherlands in March after in Anno 1571, and all his goods confiscate.
He left issue by his wife, whom he had newly married, before his departure in
Spain, but one daughter, that died very young. After his death his wife married
the lord of Floyon, of the house of Barlamont, and after earl of Barlamont;
who after her death married with the only daughter and

Touching the lives, actions, and services of these lords, done for the king
and the benefit of the Netherlands, many men in other countries round about
were of opinion, that they only were the principallest instruments, both by
counsel and action, of the kings good and prosperous proceedings, victories,
and greatness, and that his affairs (through his father the emperors of the
proclamations for the assembling of the States, and such like privileges
granted in

Cont Lodowic of Nassau having gotten the victory against Cont Arembergh and
the Spaniards, divided his army into two, with the which he went to besiege
Groningen, a great Co^t Lodowic besieges Groningen.
and mighty town in the country of Friseland, not without great admiration
of all men, how he durst with so few men and so little munition, attempt such
a town, whereas the earl of Meghen was with eighteen ensigns of Germans,
and a thousand Spaniards, and Curio Martinengue with three hundred horsemen.
The besieged made many brave sallies, and among others, one on the two and
twentieth of June, in the which the earl of Nassau lost above two hundred men,
seeking to hinder them from building of a fort betwixt two rivers. In the mean
time Chiapin Vitelli, marshal of the camp to the duke of Alua, gathered
together what men he could, with the which he advanced, whilst that the duke
prepared to raise the Chiapin camped on the one side of the town, not far
from Cont Lodowics Protestants, who sent to offer him battle, but he excused
himself.

The duke of Alua sent to entreat the emperor in the king his masters name,
that he would command the earl of Nassau to leave the siege of Groningen, and
to annoy the Netherlands no more, upon pain to incur the indignation of his
imperial Majesty, and the proscription of the empire: the which the emperor
did grant him; commanding the earl expressly to forbear, and to retire out
of the territories of the king of Spain: the earl answered the herald, That
he could not do it, before he had advertised the prince of Orange his brother,
and other noblemen, their confederates; and being certified of their
resolutions, he would answer his imperial Majesty. Which summation being
heard, and notwithstanding

The earl of Nassau knowing him so near him, and finding himself too weak
to make head against him, raised his camp, and retired into the country of
Embden, in the The siege of Groningen raised.
county of East-Friseland, breaking the bridges, and spoiling the country
where he passed,

The duke of Alua put duke Erick of Brunswicke with all his Reistres in
garrison into the town: for that being a marish country, the horsemen could
do him but small service, The duke of Alua pursues Co^t Lodowic.
a very commodious place, having on the one side the river of Ems and the town
of Embden at his back, from whence he might draw all things necessary for the
entertainment of his army, being resolved to keep himself there, until that
his brother, the prince of Orange, had entered with the body of his army into
some other part of the Netherlands, which would cause the duke of Alua to
retire out of Friseland, to go against him, for to stop his entry. But the
duke having recovered the castle of Wede, made a bridge at Reyden upon Ems, and
sent Sancho d' Auila to view the earls camp, and to draw him forth to
skirmish; then followed Julian Romero with eight hundred musketeers, to make
him quit his lodging, Sancho de Lodogno with a thousand Spanish shot, Caesar
Gonsague Curio Martinengue with two companies of horsemen: And for the
arereguard, fifteen companies of Wallons, under George of Lalaine, baron of
Ville, brother unto the earl of Hoochstraten (who was with Cont Lodowic) and
six ensigns of Germans: after the which followed Alonzo d' Vlloa, and
Gonsalue of Bracamont, with six hundred lances; the which could not march but
one at once, by reason of the straightness of the way, having water on either
side. Cont Lodowic would willingly have cut a dike, to have drowned his
enemies, before they should have come unto his trenches, having himself, with
the earl of Schouwenberch, and other commanders, taken shouels and pickaxes
in their hands to work. But his Germans (who were about seven thousand men)
seeing the Spaniards march resolutely toward them, began (after their
accustomed manner) to cry for Lodowic and many gentlemen, and others, saved
themselves also in little skiffes, after that they had made resistance even to
the extremity. The earl of Hoochstraten was two days before retired Cont
Lodowic saues himself.
from the camp, to go unto the prince. And the earl of Schouwenberch, seeing
upon the first approach of the enemy, that the Landtsknechts demanded silver,
and would not be contented with promises, but refused to fight, dislodged
betimes, with most of the horsemen.

The duke of Alua after this victory, writ to John, bishop of Munster, the
eight and twentieth of July, complaining greatly of Cont Lodowic of Nassau, who
(he said) would yield to no reason, breaking the commandments of the emperor
and the empire, having sopyled Lodowic, and an enemy unto the king of Spain:
and the rather, for that during this battle, they had made certain shot of
great Ordnance from the town upon the kings troops. Yet these letters were of
small effect, the bishop not daring to stir, fearing the prince of Orange,
who was in Germany, providing of an army, appointing his Rendes-vous in the
country of Treues, near unto the abbey of Romersdorffe; whereas staying a
month, he made a general muster. His chief Colonels and Reytmasters were,
Frederic Rollenheim, marshall of Hessen (very famous for the service which he
had done the Protestants in France) Diederich of Schouwenberch, Cont Albert of
Nassau, the earl Richard of Barby Otto of Malsburg, Herman Rydesal, Adam
Welsen, and others, with seven thousand Reyters. The colonels of the foot were,
Nicholas of Hadtstate, a gentleman of ancient nobility, and a man of great
experience in war, Feyt Schoomer and Balthazar Woolfe with four and forty
ensigns of Landtsknechts. Of the French were the lords of Genlis, Lodowic also
joined, with those troops he could save at the rout at Iemminghen. Some
captains carried in their colors this device, Pro Lege, Rege and Grege;
others carried Pelicans; others, Roses painted upon their morrions; which is
the ancient mark of the English, giving to understand, that the Queen of
England would be favorable unto them. The prince had also ten pieces of
artillery, four canons of battery,

With this army the prince marched, in the beginning of September, toward the
country of Luxembourg, to S. Vyt, a town of his own patrimony. The duke of
Alua hearing of his descent, went and encamped by Maestricht, at Vise, upon the
Meuse, with the regiments The duke of Alua camps by Maestricht.
of the earls of Lodron and Ouersteyn, forty ensigns of Spaniards, forty of
Wallons and four thousand horse, Spaniards, Italians, Germans, and the bands
of Ordnance of the Low countries, with great store of artillery. The prince
marching in field, took Aremberch, and the strong castle of Carpen, betwixt
Cologne and Duyren, then Hormsteyn belonging to the king of Spain, putting all
to the sword that made resistance: as also the duke Dom Frederic with four
thousand harquebusiers, Wallons, and Spaniards, with some horsemen, to cut off
his passage, as if he meant to fight with him. But it passed in skirmishes,
with small loss on either side, Dom Frederic skirmisheth with the prince.
whereas the Seignior of Louerual was taken prisoner, whom the duke caused to
be afterward beheaded at Brussels. The prince might easily have defeated this
small troop of Dom Frederics; but being ready to fight, the Landtsknechts (as
before) demanding silver, would not hearken unto it. So as the prince being
frustrate of his expectation, having presented battle once again unto the
duke, who would not accept it, seeing that he sought Dom Joan of Cales, Dom
Ruffin Henriques, and others. Being come to the castle of Cambresis, his
Germans burned and spoiled all that they left behind them. And there the duke
of Alua left pursuing them. Being entered into Lodowic, and the French nobility
went to counsel what they should do; whether to pass further into the Realm
(being amazed at so great forces) or to return toward Gaspar Schomberg, to
let him understand, that he wondered much, how the said prince (without any
quarrel or cause) should enter so into his Realm with an army: but if he
demanded passage, only to return into Germany, it should not be denied him*
so as he committed no act of hostility. Whereunto the prince answered from
Soissons the fourth of December, as he had before sent his intention unto his
Majesty, That although he had many reasons moving him thereunto, yet he was not
so indiscreet to address

The king hearing this answer, offered him a good sum of money for the
payment of his army, whereof he had great need: and by the same means caused
Schomberg (who was well known among the colonels and Rytmasters) to sound the
minds of his soldiers, whereof some through poverty were weary of the wars,
and others were content to enter into the kings service. The prince, his
brother, and the French nobility had propounded to march

And thus this war of the prince of Orange against the duke of Alua passed
without any fruit, with the loss of many good men and of quality, which died
in this voyage: among the The death of the earl of Hoochstraten.
besides many gentlemen who having drunk together in a banquet of wine that
was poisoned, as it was thought, dyed soon one after another, few escaping.
The prince and Cont Lodowic having retained about twelve hundred horse of
service, joined with the duke of Deux Ponts, with whom they entered into
France. And having exploited nothing in the Netherlands, the duke of Alua
(bragging that he had chased him away) stayed with all his army at Cambresis,
where he divided his troops into the frontier garrisons, cassiering a part
which he held not necessary, most of them Germans, except the Regiment of the
earl of Lodron, who was put into Valenciennes, and three hundred Spaniards
into Breda; the rest after that the frontiers were well fortified, were sent
into Holland. Which done, the duke returned Te Deum to be sung, and an Oration
was made in his praise by the deane of the church, the which was commended by
all the auditors. From thence the duke retired to the palace to take his ease.

The prince of Orange, with his brethren, Lodowic and Henry, earls of Nassau,
retayning ten or twelve hundred horse in their pay, stayed and joined
themselves with the duke of

The duke of Alua having with small loss had the victory over his enemies in
all places, and caused them to forsake the country, upon the twentieth of
December came to Brussels with his son, and placed his soldiers in diverse
garrisons; as his Spaniards under Alonzo de V^oa in Mastrich, Hertogenbush, and
Grave; the regiment of Julian Romero in Brussels and Mechelen; the regiment of
Dom Zantio de Londogno in Vtrecht and Bommel; the regiment of Billi or Robles
in Groninge; the regiment of colonel Mondragon in Deuenter; the regiment of
high Duchess under the earl of Lodron in Valenciennes and Antuerpe,
discharging The duke of Alua brings in the new bishops and the Inquisition.
1569
1569 he sent forth a proclamation, That no man should aid or assist the
fugitive people in any sort whatsoever, and that no woman might depart out of
the country to follow her husband, nor that any man might visit those that
were fled or banished for the troubles aforesaid, and further caused many to be
executed in every place of the Netherlands: Some he caused to be hanged and
beheaded; others to be burnt: which once again caused great numbers of the
people to fly out of the country, having lost all hope of living quietly in
The number of the people that fled out of the Netherlands at that time, was not
less than an

Whilst the prince of Orange was in Germany, there grew some question betwixt
the Queen of England and the duke of Alua: the duke complaining, That the
Queen had The duke of Alua p^kes a qu^rell against the Queen of England.
arrested a certain ship, and stayed in her hands a great sum of money
belonging to the king of Spain his master, with whom (he said) she should
entertain all brotherly love, and not commit such acts of hostility.
Whereunto the Queen answered, That she was well informed by some gentlemen of
Genoa, that the said mon^y belonged unto certain private merchants; and as she
had then need for her private service, she would retain it, paying reasonable
interest for a time. Whereupon the duke stayed the persons, ships, and
William Parker, and Doctor Story his substitute, an ancient man, and an
Inquisitor in England, in the time of Queen Mary, to search the ships, and
to arrest all that he found belonging to the English. This doctor going one day
to search the ship of Cornellis van Eyck, a mariner of Berghen upon Soom,
whilst that he was busy searching under the hatches, the master hoysed
sails, and went directly for England, where he delivered this busy doctor,
who as traitor to his Queen and country was hanged and

The Queen hearing of the arrest and stay of her subjects, as well in the
Netherlands as in Spain, granted the like arrest and letters of reprisall
against the subjects and merchants of the Netherlands and Spain, to take them,
their ships and goods wheresoever they could; whereby the English were well
satisfied for their losses: whereof great complaints were made at the court at
Brussels.

The duke of Alua meaning to repair the fault which he had committed, sent
Christopher d'Assonuille, a counselor of State, into England, to the Queen,
to reconcile this difference. But her Majesty being discontented, seeing that
he brought no letters of credit from the king of Spain, would not hear him,
nor acknowledge him as an ambassador, seeing d'Assonuille refused to do, for
that he had no such commission, and so depa^ted without audience: yet the
Queen sent him word, That although she found her self greatly interessed, yet
she would not begin the war, except the duke of Alua began first. She did
also write the like into Spain, complaining of the duke of Aluaes presumption:
who afterward sent Chiapin Vitell^, marquess of Cetone, with the counselor
Frincket, and the Secretary Torre, to demand the money that was stayed, and
to free all arrests on either side. After them were sent the Seigniors, Francis
of Halewin, the Seignior of Swegem, and Tho^as Fiesco, a merchant of Genoa: but
they prevailed no more than the rest. Whereupon the duke of Alua caused all the
merchants cloth which he had arrested, to be sold: So as the

The duke of Alua fearing least the Queen should attempt something upon
Zeeland, sent Chiapin Vitelli, and Gabriel Serbello^ his enginour, to fortify
such places as lay most open upon the sea; for that he had understood, that
the English had taken a Flemish ship upon the coast of Zeeland: wherefore he
made himself strong in men and shipping, to resist all those that would hinder
his designs, fearing least the English should take him unprovided.

The same year (in May) Pope Pius the fifth sent unto the duke of Alua a sword
and an hatte, which he had blessed with great solemnities. They were brought
and delivered

The emperor Maximilia^ being daily importuned by the noblemen and gentlemen
that were Charles his brother into Spain, with ample instructions to the king,
to persuade him to pardon his exi^d subjects, and to give them peace and
quietness in his countries: but all prevailed not: the king answered him by
writing, and that was all the fruit of his legation.

The duke of Alua knowing that the prince of Orange and cont Lodowic his
brother were joined with some troops of horse unto the duke of Deux Ponts,
marching to succor the Protestants 1569
in France, he also sent in the name of the king his master, Peter Ernest earl
of Mansfield, with 25 companies of foot, Spaniards and Wallons, and 2000 horse
of the bands of ordnance

The duke of Alua having made the prince of Oranges great army unprofitable,
as we have A description of the duke of Aluae^ image.
said, and by that means made the Netherlands reasonably quiet under his
government, he began to build many citadels, as at Valenciennes, Groningen,
Grave, Vtrecht, Flessingue, and above all he finished that of Antuerpe: in the
which for an eternal memory of his prowess he caused to be set up a stately,
sumptuous and proud trophie, in sign of victory, cast in brass, representing
his person, all armed, but bare headed, the right arm stretched out unarmed,
holding in the left, being armed, the troncheon of a great commander, treading
under his feet* a body with two heads, and six arms, one of them holding a
paper, the second a toarch, the third 1570
from out of the which came serpents: at the ears of one of these heads hung
little dishes and gourds, such as beggars carry about. All this work being
fifteen foot high, was set with a plate of brass on a great square stone of
marble, answerable to the greatness and proportion of the figure. On the front
before were graven these letters, F. A. A. T. A. D. P. H. 2. H. A. B. P. Q. E.
S. R. R* I. C. P. P. F. R. O M. F. P. The signification whereof in Latin you
may read before, in the year 1567, whereas mention is made of the building of
the citadell of Antuerpe: The sense of it in English is* To Ferdinando Aluares
of Toledo, Governor of Belgia for Philip the second king of Spain, for that
the sedition being pacified, the rebels chased away, religion restored, justice
maintained, having settled the Provinces in peace, as a most faithful servant
to the King. On the right side of this square stone was graven the break of
day, alluding to his name Alba, at the coming whereof all the enemies of the
night hide themselves, and men begin their work, the which was signified by
the shepherds, leading forth their sheep to feed: the superscription was,
(...), that is to say, The break of day chaseth away evil. On the left hand
was an altar with the fire of sacrifice kindled, and there was written Deo
Patrum nostrorum, as if he would say, To the God of our Fathers, to whom we
sacrifice for the delivery of the country, and victory over our enemies. This
figure was interpreted after diverse manners, some said these two heads were the
earls of Egmont and Horn, others, the prince of Orange and cont Lodowic his
brother. But Aries Montanus had alluded this body beaten down to the
Netherlands,

The earl of Lodron being in garrison at Valenciennes with his regiment of
Landtsknechts, The earl of Lodron taken prisoner by hi^ own soldiers.
the most part Grisons, and of the country of Tyrolle, was kept prisoner by
his soldiers mutining for their pay, whom he pacified with good words and
solemn oaths, in receiving the sacrament themselves to be persuaded, alleging
their* pay, which did bind them to serve the king. They

We have formerly spoken of the provost Spelle, named John Cronelt, which was
one of the cruellest instruments that the duke of Alua could have employed:
this tyrant was convicted of many concussions, and to have put many innocents
to death under counterfeit names, and The great cruelty of the duke o^ Alua.
to death, as also the duke of Alua had sometimes vanted, that he had caused
above 18000 by good account to pass through the hands of his executioners, the
which he t^rmed by the name of Justice.

At that time the duke was at rest, fearing no enemy, imagining that he had
subdued and expelled all, he therefore now dreamed of new means to oppress
to Netherlands, A general pardon by the duke o^ Alu^, wi^h ^any restrictions.
Dentelin Gondeble^, their great persecuter, whom they did miserably spoil,
with all his men, in a farm belonging to one Israel of Escluse, a banished
man. They took four and twenty horse, which they

On the other side those that were fled out of the realm, as into England,
Germany, the John of Berghes a knight, seignior of Olhain, who for a time
carried the title of the prince of Oranges viceadmirall, William of Fiennes,
lord of Lumbres, Barthol Entes a gentleman Frison, a bastard of Brederode, and
one of the house of Egmont, a Hollander, Embise a Fleming, son to the
bourgmaster of Gand, and one John Bro^k of Amsterdam, with some others, who
having good ships, got many rich booties: to whom in the end joined the
seignior of ^umay, earl of la Ma^ke. The king of Spain complained of them to
the queen of England, who to please him, commanded them to retire out of her
ports: So as to have a place of retreat, and a safe

The first of August, whilst that the emperor and the estates of the empire
were at an imperial diet at Spier, the emperor sent his daughter Anne to the
king of Spain, accompanied with the archdukes Albert and Wencesla^, her two
brethren, being yet very young, the great commander of Prusia, and the bishop
of Munster, who did accompany them unto Brussels, whereas she arrived the 22 of
the month, and from thence went to Middelburg in Zeeland, where The king of
Spain mary's his niece the emperors daughter.
she embarked with her two brethren the 25 of September, and the 24 of November
following was married to the king of Spain at Segouia in Arragon: But some did
mislike that the king Charles Laurent, for that he was borne on that day which
was dedicated to the memory of the Saint.

This year there happened great floods in the Netherlands, about the time of a
new Moon Great floods in the Netherlands.
with spring tides: for that upon all Saints day the water flowed so high in
Antuerpe, about 9 of the clock in the evening, that it flowed a foot higher
than it did in the flood in anno 1530, when there was 70 parishes drowned, and
two foot higher than it was in anno 1552, and would as it seemed have risen
higher, if it had not broken into the new town and other places, whereby it
filled all the sellers and vaults, both within and without the town, and
every empty place, where an innumerable number of men and cattle were
drowned, Austerweel, Kiel, and Hoboken John Fruytiers, wherein is set down all
the hurt done in every several province, certifying the number of the people
that were drowned that time to be four hundred thousand at the least, besides
an innumerable number of cattle. The Spaniards said that it was a just
judgment sent upon that country by the holy Saints, thereby to revenge
themselves, for breaking down their Images: but the Netherlanders judged
otherwise thereof, esteeming the Saints not to be desirous of revenge.

In the year of our Lord 850 the river of Rhin that was wont to have his
recourse by Catwicke,

Anno 1176 in Holland almost all men and beasts that saved not themselves upon
high places, were drowned.

Anno 1230 in the time of the emperor Otto the 4, the most part of Friseland
was under water, and it is said that there was 100000 men drowned.

Anno 1374 in the month of October, there was great hurt done in Flanders by a
high flood.

Anno 1400 there happened a great flood, called the Fresh flood.

Anno 1420 there was 16 villages drowned by Dort, and many men and cattle:
somesay they were 72 villages.

Anno 1508 happened the high flood, called S. Galens flood, when they took
Cods and Whitings before Groaning.

Anno 1509 there was a great flood called Cosmus and Damians flood, which brake
through many ditches, and drowned a great number of people.

Anno 1530 happened the Michaelmas high flood.

Anno 1552 there was a great flood called S. Pontians flood.

And this last in anno 1570, called all Saints flood, which was in 6 or 7
provinces, as far as to Denmark.

The electors, princes, noblemen, and towns of the confession of Ausbourg in
Germany, having presented a petition unto the emperor at the diet at Spier,
tending to the quiet of Christendom, and the reformation of some abuses, it
was not imputed unto them to rebellion, factions and innouations, as that of
the noblemen and gentlemen, and the Netherlands, was in the year 1566, by the
king of Spain: but contrariwise the emperor knowing well that what they
required tended to the good and quiet of Germany, and their neighbors, not
only accepted it in good part, but also took such order as was most needful,
specially for those of Cologne (who had driven out all them of the confession)
although they did very unwillingly obey. As for the Netherlands, as he feared
much the practices of the Spaniards (which had long before sought occasions to
get some footing in some corner of Germany, and especially Alonso d'Vlloa has
written the history, to the honor of the duke, as the greatest conqueror in
the world) holding himself after the retreat of the prince of Oranges army,
to be a conqueror finding himself now quiet without any enemies, that had
experience in war, having a conceit that he had restored the country to their
former peace, he began to study how he might at the peoples charge entertain a
great number of soldiers, both Spaniards, Italians and Germans: To which end
there were sundry impositions, exactions, and extraordinary The duke of Alua
inuents now impositions.


In the beginning of this year 1571, there was erected in the Netherlands, by
the commandment 1571
of the duke of Alua (who had propounded to settle a new order both in the
justice A new style in criminal causes erected by the duke.


About that time Herman of Ruytter, a valiant and an aduenturous man belonging
to the

The duke having in anno 1568 overcome and driven the prince of Orange, and the
earl The 10, 20, and 100 penny demanded by the duke of Alua.
Lodowicke his brother, out of the Netherlands, and having need to pay his
soldiers, and to keep a great garrison, besides the yearly pentions in
Germany, he thought it convenient, to reap the fruits of his victories, and
to employ all his wits, power, and authority to get and gather money, and that
by a continual tax, perceiving that by reason of the great number of fugitive
and banished persons, together with the hatred conceived against him within the
land, that he was to expect diverse troubles and vproares, and for that cause
he determined to send for the general states of the Netherlands to Brussels,
and to move them to consent to give the king the hundredth penie of all their
mouable and immouable goods, and besides that

Whereunto the general states and the officers of the treasorie, under them
made answer, The states answer.
and showed what troubles rose in anno 1556, upon the raising of the hundredth
penie, for that the common people would not consent that it should be known
what money every man had in his chest, and how much they were worth. Touching
the tenth and twentieth penie (in Spain called Alcoual) they showed him what
difficulty would thereby arise, not only for the newness thereof, but for the
burden that would thereby fall upon the people, as also the trouble that would
ensue about the collection thereof, in regard of the great deceit that would
be

Whereunto the duke alleged, That it was a small matter for the seller to pay
the king the The dukes reply.
tenth penie, as long as he kept nine for himself: and that if that sum did
amount to a great yearly value, the towns and the provinces might thereby
receive all their debts and damages, emperor Charles often complain of the
unwillingness of the Netherlands to contribute any

Whereunto the states, by the president Vigilius Swichemus, made answer, That
therein each countries condition, prosperity, and nature was to be considered,
saying, that the wealth of The states duplication to the duke of Alt^aes reply.
Spain consisted not in trade of merchandise, and handicrafts, but in the
fruitfulness and pasturage of the land: that the Netherlands were less, and
narrower, and were maintained by t^affique, trade of merchandise, and
handicrafts: that Spain had no neighbors but the hills and the sea, whereas
the Netherlands had neighbors round about them, that would draw the traffic
and handiworkes into their countries, if they were charged with any great
imposts, or heavy impositions: and for that cause Philip duke of Burgondie
(the first original of the prosperity of the Netherlands) did wisely foresee,
that all merchants should be privileged, Peter to pay Saint Paul. And that
whereas he collected so much yearly by the alcoual, or tenth penie, in his town
of Alua (which nevertheless seemed strange unto them) they could do no less
than wish him good fortune and prosperity therewith.

Whereunto the duke said, That his intent was to have the said taxes to be
raised, before he came into the country, being at Theonuille, where he made
the barons of Barlamont and Noircarmes acquainted therewith; and that therefore
they must of force grant unto him therein, and seek by all means to get the
states to consent thereunto.

Whereupon the states assembling at Brussels, and other places, and the same
being moved unto every particular province, they made no great matter to grant
to give the hundredth penny, but desired that they might not be burdened with
the tenth penny, alleging the danger and trouble that might thereby ensue. But
the duke not content with that answer, but giving them leave to depart, willed
them to bring him a more better and resolute answer, and that without any
conditions, limitations and moderations. But the provinces having by their
deputies did in any wise happen, he would withdraw the said tax again: some
provinces he

By these and such like practices, there was half a consent wrung out of some
of the states (such as they were) for that the duke said, That he would
moderat all the particular difficulties, Conditions how the states did consent
un to the 10 penny.
commanding that every man should send their opinion and consent in writing,
which they did, showing many reasons, that the raising of the tenth penie would
be the overthrow of all traffic, and finally the destruction and overthrow of
the Netherlands: declaring nevertheless, that they consented thereunto, in
regard that it was alleged, That the king himself would expressly have it so;
and upon promise made unto them (confidently alleging

Generally the provinces would by no means consent thereunto, offering in
steed thereof to contribute other great sums of money unto the king. They of
Brabant likewise were not all of one mind: but the duke upon his promise took
it for a consent. They of Henault, Arthois, and Namure, had given their
consent, but with condition not to be burdened therewith, but consented only
to induce the others thereunto, as they did after openly declar^. Thereupon the
duke commanded the hundredth penie to be gathered, while an order should be
taken how the tenth penie might be collected: and perceiving the difficulty
therein, thought it convenient to stay it for a while, til the disordred kind
and form of consent were somewhat anno 1569 he had begun to practice with
them of Vtrecht, to get them to consent to the giving of the tenth and
twentieth penie: but they excused themselves, desiring him to have
consideration of them, and to remember that it was not yet above 40 years from
anno 1528, since they had granted by contract to yield subjection and Sluices,
and such like costly industrious works: and that they in the forepassed
troubles

The prelates and the five churches in Vtrecht, showed likewise, That their
spiritual goods belong to the churches, were privileged, and that they could
not fall (without express consent of the pope) Sub commercium laicorum, for
that in the bull, quae legitur in coena Domini, all those are excommunicated
that did consent to give any thing out of the spiritual goods toward the lay
men's taxes, and they likewise that received any such tax or collection,
without express consent, as aforesaid: alleging many such like privileges
more, and that therefore they could by no means consent to his Majesty's
request of the tenth and twentieth penie, Salua conscientia and iuramento.

This answer much moved and offended the duke, specially because the
spirituality alleged Bullam de caena Domini, which he understood to extend
only against the oppressors of the catholics, and the church of Rome, and not
against the defenders and protectors thereof, whereof he accounted himself to
be one: withal chafing against the Printer that had last printed the said
bull, as also against the privy counsel, for granting license to do it, and
namely against secretary la Torre, for signing it, for which cause he kept him
prisoner in his house, and discharged him of his office, for the space of a
year after.

And further to compel them of Vtrecht, to grant to his desire, upon the one
and twentieth of August 1569, he sent the whole regiment of Lombardie, being
ten companies to lie in

Whereupon ensued many answers, replies, duplications, and writings, between
them of Vtrecht and the kings attorney general, with great partakings on the
dukes behalf, whereby their writings could hardly be read or heard: and for
that cause upon the fourteenth of July in anno 1570, he caused sentence to be
given out against the states of the country of Vtrecht, as namely against the
five Metropolitan Colleges of the town, representing the first member of
that state, and against the gentlemen as well within as without Vtrecht,
representing the second member: and for the third member the towns of Vtrecht,
Amersfort, Wicke, and Rheuen: charging them to have contracted and agreed with
the confederated gentlemen and their adherents, winked at the abuses of the
image breakers, and suffered the

The states of Vtrecht upon the nine and twentieth of July, appealed against
this cruel sentence of the duke unto the kings Majesty, complaining of great
wrong offered unto them,

The matter standing at this point, they of Vtrecht made friends unto the duke,
offering to give one hundred and eighty thousand gulderns for a tax, and
other presents to himself: but all in vain, and therefore their suit in Spain,
not only to be discharged of their Spanish garrison, but also of their said
sentence, was driven off from day to day. In the year 1571, upon fear of some
invasion to be made in the land by the prince of Oranges ships of war, they
were for a time discharged of their Spanish soldiers, having endured the
burden thereof for

The said garrison being entered again into Vtrecht, began to use all
extremities and rigours as they did before, not sparing John Taetson of
Amerougen, the bourgmaster, entering into his house with their rapiers drawn,
and compelled the town to lend them eight hundred dollers (the grant of the
lending thereof being by the duke himself refused them to be lent by the
bourgers) notwithstanding all humble complaints. The duke not content with
this, he caused the president of the court of Vtrecht, to demand and to
deliver unto him all the original Dom Loys de Requisens, the next Governor
that succeed the duke of

These affairs passing in this sort, and the two years drawing to an end,
upon the last The duke com mandeth the 10 penny to be taxed all the land through.
of July the duke of Alua caused the taxes of the tenth and twentieth penie to
be openly published, with a certain moderation, sufficient, as he thought,
to cease all the complaints aforesaid; declaring thereby, that the merchant
bringing in any wares and merchandises from other countries, should be free
thereof at his first buying, and that he might

This publication with the moderation would by no means content the
Netherlands, but esteemed and held it for a point of most extreme tyranny,
whereby means was sought to bereave the country of all their wealth, and so
the people being impouerished, to drive them out of the land, in regard that
the benefit and commodity of the land consisted in trade of penie, it would
amount unto an unspeakable sum of money, to the utter overthrow of the
Vigilius, Schets, and others (to their great commendation) would serve,
alleging that the states had not given absolute consent thereunto,

The states perceiving the dukes resolution and intent, at the last thought it
requisite, in the beginning of the year 1572, each province to send one into
Spain in their behalfes unto the king, which he nevertheless commanded to
come back again, threatening them with death; but yet they got through into
Spain: but before any resolution was taken therein, there happened an
alteration in the Netherlands, by the taking of the Bryele, Flessingue, and
other places, as hereafter shall be showed: without the which alteration, the
messengers in Spain

The duke notwithstanding in the mean time sought to raise the tenth penie in
some particular towns, appointing his officers to receive the same, and first
in Brussels, where he thought best to begin: but they of Brussels shut up all
their shops, and would sell nothing, that they might not be compelled to pay
the tenth penie. The Bakers nor Brewers wo^ neither bake nor brew, whereby
there grew a great confusion and desperation amongst t^ people, which to
prevent the duke intended to deal by force, resolving in March 1572 to hang
seventeen of the chief towns men in Brussels, that were against him (whose
names The duke seeks by force to constrain them of Brussels to pay the 10
penie.
he had al eadie written in a scroll) in the night time before their doors,
or else he would make them grant to sell their wares, and to pay him
thereafter: the which to effect, he Vander Mark had taken the town of
Bryele, which loss of the said town of Bryle, made him see, that he had done
better to have put garrisons into the haven towns, and to have dealt in milder
sort The case that the 10 penny was not taxed.
at his pleasure; whereas the Netherlands offered such great sums, as that
the state of the land could hardly raise. Thus by means of the taking of the
Bryele, the raising of the tenth and twentieth penie was stayed, although it
has since been sought and required. They of Amsterdam, because they would not
absolutely consent to his demand of the tenth penie, were fined to pay the
sum of five and twenty thousand gulderns, toward the buylding of the castle
at Flessingue: but they excused themselves, by their great loss endured by the
great floods, and the mending and making of their ditches, and above all, that
they daily endured so great loss by the water Gueux, that took their fleets
coming from the East and West Indies.

As I said before, a great number of banished and fugitive persons of the
Netherlands, having prepared ships, kept at sea, and were conducted by certain
gentlemen and others, who most by poverty were driven to seek some recompense
of their losses and hinderance by force and extremities: After that, other
joined with them, having a further intent to do something tending to the
deliverance and good of their native country. This number daily increasing,
and doing great hurt unto their enemies round about Holland, as in the Vlie,
Texel, and the Ems, harboring most commonly under England, in the downs and
at Dover, and thereabouts, amongst the which the prince of Orange, as admiral
by force of his letters of Mart, had his officers that received the tenth penie
of their prizes. The duke of Alua made means to the queen of England to
entreat her not to suffer them to harbor there: alleging

This necessity compelled them to use order and discipli^ amongst them, and to
that end they all put themselves under the command of William earl Vander
Mark, free heir to Lumey, Franchimont, etc. eldest son of John lord of
Lumey, and of Marguerite youngest daughter of John lord of Wassenare. This
earl Vander Mark made himself admiral, and his lieutenant Bartel Entes van
Meutheda, viceadmirall, having with him captain William de Bloys, called
Threlon, the lord of Sweten, Lancelot van Brederode, Jacob Cabilleaw, one of
Egmont, Jacques Schooneual, Antonis Wenthoue, Antonis van Rhine, William de
Grave van Egmont, Jacques Metens, Nicholas Ruythauer, captain Eloy, Iock and
John Abels, Marinus Brandt, Roybol, Jacques Hennebert, John Clauson, Spiegel,
John Simonson, Merten Merous, Walter Franson, captain Ielande, and diverse
others: All these together having about forty ships, most flie-boats, in the
month of March put out of England, and took a great ship of Antuerpe laden
with Spanish wares, and another Vander Mark failed of his enterprise, and for
that the wind fell contrary, whereby they could not get out of the Meuse, they
stayed there not without fear, and there began first to consult, to take some
place or other for their own security, whereupon Threlon counseled them to
take the Bryele.

The ships entering into the Meuse, put them of the Bryele and Meuseland sluice
in great fear, not knowing what ships they were, and for that cause sent out
one John Peterson Coppenstock, who perceiving them to be Gueux, asked for
captain Threlon, for that his father had always been bailife of the Bryele,
and being brought unto him, the earl perceived him to be a fit Theolns
signet, with commission in the name of the earl Vander Mark, to summon them
to yield up the town, for the prince of Orange, as the kings lieutenant, who
was coming into the Netherlands with a great power, to free the same from the
tyranny of the duke of Alua, and from the tenth penie. The signet was sent
into the town, for the bourgmasters security, which desired the same until
the earl Vander Mark came forth. This Coppenstocke was let into the town,
which as then was shut, and being questioned withal, did his message so well,
that the townes-men were much abashed, having a weak town; and without
garrison, whereby the the richest, and the best of them, yea and the greatest
part fled out of the town, before they gave him any answer. Until that time
there had two companies of Spaniards lain in garrison The town of Bryele taken.
went on land, dividing themselves into two parts, Threlon going with one
company to the South gate, and Roybol to the North gate: where with fagots,
pitch, and straw, they thought to fire the gate; but taking a mast and running
forcibly against it, broke it open, and so upon Palm Sunday in the evening,
being the first day of April, anno 1572, they entered into the town, without
blood shedding, the earl Vander Mark with many Walons entering Threlon, and
Jacques Cabilleaw, and others, that counseled the earl to stay there, for the
good situation of the haven: and for that cause promised each other to keep
and defend the same to the uttermost, and so wrote unto the prince of Orange for
more aid: and taking some of the ordnance out of their ships, fortified the
town therewith.

These news being brought unto Brussels, made the towns men glad, for that they
were then upon the point to be forced to pay the tenth penie, and from thence
forth to continue the same, or else part of their towns men should have been
hanged up before their doors.

Maximilian earl of Bossu beng governor of Holland, having before received
intelligence that the earl Vander Mark was at sea, went to the Hage, and from
thence had sent for two The earl of Bossu d^uen from the Bryel
companies of Spaniards, under the leading of Don Ferdinando de Toledo; and
upon the news and commission sent unto him by the duke of Alua, he marched
with ten companies of Spaniards Rochus Meussen, the town carpenter, leapt into
the water, and with great speed opened the new Sluice, whereby presently there
entered so much water into the land, that no man could go in the island, but
only upon the ditch, upon the which the Spaniards went along unto the South
gate, where they found so much shot placed against them, that they began to be
both out of hope and courage.

Mean time it being Easter eve, Threlon and Roybol went with certain
soldiers to assail man fled disorderly away, seeking to save themselves, some
swimming, others running through the water, and some hanging upon the scutes,
and so got over Beuerland in the dirt vander Mark durst not send many of his
men out, being too weak. In this sort the Spaniards came before Dorcht, all
wet, durtie, and weary, where they of the town (in friendly manner) refused
to let them in: for which cause, the earl of Bossu went with them to
Rotterdam, having left sixteen of his men behind him in the Island, and two
captains, which the Gueux hanged up at a mile. The Grave vander Mark sought
means to strengthen himself in the Island, causing the country people
therein to be mustered, swearing and protesting to stand one by the other, and
prepared ships and boats to make war upon the water.

The prince of Orange disliked much of the taking of the Briel, fearing, that
his other enterprises (as then not ready to be effected) would be discovered,
and that thereby the duke of Alua might be too soon awaked: but in regard of
the good situation of the place, he sought all the means that he could
possibly to aid and help the earl from all places.

The ninth of April the duke fearing the like accident in the Isle of Walchren
in Zeeland, that had happened at the Bryel, especially at Flessingue, and for
the better execution of the citadell, which he had designed upon the sea side,
whereof the foundations were laid, and The duke of Alua seeks to assure
himself of Flessingue.
to hinder the navigations of strangers, he resolved to send a garrison: but
doubting they would not willingly receive any, especially Spaniards, fearing
some mutiny, the six and twentieth of March the sent Scipio Campi, an Italian,
to enter into the town under color of friendship, Scipio being entered the
town the eight and twentieth day, caused the commons to assemble, to whom he
declared, that he had greatly recommended the town to the duke of Alua, so as
he had granted them in his Majesty's name a good sum of money to be employed
in the fortification of the town, and that for his part he was desirous and
ready to employ himself therein, and to assist them: for the which the
bourgesses gave him great thanks. Some days after he did impart his intention
and charge to some of the town, his adherents: and as he had put this good
impression into the peoples minds, the third and fourth of April following he
made five breaches in the wall at one time, under

In the mean time, the quarter masters of these Spanish companies being landed
at Arnemuyden, came to Flessingue, where they called the magistrates together,
and importuned them with threats, to make lodgings for the Spaniards. The
magistrates and these harbengers being busy in the towne-house about it, the
people began to troop together in the streets, much troubled, for that they
heard they would lodge the Spaniards: they entered into the towne-house, and
began to cry out confusedly, That they would have no Spaniards, and that they
would rather die than receive them, encouraging one another to arms. The
bourgomasters seeing it, sought to stay them, and to appease this mutiny: but
one of them saying unadvisedly unto the multitude, If we would receive the
Spaniards, can you hinder vs^ At that were the authors, seeing the bourgesses
thus moved, slipped quietly out of the town, and

The bourgesses having freed their artillery, seeing the Spaniards advance to
enter into the haven, they demanded powder; the which being refused them, they
forced the Magasin of munition, where it was, from whence they drew as much
powder and bullets as they pleased, wherewith they charged the artillery,
crying out, That they would not suffer the Spaniards to enter, so long as there
was a man of them alive, making some shot through this fleet of ships.
Whereat the Spaniards being much perplexed, struck sail, so as they durst not
approach any nearer, being within an arrow shoot of the head of the haven, and
not able to retire, by reason of the tide and the wind, that was contrary; one
among them leaping into the sea, came swimming to land: being come into the
town, he entreated the inhabitants,

In the mean time, the baylife of the town seeing the people thus moved,
ran speedily to Middlebourg, to inform the Seignior of Wacken, Vice Admiral
for the king of Spain, of all that had passed: and in the mean time, many of
the magistrates which had favored the Spaniards, retired secretly out of the
town. After dinner, the Seignior of Wacken being come, and having demanded of
the people, If all that which they did were well done; That he himself was the
cause thereof: which amazed him so, as he retired to the towne-house, to some
of the aldermen that were yet remaining: then afterward he went and spoke
again unto the people, but somewhat more modestly, entreating them, that at
the least they would suffer a hundred Spanish soldiers to enter; which they
refused: Then he demanded them, if they had rather have Wallons: whereunto
answer was made him, That neither the one nor the other. Being full sea at
three of the clock in the afternoon, the Spaniards were commanded to retire,
and two pieces of Ordnance were discharged, which made them presently to
depart. The burgesses being much incensed against the Seignior of Wacken, would
have slayed him, accusing him to be the cause of all the mischief, and that
returning to the duke of Alua, he would be their mortal

The duke of Alua hearing how matters went at Flessingue, and that it was lost
for him, setting a good face on it, said, Pitsi linge no es nada: for which
cause, the Protestants of Zeeland carried afterward in their colors, No es
nada; others carried nine pieces of money, showing, that they made war to
preserve the tenth.

These ships, laden with Spaniards, being retired from Flessingue, arrived in
the Island of Zuydbeuelandt, thinking to enter into the town of Ter-Goes, but
they would not receive The Spaniards being refused at Ter Goes, surprise
Berghen.
them; so as the thirteenth of April they arrived before Berghen upon Soom,
where the entry was in like sort denied them: but the sixteenth following they
surprised it by night, and entreated the inhabitants, by reason of this
refusal, as you may imagine, and as they accustomed

Those of Flessingue went unto the village of Coukerke, to require them to
join with them; but at the first they refused them, giving too much credit to
Streyen, to the baylife, and to the bishop of Middlebourg; yet the thirteenth
of the month, being returned again with a good number of pesants, they
agreed, and so did Westcappel, Soeteland, Dombourg, Eastcappel, and others:
those of la Vere and Arnemuyden did also join: and the twentieth Threlons men
won the castle of Ter Hooghen. And as there came soldiers unto them daily
from England, and other places; so the seven and twentieth of the month there
arrived seven ships laden with soldiers on the prince of Oranges behalf,
from the Breyle, and the same day the Spaniards came near unto the Polder,
Arnemuyden taken by the Spaniards.
which is before Arnemuyden (the which is a piece of drowned land recovered
from the sea) where they landed, and the next day won the town of Arnemuyden,
which was yet compassed in with walls and rampires. The Protestants of
Flessingue and la Vere to be revenged Pachieco, who (they fayd) was cousin to
the duke of Alua. This Pachieco had done much mischief to the town of
Deuenter: he offered a great sum of money to have his life saved, being very
loath to dye, especially to be hanged, the which he would gladly have had
exchanged with the sword for a good round sum: but the inhabitants and
mariners were so incensed, as they had rather see him hanged, than to have his
money in their purses. The same day captain Worst of Flessingue, with seven
ships, defeated thirty of the Spanish party, among the which there were
seven ships of war, whereof some were taken, and some burned; as for the
men, some were slain, the rest drowned, and few escaped. All this war was
managed by the Protestants of Zeeland, under the authority of the prince of
Orange, from Rowland and William Iansz (who meant to betray and deliver the
town) were taken and executed; by reason whereof supplies were sent unto them,
as also unto Flessingue. The sixteenth of the said month, the chaloupes or
pinnaces of la Vere chased and caused seven Spanish ships to return to
Ter-Goes, whereof one being cast upon a bank of sand (the men being fled to
land) was burned. The nineteenth of the said month six Boyers (which is a
kind of ships) of Middlebourg showed themselves upon the Hont, thinking to
go forth: but captain Philip Grenu; alone with his pinnace, made them
return into their haven. The same day the magistrate was renewed, under the
authority of the prince of Orange, as Governor Worst against some Spaniards
and ships of Middlebourg: departing from Flessingue, they passed by a
straight of the sea, called Iocker Frans-ghat: Those of the castle of Rameken
(otherwise called Zeebourg) where there were some Spaniards, made five or six
shot at them, but to no purpose: Being the same night joined with captain
Worst, they had a furious fight with the ships of Middlebourg: in which
fight, Bastien of Langhe, admiral of la Vere, being in fight with four of the
enemies ships, fell aground with his ship, whereas the Spaniards boorded
him; but one of his men seeing that they were all lost, set fire on the powder,
and blew both Spaniards and Zeelanders into the air; which made this victory
fatal and mournful unto the Spaniards.

The four and twentieth of May Cont Lodowic of Nassau, brother to the prince of
Orange, having made a new party with the Protestants of France, to enter into
the Netherlands, Mons in Henault surprised by Cont Lodowic.
and to surprise the town of Mons in Henault; the enterprise was made in this
sort. The two and twentieth of May, at night, there came into the town twelve
adventurers, attyred like merchants; being at supper, they informed themselves
of their host, at what a clock in to the gate, they promised the porter a
piece of money to open the gate; the which he did: Lodowi^, who was attending
at the port, entered with forty horses only, with the which he planted
himself at the corners of the chief streets in the town, and if any one did
open a door or a window, they shot at them with their pistols, crying out as
loud as they could, Liberti^, Liberty is given you by the prince of Orange, to
free you from the tenth penny, and from all the duke of Al^ exactions. These
cries continued some three quarters of an hour, making as great a noise in the
town, as i^ they had been a thousand men. The earl having long expected his
troops, seeing that none advanced, he went out of the town, to see where
they stayed so long, and where his horsemen were, the which had strayed in the
wood, whom the earl guided unto the town, to the number of five hundred
horse, having every one a harquebusier Lodowic.

At the same time Valenciennes was also surprised, but soon after it was
recovered again by the duke of Alua. For having sent Dom John de Mendoza with
some horsemen (...) the castle (in the which there were Spaniards) being
unfurnished of victuals and powder, he that had made this surprise in Cont
Lodowics name, fearing to be besieged, and to be forced

The duke of Alua knowing well of what importance the town of Flessingue was*
as being the entrance into the sea and the river of Escaut, where their
victuals came from all parts to feed the Isle of Walchren, and that it was
easy to fortify it, he sent Sancho d' Auila with men, artillery and munition
to besiege it, and by the same means to provide for the towns of Middlebourg
and Ter-Goes. The Protestants did no less for their parts, doing their
uttermost S^ncho d' A^ ^nt to be^ (...).
endeavors to fortify the places which they held, but above all, Flessingue;
where, after they had chased away captain Threlon and his men, by reason of
their insolences, they received some

The prince of Orange on the other side having an intent to second Cont Lodowic
his brother, being in Mons in Henault, levied what men he could both in
Germ^ny, England, Scotland and France. The duke of Alua to frustrate his
designs, sent for duke Erick o^ Brunswick, and other commanders and colonels
of horse and foot, Germans, to join with his army, and to attend the prince,
if he advanced to enter into the country.

These troops of strangers being entered into Flessingue, the inhabitants began
to take courage, and to make great designs: they issued forth of their town
to go and burn the ports of Middlebourg: they shot off their Ordnance at
randon through the town, and prepared Do^ Sancho d' Auila's army, coming to
succor Middlebourg (who being forced through tempest to lan^, seized upon the
castle of Rameken) they retired home. Yet after they had consulted in what
manner they might most annoy the enemy, where they should have means to
defray the charges of the war, and to entertain their soldiers, and to
supply all other necessities: they resolved to go to field, to attempt some
places, and to arm a good number of ships, to keep Middlebourg not only
from victuals and munition of war, but also to cut off the passage for the
succors which the king of Spain might send them by sea: so as in a short time
they had ^igged out a hundred and fifty sail, and put to field some three
thousand men Yet could they not do it so speedily, but the duke of Alua had
furnished Middlebourg Sancho d' Auila. After this resolution, the fourth of
June, ten ships of Zeeland, sailing toward Antuerpe, being come to Boom.
Creek, took there thirty boats of diverse places, some going to Antuerpe,
others returning.

The garrison of Middlebourg meaning to be revenged for their losses upon them
of Flessingue, Barnard had been in danger to have miscarried; and although it
was well fought on either side, yet the Flessinguers finding themselves too
weak to vanquish such great Spanish forces having Canon, they retired to their
town with the loss of twenty men. The Lodowic, thinking themselves strong
enough to fight with all the Spaniards, entered into Flaunders, and marched
directly to Oudenbourg, E^kloo, and Ardenbourg, three great boroughes, where
they found some of the chief bourgesses of Bruges, who were sent to declare
unto captain Saras (governor of Fl^ssingue, and chief of those troops) the
good affection which they of Bruges bare unto the prince of Orange, and the
desire they had to be of their allies. After that he had heard them* they were
sent back to confirm the rest of the bourgesses in this devotion, Sar^ seeing
it impossible to get to Cont Lodowic, without putting himself in danger to
have all pass^ges stopped, and to be compassed in on all sides, without any
means to retire, changed his resolution, and retired to Flessingue the same
way he came, thinking to do better upon the town of Ter-Goes; where he
framed to himself assured designs, by the intelligences which he presumed to
have: but it was all in vain, being no more fortunate there than elsewhere;
which made him to be suspected of cowardice or treason: so as at his Saras
ag^ine. Coming unto the Island of Zuytbeuelandt, he found at his lan^ing place
a sort manned with two hundred soldiers; the which he took by force with his
Englishmen: such as could save themselves, fled unto the town, and gave
warning* that the Zeelanders had entered the Island: Saras pursuing them,
advanced with his troops toward the town, the which he summoned to yield,
and to have their lives and goods saved: but his hardy demand had a bardie
denial: for those of the town entertained them so courteously with Canon and
Musket shot, as some being hurt, they retired a little back: yet afterward
he Saras (as despairing to win it) gave courage unto the Spaniards, who made
a sally forth to charge them in the ^eward, as he made his retreat; but they
marched in such good order, as they could not annoy them. Saras hearing of the
coming of the Spaniards from An^rpe and Berghen vp^n* Soo^, raised his camp,
and returned into the Isle of Walchr^* But the Flessinguers accusing him of
cowardice and of treason in all his enterprises of Bruges, Gand, and Ter-Goes
(where they presumed to have many

The Spaniards of Middlebourg, Ter-Goes, and other places thereabouts, came in
the Saras returned to Flessingue, where the entry was again denied him; yet
after that he had wandered up and down fifteen days, at the request of the
French captains he was received.

Soon after, there were new preparations made to go again into the Island of
Suytbeuelandt, The Protestants of Zeeland besiege Ter-Goes.
and to besiege Ter-Goes, situated in the midst of a fertile country, which
yielded many good commodities of victuals to the town of Antuerpe. It had a
strong wall, and deep ditches, but no counterscarpe nor parapet upon the
rampire. They sent nine double Canons thither, which were drawn out of
Flessingue. The Protestants army lodged at the first in the suburbs of the
town, whereas there were but two companies, one of Spaniards, and another of
Flemings in garrison. The Canon was planted in two batteries; the one at Saras
had given them, were too short: so as this assault was very prejudicial unto
them, being forced to leave it with shame and loss.

About that time, the five and twentieth of August, all the soldiers within
Flessingue (except the companies of captain Barnard, Eloy, Morcant, and some
few others) embarked with them of the garrison of la Vere, with a great number
of boats, having a design upon the town of Antuerpe, where they had
intelligence with some bourgesses: the which was done under the command and
authority of the prince of Orange: but as they were upon the

The eight and twentieth of August captain Claes Claesz with his ship, and
Broubier with his flie-boat, went out of Flessingue, and going along the
Western coast, they met with four pinnaces come out of Scluse to seek their
adventures upon the Zeelanders and their allies: two of which were chased back
into their hole, called the Swyn: the third was abandoned by the Spaniards* who
leaped into the sea, whereof some were saved, and the rest drowned: but before

The duke of Alua fearing least the town of Ter-Goes would be lost (by reason
of the small garrison that was within it) by a long siege of the Zeelanders, he
sent Sancho d'Auila, d'Auila fainted not; but having enquired of the best
experienced mariners, if there might be no way to pass over at a low water;
being told him, that there was good means, yet he would not trust them, before
he had sent some of his people with them to sound the passage; who having made
their report, D'Auila being glad to have found this way, would make a trial
with all his troop accompanied by colonel Mondragon his assistant; who
marching first on foot, led them both Spaniards, Wallons, and Germans, two
thousand paces, or thereabouts, into the drowned land, not knowing whither they
went: the which they passed in five hours, and arrived safely (though with
great toil) in the Island of Zuytbeuelandt, where they made them to rest,
before they would have them fight with their enemy, being above four leagues
from them. And although that these soldiers were so wet and tired, as they
could not march far, and that the Protestants (besieging Ter-Goes) were five
thousand men, and might Bartel Entens, lieutenant to the earl of March, was
one of the ringleaders in this flight: who arrived the two and twentieth of
October with his men, and the French, before la Vere, and the English before
Flessingue. They had left some English and French in the suburbs for the
rereward, that they might the more easily imbarke the artillery. But the fear
and apprehension was so great among them, as they abandoned all, and fled in
such disorder to their ships, as many seeking to enter in the prease, were
drowned, and the artillery abandoned and lost. Captain Saras, unfortunate in
all his exploits, was again taxed with treason;

Bartel Entens being returned with his men into the Isle of Walchren, made an
enterprise upon Arnemuyden, thinking to surprise it, but he failed; for that
one of his soldiers having

The king of Spain hearing, that the too sharp and rigorous government of the
duke of Alua had been the cause of all the troubles in the Netherlands,
whereof he had daily The duke of Medina Coeli sent to govern the Netherlands.
many complaints, and that through his negligence the Zeelanders and others had
taken arms, meant to call him home, and to send the duke of Medina Coeli in
his place: a nobleman of a milder disposition, to govern the said countries of
the Netherlands after the duke of Alua. And to that end, there was a good fleet
of ships of war appointed,

With all this fleet the duke of Medina sailed happily, until he came unto
the coast of Flaunders. But the eleventh of June news being come to
Flessingue, That there were forty Worst, with other captains, went forth to
find them, with twelve ships and hoyes; but before they could come, six and
twenty carauels of this fleet had cast themselves into the Swyn of Scluse,
whereas the duke of Medina saved himself with twelve more in a shippe-boat.
The Zeelanders burned three which were run a ground; and two others being
taken, were carried to Flessingue, laden with merchandise. The Spaniards that
were found in these five, were cast ouer-boord, and about threescore carried
prisoners to Flessingue: from whence the twelfth day of the same month went
forth eight other ships, well manned with soldiers, mariners and
bourgesses, gaping after nothing but booty, encouraged with the good success
of the day before, and to second those Worst, to fight with those twelve great
ships, laden with Spanish soldiers, the which for their greatness could not
enter into Scluse: but these great carackes seeing them come, kept so close
together, as the Zeelanders could not annoy them; so as they returned without
any effect, being hindered by a Westerly wind, which was contrary unto them.
Yet the same day they rigged forth certain great ships, to visit them the
next day, if happily the wind would serve; but the tempest increasing, they
could not do any thing, and so for spite they hung up eleven Spaniards, which
they had taken prisoners. The next day they discovered many sails at sea,
coming from the West, yet could they not suddenly discern what they were, and
therefore at Flessingue they held their artillery ready, and their rampars
well manned. The twelve great Spanish

The Zeelanders had a wonderful rich booty in all these ships, besides that
which

I think it convenient to show how the town of Enchuysen obtained her
freedom* which I will in brief declare, that the Reader may thereby conceive
how other towns likewise proceeded in their actions: for that the taking of
the Briel, Flessingue, and Enchuysen were the only foundation and first
original of the recovering of the freedom of the Netherlands,

Enchuysen is a good town, belonging unto North Holland, or West-Friseland,
and lying upon the South sea: a town well peopled, and well stored with
ships, but in times Enchuysen reuol^th.
past but little esteemed, inhabited by rich seafaring men, and fishers; which
being strongly situated (together with the great store of seafaring men, and
ships belonging unto the same) was the foundation, back, and ground of the
assuring of the neighbor towns about it; as Briel in South-Holland, and
Flessingue in Zeeland were unto those about them.

The town of Briel being taken by the earl Vander Merke in April 1572,
whereupon ensued the revolt of Flessingue, with other towns; the duke of Alua
having before commanded Amsterdam, Enchuysen, and other places were busied
about the same, diverse soldiers were likewise sent thither, not only for the
ships, but also under pretense thereof secretly to put a

This pretense was partly perceived by the unadvised words of one captain
Schuylenburgh, by him spoken in anger unto a bourger of Enchuysen, that asked
him some money that he ought him, threatening him and the rest of the
townes-men with further inconveniences, than they as yet had felt: which being
made known amongst the bourgers, they promised and ^ore each unto other, not
to suffer any soldiers to enter into the town. After that, it happened, as
the ships of war were almost ready, one captain Quickel came unto the
gate of Enchuysen, with certain soldiers, desiring to enter in; which he
Cornclis Peterson, John Reynarson, Volckar Harrickson, and William Johnson,
sought and agreed all together, under pretense of a muster, to bring the said
captain Quickel his soldiers into the town: but the townes-men assembling
together, to withstand the same, an old bourger, called Reymer Stontingh, told
the old bourgomaster Walter Symonson, That it was best for them to muster the
soldiers without the town, and Cornelis Peterson Re^tlutz, one well esteemed
of amongst all the townes-men, and that after served in many offices of the
town, answered him, saying, If the town be committed unto your charge, then
rule it as you ought to do; but if you seek to charge Cornelis Peterson spoke
boldly, saying* We desire to have no soldiers enter into the town, though it
cost me this black head of mine: and of whom should you ask the question,
but of us, that are inhabitants of the town? Or have not we to do therewith?
you alone cannot maintain us. But when the bourgomaster saw more of them to
assemble together, he said unto them; Be of good cheer, there shall no
soldiers come in here:

The next day the lord of Boshuysen, admiral of Holland, came unto the town
with his officers and his halberdiers, attending on him, who by his authority,
together with the bourgomasters, caused captain Quickel with his colors and
company to come unto the town; but the bourgers running unto the gates, made
them retire: by which means their purpose failing, part of the said soldiers
got their pasports, fayning, not to be willing to serve in the ships, saying,
That they were taken up and appointed only to lie in garrison in the town. By
this fained kind of discharging, they thought to get into the town without
arms, and by means of Claus Rem, host of the Paradise, where captain Quickel
aforesaid then lay, they thought to get their arms to be brought secretly
into the town under some women's long huyckes; and having partly effected the
same, and gotten part of them in, the captain caused a drum to be sounded
(to put the bourgers in fear, as if all his soldiers had been entered) to
will them all to assemble at his lodging: Quickel, with his soldiers, out of
the town, and yet no man hurt on both sides. The said captain Quickel being
out, the bourgers went unto the house of Frederick Simonson, hard by the town
house, where the admiral Boshuyse^ lay, to speak with him; but the host
swearing that he was not there, they would not leave until they had found
him, and for that he had deceived them before, they put him into the
towne-house, and there kept him, with certain bourgers to watch him, and
thereupon went and fetched the Ordnance that lay at the haven, and out of two
ships of war, and brought them into the town, giving order, and causing
the Passage Hoye of Amsterdam

The next day, being the third of May, the bourgers being somewhat better
encouraged, went in great heaps unto the towne-house, where the bourgomasters
sought to persuade the chiefest of them to be quiet, saying, That all that
while there had nothing been done, but that which might be easily answered
before the king, and imputed unto some light young fellows and strangers in
the town, and such like reasons. But John Frederickeson and Cornelis Peterson
aforesaid standing by, Correlis bad the bourgomasters not to make the matter
any fayrer than it was, saying, That the bringing in of the soldiers was
nothing else but villainy, whereby they sought to bring many bourgers
(especially Diericke Johnson, a brewer, came thither, the said Cornelis spoke
in this manner: There is a man, which you banished out of the town without any
cause, and without law or ^ight seized upon all his goods, who, with diverse
others, were compelled to abandon and forsake the country: Therefore (said he)
it were time for us to lose and unburden our selves from the Aluanish
tyranny, and the exaction of the tenth penny, and to receive the prince of
Vol^kar Harrickson, and another bourgomaster making answer, said, That they
would (for a great sum of money) that it were come unto that pas^e, that the
prince of Orange were in the government, and they discharged of their offices.
Whereunto Cornelis said, That they were in no danger, nor had any cause to
fear, that any innocent blood should be spilt, for that God had taken care
both for them and his Religion, and that therefore they were to expect and
attend nothing but friendly usage and good dealing, behauing themselves in good
sort, and truly and faithfully aiding and assisting one the other.

Certain days after, Paulus vander Loo, Drossart of Muyden, came thither,
with a carauel Peter Buyskens met the Drossart coming to the gate, and roughly
asked him, What he made there, and whither he would go with his soldiers. The
Drossart abashed at his rough speech, knew not what to say: whereupon they bad
him to be gone from thence, or else (they said) they would make him shorter by
the two legs. Mean time, the bourgomaster William Johnson came thither, to
fetch the Drossart into the town; whom Diericke Johnson, brewer, asked,
Whither those soldiers should go, saying that they perceived all their doings
to be nothing but villainy, and that they must be forced to cause the bourgers
to rise; whereby great trouble began to ensue: the bourgomaster made answer,
Cornelis Johnson, brewer, placed a piece of Ordnance, and having a match ready
lighted in his hand, was about to shoot at the ship; but Harman Entison, the
town carpenter, by good fortune stayed Peter Luytkison Buyskens had commission
from the prince of Orange, bearing date in Dillenbourg the twentieth of April
1572, to assure the town of Enchuysen with the ships of war, against the
duke of Alua, the which upon the success of the Briel and Flessingue had
caused him and others to be so bold, as to come into the town, and that the
bourgers were there with imboldened, they sought to make a deceitful and
fained agreement; whereunto the bourgers all with one voice consented; which
was, That the ships lying in the stream should be let pass, but that all
the ships and goods that were within the town, should be kept there, which
were the ships of war, with munition, powder, and shot: That the watch in the
town should Siewaert Johnson, Crommendike, old Frederick Simonson, Peter
Hendrickson, and Frederick Peterson, alias Maekschoon; choosing twelve bourgers
to sit in counsel with the magistrates, and so as they thought the matter was
ended. This notwithstanding, the bourgomasters secretly sought to assure the
town for the duke of Alua, and for that cause devised* that certain bourgers
that were affected to the Spaniards, and the ^arle of Bossu their governor,
should make request unto them, to have license for the space of three days to
ship, lade, and carry all their goods out of the town whither they would:
which being granted them, they subtly got all the come into their hands,
Dierick Brewers wood yard, where they determined to send Corn is Peterson, and
young Frederick Simonson, to the bourgomasters in the towne-house, to certify
them, That the bourgers were discontented, and found fault, that the watch was
not strengthened as it should be, with other complaints. The bourgomasters made
answer, That they were then in hand with the captains, about providing
certain shot, and that they should stay till the next morning, and they would
fulfill their Boshuysens bad counsel, who as then was kept in the towne-house,
went all together thither, and seemed to be much out of quiet. Whereupon
Cornelis Peterson thinking to do for the best, and seeking to appease them,
they cried out, and were angry with him, saying, That he dissembled as well as
the rest: wherewith he presently excused himself, willing them to kill him,
whenever they found him with that fault. After that, one Peter Potbacker
cried out, and said, That they would have the admiral Boshuysen out of the
towne-house, and put him into a straighter prison; which was done (disorderly
John Vesterman, that spoke in his behalf, because he was an old man, to
another place, and kept him prisoner in the Keet-gate, where they willed him to
write unto the captains of the ships of war that lay before the Veen, that
they should bring the ships, and lay them in the road before the town, and
put themselves into the hands of the bourgers of Enchuysen: but they not
agreeing amongst themselves, whether it should be done in the name of the
admiral, or in the bourgers name, they sent particular letters, whereby there
grew division among the fleet, which as then began to be stronger. And for that
cause, the ships of Amsterdam sailed home again, and they of Enchuysen came
the next day, and lay Boshuysen and Vesterman to be set at liberty, and with
good store of shot to be conveyed to Amsterdam. Thereupon the bourgers and the
bourgomasters took order together, That the ships of war should be
brought into the haven, and the Ordnance placed upon the walls, and to
Frederick Simonson, the elder, one of the captains of the town, having the
command of the watch that night, did nothing all that night, but labor with
the bourgers, to persuade them to desist from their pretense, telling them,
That they were to expect no better issue, than they of Valenciennes and Berghen
in Henault had: That they should have no free passage (through any toll)
neither at Amsterdam, nor in any other place: and that the troubles that had
happened in the town, were to be imputed unto the admiral Boshuysen, that
sought to have brought captain Quickel, with his company, forcibly into the
town, having to that end caused their arms to be secretly brought in, and
that Boshuysens ships had taken two of their bourgers Dogh-boates; for which
cause Cornelis Peterson spoke boldly unto him, and asked him, why the boomes
were open, contrary to the order taken touching the same, and that the
bringing in of the ships, and the placing of the Ordnance on the walls was
stayed. The captain seeking peaceably to excuse the matter, and to bring him
to consent and agree to his persuasions, said, That it was his office
appointed him by the town: And with that, Cornelis Peterson said, That he had
nothing to do with their offices, and that all was in vain, and that the
ships must be brought into the haven, and the Ordnance laid upon the walls:
and certain bourgers being assembled at North Spuye, they both went thither,
each to persuade them as he thought best, Cornelis Peterson earnestly
alleging against the captains arguments, That both his speeches and promises
were nothing else but mere deceits, to persuade and bring them once again
under the duke of Aluaes tyranny: from thence they two went to the West end of
the fishers dike by another assembly of bourgers, each showing his reasons, as
aforesaid. But when captain Frederick Simonson perceived some of the
favorers of the reformed Religion to be there, he moderated

Captain Frederick having drawn a great number of the bourgers to hearken
unto him, he took them all to witness, That Cornelis Peterson was a
stubborn, mistrustfull, and suspicious man. Whereupon Cornelis Peterson said,
That he could not believe him, for that he sought to break the order and
agreement that was made the day before, as also that he had sworn, that
Boshuysen was not lodged in his house, and yet he was found therein; as also,
that the proceedings of those of Amsterdam was yet fresh in every man's
remembrance, how that the bourgomasters in Anno 1567 dealt doubly with their
bourgers, telling them, That if the baron de Brederode went from thence with
his soldiers, they would take no more in to them: but they (contrary to their
former promises) took the earl of Meghen his soldiers into the town.
Captain Frederick made answer Whereunto Cornelis Peterson said, That there
were four men (such as they were) whereof he Cornelis Peterson spoke out, and
said, That it was all villainy John Reynarson spoke, and said, Good brethren,
strive not against the kings army, it will be hardly laid unto our charges,
let them therefore go, and that is the best way for us. The most of the
bourgers therewith giving consent, that they should go, and the sooner the
better, Cornelis Peterson and his adherents said, That it were best to let them
lie, until the ships of war of Amsterdam were come down; and therewith the
assembly departed: But to get the consent of the bourgers, the bourgmasters
caused the great, or the common counsel of the bourgers to be assembled, and
sent unto them some of their secret counsel, and others Vander Marks ships
making toward it (the captain and the men having forsaken it) fell upon it,
and having ransacked it of all that was in it, burnt it. The bourgmasters
hearing thereof, thought good to set out another fli-boat in place of that was
lost, not making any words nor show to do it, till about noone time, when least
people were in the streets: which for that it was contrary to their agreement,
and they seeking to bring it through the draw bridge, certain bourgers
Henricke to be their captain; but the bourgers not content with him, sent
Peter Ruyskens, and Diericke Brower, to tell them that they liked not of him.
Answer was given them, That they would please them, and that they desired
nothing else but peace; and that if they would nominat four men, they would
choose one of them. Whereupon the bourgers assembling, chose four men, but they
liked not the bourgmasters: whereupon one Bart Luytgeson was appointed captain
of that company, and therewith they took their oaths. Mean time Peter
Buyskens, and Diericke Brower sought by all means to persuade the bourgmasters,
that the prince of Isebrandt Iacobson, and Richart Claeson had brought, but
they would not believe it, but devised all the means they could, to go forward
with their proceedings, to aid the duke of Alua: and having gotten a company
of soldiers under their command, determined to send the flie-boat that lay
under the bridge for a man of war, amongst the rest of the ships that were
gone to Amsterdam, and to that end the bourgmasters and the counsel, with the
company of soldiers, about noone time went to the bridge, where they found no
man but Cornelis Brewer, with Jacob and John his two brethren, who presently
got more company, and standing upon the promise made unto them, stepped upon the
bridge, Cornelis having a two handed Peter Cornelison stepping forward, asked
who was there, that would let them from drawing the flyboat forth from under
the bridge: whereunto Cornelis Brewer made answer, and said, That will we, or
else will die for it. The bourgmaster therewith abasht, and withal many people
Cornelis Brewer and his brethren, which one of the bourgers, called Arent
Erickson, perceiving, cried out and said, If thou shootest at any of the
bourgers, I will th^ust my poniard in thy ribs: wherewith he and the
bourgmasters left off their pretense, returning back again with the company
of soldiers to the town-houle, where they presently caused the harguebusiers
to assemble at the townhouse with their arms: the said harguebusiers
(appointed in every town of the Netherlands out of the best and fittest
bourgers, with special oath to defend the town) being come unto the town
house, asked wherefore the bourgmasters had so suddenly sent for them. Answer
was made them, That they would have them to help either to drive the Gueux and
villains out of the town, or else kill them. Whereupon great dissension rose
amongst the shot, so that William Besterman striking off the locks, laid powder
upon the touch-holes, as if they had been ready to shoot them off. Wherewith
a bourger of good account, called Jacob Florison, that dwelt not far from the
towne-house, then sitting upon the seat before his door, with his wife, seeing
that preparation and forwardness, thought upon some means how to prevent the
danger of blood shedding, and standing up, determining to venture his life,
said to his wife Sou (that is Susanna) Williams daughter adue, we must now
part, and presently went to the North Spuy, where he met with Gerrardt Johnson
Swaels, a canonier, that asked him what Jacob said, Well then, take the planks
that lie there, and place them in manner of a sco^ce breast high, in the broad
street, before thy mothers house, and then fetch the two brass^ pieces that lie
upon the haven, and place them before the planks, but shoot not before they of
the towne-house come, or till I come again from the Spuy. Wherewith he going
to the Spuy, found great store of fishermen there, that heartened one the other
to go forcibly to the towne-house, and to constrain them to lay down their
arms before they were stronger, crying out and saying, Seeing they seek to
bring us to our ends, let us go and spoil them first: but when Jacob Florison
spoke unto them in friendly manner, and said, Good brethren, be patient a
while, until they come to fight with us, and then will we show that we are
Harco Meyusche (that after was a captain in the battle against Boshuysen,
and lost his life in that war, for his countries cause) said, That it was the
best way to set upon them, least they should come too short and too late:
wherewith they were certified, that the harguebusiers in the towne-house were
at controversy, and many of of them unwilling to fight against their fellow
bourgers, and so to bring the town into perpetual slavery, and that
therefore many of them were gone home again, and that only some that favored
the Spaniards stayed there. This being thus pacified, and the one holding the
others sword in the scaberd, the bourgers sent Peter Buyskens, with some others
to the burgmasters to move them to send the brass pieces that stood before the
towne-house unto the walls, and to and and assist the town, to defend it self
against the enemy. But the bourgmasters made answer, William Johnson, and
Jacob Peterson Samsoen should be returned from Amsterdam, whom they looked for
that evening, and that then they would say more unto them, else not. Those
committees that were sent to the earl of Bossu to Amsterdam, being returned,
the bourgers sent their mess^ngers once again unto the towne-house, to have
answer upon their Dierick Johnson, Jacob Erickson, and Peter Buyskens, it will
not be, and we are not yet ready to carry the ordnance unto the walls, for
our committees are come from Amsterdam, and bring us word, That the earl of
Bossu is desirous to know who are his friends, or his foes, and will have us
all expressly Peter Buyskens that had commission from their old governor the
prince of Orange, and one Hans Cloterman gave them counsel, and said, That if
they would not be suddenly ouerrun and spoiled, they must not long stand upon
resolving what they meant to do. And having in that sort consulted together
till noone time, they all agreed, and so every man went home to dinner,
promising one the other to hold together, and to proceed therein in the name of
God: the bourgmasters being likewise devising and consulting what order to
take, to proceed in their affairs.

About noone Dterick Johnson Brewer, caused the town drummer to sound his
drum round about the town, and to will all those that loved the king of
Spain and the prince of Peter Buyskens for one of their commanders, to be
with his company at the North Spuy, and Jacob Erickson at the south Spuy, by
the gate, to take in the South tower, and Diericke Brower to go to the blew
gate, where there lay two pieces of ordnance, which he took, and there made a
barricado, which he drove before him, and therewith went with his Cromendike,
Peter Hendrickson, and master Ma^kschon met them, persuading them to agree
friendly together, as friends and citizens ought to do: but the bourgers that
went forwards toward the town house giving the captains no answer, a number
of the best and motherliest women in the town assembled together, and stopped
the street, thinking to stay them from blood shedding (as the women thereabouts
of nature and ancient custom are very manly, in regard that the men are often
out at sea to fish, and otherwise) and began to cry out, and to fall upon the
men's necks, and to entreat them not to proceed any further, but peaceably to
go home again to their houses, and live friendly one with the other, with
many such words. But Diericke Brower mistrusting such a matter, spoke ruffely,
and said, Away John Frerickson Flutske, and Jacob the son of Diericke Brower,
with some others stepped out before the ordnance and the barricado, and went
toward the towne-house, and there finding a great company of harguebusiers
standing before it, that meant to resist them, the John Frerickson couched his
piece to shoot at one of the principallest criers out for the duke of Alua
called Albert Reinierson, but shooting off, mist him: which the harguebusiers
seeing, and perceiving that the bourgers meant to proceed to a fight in good
earnest, and withal hearing and seeing another company of bourgers come from
the South part of the town and a great number of fishermen from the North end,
they were in great fear, and went their ways, letting the rest do what they
would. The bourgmasters perceiving themselves to be forsaken of the
harguebusiers, and the bourgers coming strongly on, fled into the towne-house,
and shut to the door, to save themselves from the fury of the people, and hid
them in secret places. The bourgers finding the towne-house locked, Diericke
Brewer bad them take

Hereupon they wrote unto the earl of March, lieutenant to the prince of
Orange, entreating him to take their town into his protection, and that to that
end he would send them some soldiers, to repulse the tyranny of the duke of
Alua. Those of the towns of Alcmar, Horn, Edam, and Medemblic, in the said
country of Friseland, did the like, following the example of them of
Enchuysen. On the other side the towns of South-Holland, that lay nearest unto
The earl of March as lieu tenant to the prince of Orange se^seth upon Holland.
under his protection and obedience, except Schoonhouen and Amsterdam, which
made great resistance: But Schoonhouen was soon besieged by the earl of
March, who reduced them unto reason: so as all Holland yielded unto the earl,
as lieutenant unto the prince, who had been long governor: only Amsterdam
excepted, the which he besieged twice, but he prevailed nothing, being too
strong of situation, and too well peopled, not able to win the citizens, who
were too much inclined to the Romish religion, and to the king of Spaines
devotion.

Whilst that the earl of March played his part in Holland, the earl of
Sheeren-Berghe, brother in law to the prince, entered into the county of
Zutphen with a good troop of men,

In the mean time some gentlemen Frisons of those which had fled with their
allies (among the which were cont Iosse of Schouwenburg, and the seignior of
Nederwomter) were received Gaspar of Robles, seigniour of Billi, to come and
succor them: who being arrived with part of his regiment of Walons, was well
entertained into the said town and castle of Leuwarden, and in Sloten, and
Harlingen. The first entrance which the Protestants made into the country of
Friseland, was at Dockom, with a great number as well of soldiers as of
peasants from whence they chased the garrison of Walons that was there, whereof
there remained five in the church tower, who had saved themselves there,
shooting continually at them that went in the streets: which the Protestants
seeing, they set fire on the tower, yet there was but one of the five that was
burnt, the other four remained there unto the sixth of September, when Billi's
soldiers

Colonel Billi hearing that the soldiers of these Protestant captains, were
for the most

Cont Lodowic having surprised Mons in Henault, the duke of Alua at the first
would not believe it; but when he was certainly advertised, he began to
storm and rage, he began to tear his clothes, and to cast his hat to the
ground, and tread on it, cursing God and men, Lodowic did fortify himself
within Mons, being resolved not to leave it but upon good terms: wherefore,
setting all other affairs aside, he resolved to besiege him, sending first his
son Dom Frederic with two thousand Spaniards and Walons, two thousand
Landsknechts, and five hundred horse of the bands of ordnance, Mons invested by
Dom Frederic.
to inuest the town, whilst that he himself should come in person with all
his forces. Dom Frederic at his first approach seized upon the cloister ioining
unto the town, notwithstanding the many sallies which they within Mons made
upon him. The town was not very well provided of victuals, but as it was the
time of Harvest, the soldiers both of horse and foot went forth often to
skirmish, to reap the corn, and to bring it into the town, the which they

Cont Lodowic knowing that these troops were upon the way to come and succor
him, sent them word that he had no need of them within the town, where they
should cause but a greater dearth of victuals, seeing there was nothing to be
gotten thereabouts: he therefore entreated them to march toward Cambray, and
to go join with the army of the prince of Genlis and the French Protestants
defeated
been free from the slaughter of the enemies, and to be safe, fell most of
them into the peasants hands, people without pity or mercy, who first stripped
them, and then did murder among the which there were some threedbare
gentlemen) he was beaten down. The Rhingraue The barbarous (...) used (...)
the French.
There were some two or three hundred burnt in a barn, into the which they had
thrust them thus naked: from the which, thinking to save themselves, and to
escape the fire, the Spanish

After this defeat of the French, many thought that cont Lodowic would not hold
the town of Mons long with such small troops as he had there in garrison:
Whereupon Dom Frederic Lodowic was resolved to hold the town, the which could
not be taken with those forces which his son had, parted with all the forces
he could gather together, and went and camped near unto the town, besieging
it straightly on all sides, the which Dom Frederic could not do with those small
forces The duke of Alua comes before Mons.
which he had: and seeing that the French, which were in garrison in the abbey
of Crespin, joining unto the town, did greatly assist the besieged, he caused
it to be battered with four pieces, so as at fifty shot he made a sufficient
breach to give an assault: but the captain that if an assault were presented,
to make it good even unto the last man.

The duke seeing that all his batteries could not so much avail him as to take
the town by assault, began to batter S. Andrews tower, the which was so
pierced through with the ordnance, as no man d^rst any longer abide in it. The
besieged were not idle in the mean time, for besides that they sallied daily
forth upon the enemies, they had planted five pieces upon the tower of stone,
as well faulcons as culuerins, wherewith they shot through the enemies camp,
into their tents and pauillions, and upon all the approches, which made the
passages very difficult. They were also very expert in speedy ramparing up
the breaches that were made, with packs of wool, beds, ^ckes filled with
earth, and other materials: so as with this ramparing they made their walls and
rampars as strong as before. The lord of la Noue with an hundred gentlemen, and
some harguebusiers kept the first rauelin, to preserve that which

Whilst that the duke of Alua and the besieged within Mons maintained
themselves in The prince of Orange comes with an army to succor Mons.
this sort, the prince of Orange being in Germany, was not idle: but having
levied a goodly army, he past the Rhine with it near unto Dousbourg in the
country of Cleeues, and the 4 of August he surprised Ruremonde in the country
of Geldres; then entering into Brabant, he Elbert ^eonin, called Longolius* who
went unto him to the abbey of the park, without the town, where they agreed
upon certain conditions. From thence he went to Macklin the which was opened
unto Bernard of Merode, lord of Waroux, by the intelligences which he had
within the town. The prince of Orange caused a certain protestation to be
printed and published, as well in his own name, as in his confede^ats, giving
a reason of the arms which they had taken the second time, as follows.

We William by the grace of God, Prince of Orange, Earl of Nassau, etc. To
all Noblemen, The prince of Oranges protestation.
Knights, Gentlemen, and others (of what quality soever) of these Netherlands,
which desire the liberty thereof, being miserably tyrannized and oppressed by
the duke of Alua, the goods, estates, or honor of any, of what quality
soever, were he of the clergy* but are read^

About this time captain Blommart surprised the town of Audenarde in Flanders,
at which surprise the bailife being retired with some others into the castle,
and pu^sued, refusing to yield, he was shot through, and cast out at a window
into the river: the cloisters, churches, and all the goods of clergy men, were
spoiled. The town of Deuremonde was also surprised by the practices of Arnold
van Dorpe.

The prince parting from Macklin, marched directly toward Mons in Henault, to
succou^ his brother, and to seek to raise the duke of Aluaes siege. He might
have taken many towns in passing, but he still advanced, having a great care
to furnish his army with victuals: some of those towns which he had taken
were forced to assist him with money. Those of Niuelle in Brabant were summoned
to furnish him both with money and victuals, but they refused it, hoping that
the duke of Alua would defend them, having first advertised him that the prince
of Orange marched: but for that he would not diminish his army that was
before Mons, where he had work enough, he could not preserve them as they
expected, but they must enter into the dance.

The duke hearing that the prince approached, and that he was near him, he
resolved not Henry his brother with four companies of carabins, or
harguebusiers on horseback, the which incountred these Spaniards, whom they
charged, put them to rout, and pursued them even to the foot of their trenches.
This first charge did so amaze the dukes camp, as he was almost ready to
fly, thinking that the prince had followed with his whole army: the which if
he had done, without doubt that day had been the last of the duke of Aluaes
wars. The prince was so resolved, but it was too late, causing his army to
march in battle even unto the mills, where he stood

Salentine bishop of Cologne came to the duke of Aluaes camp with two thousand
horse, and daily men came to him from all parts, so as the duke had in his
army 12000 Spaniards and The bishop of Cologne comes to succor the duke of
Alua.
Wallons, and above sixteen thousand Germans. This bishop would willingly have
charged the prince with a thousand horse only, to provoke him to battle, but
the duke had no desire, saying* That he was come thither but to win the town,
and to keep the prince from succouring it, but not to fight, if he were not
forced: and so every one retired that night into his lodging. The prince seeing
that, being so far from his enemies, he should profit little, he and to call
the duke to fight: the which was well liked of, whereupon he went and planted

WILLIAM OF NASSAV, PRINCE OF Orange, Earl of Nassau, of Vianden, of
Catzeneleboghen, Diets, etc. Governor of Holland, Zeeland, and Vtrecht.
(...). D. G. PRIN. AVRAICAE (...) NASSAVI GVB. BELGICAE,


In youth I was instructed, taught, and fostered
In true Religion, for the which my blood I often shed,
Maintaining it against all tyrans cruelty,
And the most bloody Wolf of Rome, and all his subtlety.
From Spanish yoke I set Holland at liberty,
And Zeeland, with the Provinces that now united be:
And hoped them long time in peace for to maintain,
If so dainly a murderer had not me strangely slain.
But my most valiant son, the worthy Prince Maurice,
Supplying their defect therein, took on him my office:
And my posterity shall them always defend,
And cross the purpose of their foes, what ever they pretend.
WILLIAM of Nassau, Prince of Orange (having often presented battle

The duke of Alua was much incensed against them of Macklyn, for that having
refused the Spaniards, they had received the prince and his men: but he
dissembled his discontent, Lodowic, to whom the prince had written before his
departure, That he should endure an assault or two, and if afterward the
enemy were obstinat at the siege, he should make his composition with the most
honorable conditions that he could. When these letters came into the town,
the earl was in his bed sick of a violent fever: the colonels and captains
hearing it read, were out of all hope of succors from the prince, and were
content to capitulat with the duke upon such conditions as were receiuable. To
this end the seigniour of la Noue, Seuarpont, and Siracourt were deputed, the
which pleased him very well, thinking he had won honor enough, to have
brought such commanders unto reason, considering also that it would be a great
benefit unto the king his master, for that so many towns did daily revolt from
him, the which he did hope to reduce under his commandment. Lodowic should be
conducted in safety into the teritories of the empire. In this manner the town
of Mons in Henault was delivered up to the duke of Alua. He took Mons yielded
to the duke of Alua.
no revenge of the bourgers, for that it was not found that any one remaining
in the town, had been confederat with the prince, but they had been
surprised, and were forced to obey him whilst he was there. Many have wondered
why the duke would yield to such honorable conditions, knowing they were
almost at extremity, seeing they had procured him so much harm, toil, and
trouble. But they said he was moved thereunto for two considerations, the The
duke causes Macklyn to be sacked.
wives, without respect of any quality or age, were they capable or not,
priests or lay men, committing infinite cruelties there, more than the which
could not be done in any enemies town taken by assault. The booty that was
carried from thence, was sold in Antuerpe and Brussels for a vile price, for
that many refused to buy it, for the pity they had of their neighbors so
prince, the which redeemed it self from pillage for eight thousand florins,
the like was done

The bruit of the taking of Mons in Henault, being spread over all Flanders and
Brabant, the towns were so much amazed, which held for the Protestants in
those countries, as the soldiers that were there in garrison, without
expecting the enemies coming, began in a manner all to fly, some marching
toward Germany, others toward the sea, to pass into England, and some into
the woods and forests, where they had kept a little before. Those that had
surprised Audenarde, with captain Blommart and had continued long there in
garrison, took their way (not without great difficulty and lost of their
companions, having the Spaniards still in the tail of them) toward Ostend
where having seized upon ships and mariners, they embarked for England, with
such have an^ ^are, as they left some of their companions on land, who being
Charles Nerin, who was sent thither by them of Flessingue to levy men, who
upon promise of good entertainment, caused them to imbarke again, and sent
them to Flessingue the nineteenth of October. And as they were some Walons and
some Flemings, there were two companies made: the Flemings were given to
captain Gunsert, and sent into Holland, the Walons (whereof most part had
been of Blommarts company) were given unto the seignior of Schoonewal, a
gentleman of Flanders, and kept for the guard of Flessingue. Captain Blommars
thinking to save himself better alone, than with his soldiers, Vander Berghe
in the prince of Oranges name. And first he sent Doin Frederic his son, and
lieutenant of his army, to Zutphen, where at his arrival he was presently
received by the bourgers without any resistance or Zurphen sacked by the
Spaniard.
difficulty, the 13 of November. But the Spaniard was no sooner entered, but
he fell to murder, hang, strangle, and drown a number of the inhabitants,
with infinite cruelties upon wives and virgins, yea upon silly infants. This
inhumanitie of the duke and his son, was presently Vander Bergle in Geldre,
Ouerissel and the county of Zutphen, and the earl of Schouwenburch in
Friseland, had abandoned all the towns they seized on, yet the final issue of
this war did show by the effect how little he got by his cruelty and
barbarousnesse.

Dom Frederic having ended this cruel execution at Zutphen, he marched
directly to Naerden; in the quarter of Goytland in Holland. The inhabitants
made an agreement with him at his arrival, and he entered the town the
twentieth of November, whereas never Turks The sack of Naerden, and the
execrable murders committed therein
nor Schythians, nor the most barbarous and inhumane nations in the world, did
ever commit more abominable cruelties, than Dom Frederic did in this town,
the which all future

All these poor and miserable inhabitants being thus assembled, the Spanish
soldiers were commanded to murder them all, and not spare any one: the which
was presently executed, so as in this wretched and desolat town, the poor men
were massacred, the women were ravished, and then afterward most cruelly
murdered, the children had their throats cut, and in some houses some were
tied to poasts with cords, then the houses any spark of humanity in him, but
will have horror to hear it spoken of; and future

After this horrible and fearful massacre at Naerden, Dom Frederic being not
yet glutted with so much innocent blood, and with such cruelties, caused his
army to march toward Amsterdam, with an intention to surprise the town of
Harlem: But before he would Dom Frederic before Harlem
attempt it, and for that he would not draw his men into danger, he would have
the advice of the bourgomasters and the counsel of the said town; who were of
opinion, That he must practice some intelligences, wherein one Diericke of
Vriese (sometimes a bourgomaster of the said town) might do him great
service, with some others, that were well affected Ieams de Wy, curate of great
Beginage, hearing speech of this enterprise, and pretended surprise, advertised
his brother, that he might avoid the dukes fury, and his sons, of whom they
had seen such goodly examples in their neighbors.

Upon these letters the great counsel of the town was assembled the third of
December, at seven of the clock in the morning, ^here the said letters were
red, and upon the contents thereof they would hear every man's opinion, Whether
they should go and present themselves unto the duke of Alua, or not, seeing
the said letters made mention, that there was yet some hope of mercy in them.
This proposition being made, Diericke of Vriese, Christopher van Schagen, and
Adrian van Assendelf, the Orator of the town, went presently out of the town
by the port of Spaerwoude, making their sledge-man believe, that they would go
to Sparendam, but they passed on toward Amsterdam to Dom Frederic. Those of
the great counsel would also know the minds of the commons and of the sworn
companies, upon the letters sent by the curate of Beginage, causing them to
assemble in the artillery garden, whither also went captain Wibout Ripperda,
Lancelot of Brederode, Adrian Ianson, baylife of the town, and the
bourgomaster Stuyuer: the bourgers and companies being there assembled,
captain Ripperda said unto them, My masters and friends, behold a letter
directed The words of captain (...) to the ^ssembly of Harlem.
unto the bourgomaster and counsel of this town, containing, that there is
yet time to obtain grace of Dom Frederic, to which end Diericke of Vriese is
gone unto him to Amsterdam: you may well think what grace we can hope for
from him, and you know what oath you have taken to the prince of Orange: For my
part I am resolved to keep mine honor and faith which I have sworn unto him,
and to hazard the last drop of my blood for the preservation of this town,
and the inhabitants thereof, employing therein both my person and my means:
are not you all so minded, speak freely and boldly? At these words the
company began to cry out aloud, That they were all content, and they would
live and die with him, saying, that they had sufficient testimonies by their
neighbors, of his clemency and mercy, although they were not at that time
very well furnished, to make any great resistance.

Here began to appear the profit and advantage which the duke of Alua and his
son Ripperda and the baylife seeing, they writ unto the prince of Orange,
being then at Delft, of the estate of their town, and sent secretly a
messenger unto colonel Lazarus Muller (who the same day had taken two
messengers of Dom Frederics, and caused them to be hanged) entreating him to
send some of his companies into the town. Lazarus had no sooner received these
news, but he marched by Waterlandt directly to Harlem with all his regiment,
being ten companies, where he arrived the fourth of December at noone day; of
the which, four companies entered, the rest going toward South-Holland.

The same day (being the fourth of December) the great church of the town was
opened, the Images and altars beaten down, and all made ready for the
preaching of the Protestants Religion.

The next day, which was the fifth of December, there returned into the town
Christopher van Schagen, and Adrian van Assendelf, who were the same day sent
prisoners to Delf, to be examined before the prince of Oranges counsel: as
also the same day there was one taken, who had caused a poor pesant to carry a
letter from Diericke Vriese to the bourgomaster; he was hanged, after that he
had confessed under the ladder, that he was persuaded thereunto by Vriese for a
dollar.

The seventh of December the Spaniards came unto Spaerwoude, to skirmish with
them which the Harlemois kept in the fort of Sparendam, but it was to small
effect: and the next day the bourgomasters and captains sent three hundred men
to the relief of Sparendam, under the conduct and command of Martin Pruys:
and the enemy thinking to return the same day, they were so welcomed with
the canon, as there was no safety in staying

The eight of December the inhabitants perct a dike, which lies betwixt
Sparendam and Spaerwoude, to drown the country: but having not dug deep
enough, the Spaniards came to stop it the same day, and there made a trench.
Then came the Seignior of S. Aldegonde to Harlem, where, by virtue of a
commission given him from the prince of Orange, and with the advice of the
sworn companies and the chief among the people, he renewed the law,
displacing the old, and creating new magistrates, that is to say, eight
bourgomasters, four aldermen, and twenty of the counsel. On the tenth day it
had frozen so bitterly, as the rivers were all ice, and among others, the Tie
and the Spare, on the which they might run in great troops. Whereupon Julian
Romero, with the Spaniards, The fort of Sparendam taken by the Spaniards.
the charge, as by the artillery of the fort, yet they took it by assault,
the soldiers Protestants saving themselves as well as they could in Assendelf.
The Harlemois hearing that this place was thus violently assaulted by the
Spaniards, thinking to succor it, they sent two companies; but before they
could approach, news came, that the enemies were masters of the place. At this
taking of the fort, captain Martin Pruys was slain, with many soldiers on
both sides.

Mean time, Monsieur Aldegonde came to Harlem, in behalf of the prince of
Orange and the States of Holland, who upon the ninth of December assembled the
harquebusiers and Diericke de Vriese by his dealing sought to bring them unto a
fained agreement, and such like speeches, desiring them, seeing the town was
in that extremity, to choose another bourgomaster, or to strengthen their
counsel: for which cause (he said) he came with authority from the States
and the court of Holland, praying them to choose amongst them eight men to be
their bourgomasters, and fourteen Schepen, whereof the half should rule the
next year ensuing, as they likewise did, and therewith they chose for
bourgomasters Claes vander L^, John Vander Vliet, Gerrard Stuyuers, and Peter
Kies, with seven Schepen more, and ten counselors, that took the charge upon
them, to take order for all necessary policies concerning the town.

Upon the eleventh of December the Spanish army came before Harlem, being five
and Harlem besieged the 11 of December.
thirty companies of Spaniards, two and twenty companies of Wallons, under
the barons de Noircarmes, Capres, and Liques, eighteen companies of high
Duchess, under the earl of Ouersteine, and eight hundred horse, every day more
coming unto them with Ordnances, and other things thereunto belonging, with
the earl of Bossu, that had been lieutenant governor of Holland. While the
Spaniards were busy before Harlem, the prince of Orange and the earl Vander
Merke sent for all their soldiers, intending to gather an army between
Leyden and Harlem, in a village called Hillegom, having as then eleven or
twelve companies of soldiers together; who being come thither, esteeming the
enemy not to be so strong before Harlem, as he was, the earl Vander Merke
sent eight horses to discrie earl aforesaid, being general of the princes
soldiers, had scarce time to put on his armor, Bartel Entens very unadvisedly
(without looking about them, whether the rest were come forward) presently made
toward the enemy: but his horsemen being too weak, and for that he could
hardly see what number of men his enemies were (for that as then it snowed very
fast) they were overthrown before they knew it, and began to fly: after them
followed the Breamers or high Dutche, and many others, before they were fully
in good order; so that the earl with his guard only found themselves in a
manner all alone in great danger, at the last he got from thence, after he had
lost two horses that were slain under him: certain valiant and stout
ensigne-bearers, and amongst the Iacques Martens van Ghenet, son to the
President of Flaunders, would have stayed the soldiers from flying away, and
stood still, wrapping themselves in their colors, where they were stabbed.
There and in the flight they lost at the least six or seven hundred men: among
the prisoners were Baptista Trier, and Hans Keller, that were hanged by the
Spaniards alive upon the gallows by one leg, with their heads downwards:
the earl Vander Mark offered two thousand crowns for Baptista Trier his
life, with nineteen of their soldiers that he kept prisoners, but all in
vain, for which cause he presently hanged up all the nineteen soldiers.

The next day the Spaniards made their approches unto the town, and from the
twelfth to the seventeenth they did nothing but entrench; and the besieged to
fortify their rampars: Dom Frederic planted his Ordnance at the cross port,
the which he battered in the midst, and the wall on either side, the which
was then but single, without any rampar of earth, discharging fourteen pieces
at every volly, the canons carrying bullets of forty, and five and forty
pound weight, intending to beat down the port, and to chase the besieged out
of a bulwark there adjoining, the which by the fall and ruin of the port
would be unprofitable unto them: The which the Spaniards effected, for before
noone all the port was beaten down, and the inhabitants were forced to abandon
this bulwark. Yet the night following, the besieged did rampar up courageously
that which the Spaniards had beaten down in the day, with packes of wool,
wood, stone, earth, and other materials mixed withal, such as the time and
necessity could furnish them with; wherein John van Vliet, burgomaster,

The next day the Spaniards continued their battery at S. John's gate, from the
morning until night, at the which they made 675. shot: but the besieged were
diligent to rampar, making from the said port unto S. Katherines bridge within
the town, a new rampar, the which they finished happily. On the twentieth day
the Spaniards renewed their battery at this bulwark, so as about noone they
prepared to give an assault. Then the alarm Whereat the besieged, both
inhabitants and soldiers, showed themselves so valiant and Dom Frederic, and
of the noblemen of the army, and what number of soldiers there were: the next
day this poor wretch was hanged. Afterward the besiegers did nothing for a
long time but mine, to blow up that bulwark, where they had that shameful
repulse, keeping themselves otherwise quiet in their trenches. And then began
they to coin the first pieces of silver in the town, of sixteen and two and
thirty pata^s

Notwithstanding, the prince of Orange assembled his soldiers together
between Leyden and Harlem, in a village called Sassen; from whence he sent all
necessary provision into the town, as also diverse soldiers, both Wallons,
Frenchmen, Englishmen, and Scots, under diverse captains, as Christopher
Gunter, Schram van Brunswicke, Dutch captains, and captain Ciery, Vehemy,
Margotin, Denna, Jasper, Sosey, Paris, Seminade, and Balfort, all French men,
Wallons, Scots, and Englishmen, with the Commissaries Serrats, Haultaine,
Rose^gi, and Bordet, in all fifteen companies, besides four Dutch companies
that were before in the town, which were all sent in over the ice, the water
and Harlem mere being as then frosen, and every day diverse soldiers were sent
into the town with corn, powder, and Walter Enchuysen, borne in Delft,
wherewith they brought in diverse prisoners, by whom they understood the
enemies pretenses, and how they mined under the walls. Amongst all their
sallies, the notablest was that which was done upon the five and twentieth of
March, when they issued with a thousand men, and fell upon the Dutch quarter in
Harlem wood, driving the Dutchmen out of their skonces, and killed and drowned
five or six hundred men, and took from them eleven ensigns, seven pieces of
Ordnance, and fifty oxen, burning fifty tents, and carrying great booties
into the town.

Adrian van Assendelf, Orator of Harlem, who had been with Diericke of Vriese
at Amsterdam, to confer with Dom Frederic, at his return was taken prisoner,
and sent to Delft, unto the prince of Orange (as we have said) after that he
had been examined and convicted, The ^corder (...) be^ at Delft.
he was executed for the treasons which he thought to have practiced against
his country and the town, where he was an officer; his head was set upon a
pole the sixteenth of January 1573. 1573


Whilst that the Spaniards were busy to undermine the town of Harlem, and
that they did not issue much out of their trenches, the besieged received
refreshings often, both of men, victuals, and powder. And as they of Vtrecht
sent unto the Spanish camp three hundred bullets, and six and thirty barrels
of powder, the garrison and bourgers of

The seventeenth of January a troop of soldiers sallyed out of Harlem by the
port of Schaelwic, to fall upon the Germans quarter, which were at the castle
of Russenburch; where (at their first approach) they chased some of these
Germans out of a water-myll, and so passed on unto their trenches, which they
forced, and slew all that they encountered: among the rest, an ensigne-bearer of
Harlem pulled the colors from a Spanish Alphere, and having slain him,
carried them into the town with him. Having woo^

This night it was thought good to abandon the bulwark that was without the
rampars, Adrian of Benkenroede, alderman of the town, went forth, to go to
Delft, unto the prince of Orange, to inform him of the estate of the town,
and to bring them back what was needful. He had a conuoy of some horsemen,
and about six hundred harguebusiers, Wallons, English, Scottish, and high
Dutch. The Spaniards went to encounter them about Schaelwyc, Harlemmer-Vlyet,
and Vyfhuysen, where they had planted themselves to stop their passage unto
the town. Yet notwithstanding, the soldiers and some bourgers of Harlem
charged them with such fury, as they put them to rout, after that they had
slain and, drowned above two hundred

The first of February, as the Germans being in guard at the cross gate, and
at Saint John's port, had not kept good watch, the Spaniards seized on the said
port before the break of day, the which was in a manner all down, before that
the besieged could discover it. On the other side, there were others, who (by
the bulwark of the cross gate) crept through the bushes that were along the
rampars, from one port unto another: there was also a part of the army in
battle, with their colors flying, and the rest remained ready in their
trenches, from S. John's port unto the cross gate, to give a great assault; so

The chief place where this assault was given, was at the old bulwark at the
cross gate, whereon the enemies had seized, for that it had been abandoned by
the besieged, and was opposite unto the new bulwark, which they of the town
had fortified with John's gate, they shot with a demie culuerine, and some iron
pieces and harguebuses acrocke, through their squadrons, which stood there in
battle, expecting their turn, when they should go unto the assault: but
they were enforced to retire with all speed possible into their quarters,
carrying back with them the chiefest of their men that were slain. In this
assault there dyed (of them that were besieged) one captain Lambrecht van
Wittemberg, not upon the place, but soon after, being carried unto his
lodging.

Whilst that the Spaniards were busied at these assaults both at the cross
port, and at that of S. John, there entered into the town (by the port of
Schaelwyc) three hundred harguebusiers, and seventy horsemen, coming from the
prince of Oranges camp over the

Dom Frederic was in despair to win the town by assault, by reason of the
great garrison Puluilier, with Wallons, and some Italians, and a regiment of
those of the league, that was made against the Turk: also some Spaniards,
under Dom Gonsalo de Braccamonte, Rodorigo de Paz, Dom Lopes de Aougna, and Dom
Lopes de Figuera, and more horsemen. He likewise sent Henry de Vienne, baron de
Cheuieaux, with an hundred Burgonians.

The fourth of February the Spaniards thinking to blow up a mine which they
had made under the bulwark at the cross gate, the besieged having vented it,
they themselves set fire to it, the which did consume many pioners and Spanish
soldiers, and did small hurt unto them of the town. The eight of the same
month the besieged received another refreshing

The Spaniards having with the fury of the canon beaten down the upper part
of Saint John's g^te, the besieged advised to fill it with earth, bauins, and
other kind of wood and stone, and to make a platform there, to defend their
curtynes. This work was suddenly finished the ninth of the month. On the
other side, the Spaniards made a high mount at the bulwark of the cross gate,
that they might shoot into the town with more ease, not ceasing A half moon
made w^n the town.
and finished with such diligence, as there was neither bourgomaster nor
captain, rich nor poor, women, maids, nor children, that were slack, but
did strive to be first at this

The eighteenth of the month entered the first galley into the sea of Harlem,
being eighty foot long: and the same day here entered into the town five
ships with victuals, and another with two pieces of brass Ordnance, coming
from Leyden: the next day there arrived also one with ten iron pieces and
some powder and munition.

At the same time, some ships of Zeeland having taken into their long boats
a small Z^land.
number of soldiers, departed in the night from la Vere (of whence they were)
and went to burn the admiral of Middlebourg, being furnished with good
Ordnance, even in the midst of their channel, the which they did execute so
suddenly, as they within had scarce leisure to save themselves. Soon after,
the sailors of Flessingue being jealous of the honor

These enterprises seemed to be foolish and rash, by reason of the danger that
was in the execution; yet since they have found by experience, how necessary
and profitable they were unto them, the enemy being thereby so disappointed of
ships of war and Ordnance, as they could never afterward become masters of
the sea: which many thought to be the only means whereby the Spaniards might
subdue the Protestants of Zeeland and Holland, with the prince of Orange.

At that time the report was so great of an army which they prepared in
Antuerpe for the whereas they were sunk upon the three and twentieth day: but
the current of the

In the same month, they of Bommel (whereof Diericke van Haften was governor)
surprised the town of Meghen, which they spoiled, and then abandoned. At that
time there were many such like enterprises made on either side. But let us
return unto the siege of Harlem.

Upon the eighteenth of February, they of Amsterdam with their galley, and
five or six barks, came by the Zuydersee to Pennincx-Veer (which is the place
where the toll is paid from Harlem unto Amsterdam, a quarter of a league from
Harlem) with an intent to pierce

The six and twentieth of the month they of Harlem had a great fight at sea
against fourteen carauels of Amsterdam. Gerard of Ionghe (captain of the
great galley of Harlem) knowing, that they of Amsterdam were in this sea (as it
was not so great, but he might well Ionghe, although he were hurt, and one of
the mariners leaping into a skiffe, saved themselves. His companions, and
(among others) Jacob Anthonisz, captain of the little galley of Harlem,
pursued these carauels, and having overtaken them, they rescued the galley by
force, the which they of Amsterdam had held above two hours, in the which they
found some of the enemies, whom they did presently hang at the maine yard of
the gally. Not satisfied with this rescue, they pursued the carauels, whereof
they took one that was new. full of Wallons and Spaniards, whom they slew in
the fury,

As during this siege, the besieged had received at diverse times, and from
diverse places, a good quantity of Ordnance, to serve them at their need, they
planted a good part thereof against that great mount, which the Spaniards had
made before the bulwark of the cross gate, whereof one John Coningham, a
Scottishman, had the charge, who in half a day overthrew this mount, for the
which he won great honor in the town. The Spaniards would have repaired it,
and planted some Ordnance thereupon, but Coningham still ruined it.

In the beginning of March, the ships of Zirickzee and la Vere having joined
with Zeeland.


The twentieth of March the Spanish ships having passed the straight whereas
the Flessinguers, with their boats laden with stones, had thought to have
stopped the passage, there passed some great shot on either side, the which
were easily heard to Flessingue. But the next day the fight was very furious,
for that the admiral of Flessingue being run upon the sands (through the
fault of the pilote) was set upon by ten Spanish ships: yet by the succors
which he had from his consorts, especially from captain Worst, he defended
himself seeing that the Zeelanders were resolved to graple with them, they
retired unto the Castigador de los veillacos Flamingos Lutheranos) and the
captain of the said vice admiral were all three slain, with four or five
hundred soldiers and mariners. On the Protestants side was slain captain
Cloot, a Fleming, and five or six soldiers and mariners only.

The Spaniards lost in this fight so many men, and their greatest ships
(which made the point) were so spoiled, as they were forced to return to
Antuerpe, to repair them, and

The seventeenth of March the Spaniards blew up a mine which they of Harlem had
Holland.
the old bulwark, the French and English captains never rested, until that
they had recovered it, and chased away the Spaniards, whereat the bourgers
rejoiced much. The next day the assaylants blew up one of their own mines, but
it was without any effect at all.

The five and twentieth of the month, about nine of the clock in the morning,
there went forth at the port of Zyel some two hundred Wallons, to give a
camisado to the enemy, who was lodged in the wood of Harlem, where they forced
the first trenches; but finding themselves not strong enough to pass on, they
were forced to return unto the town, with the loss of two men only. The
magistrates and governors, with the advice of the colonels D' Adenne, a
valiant man, and who had done great service to the town, in the
fortifications, whose death was much lamented of all men.

The eight and twentieth of the month, two hundred soldiers drawn out of the
garrison Zeeland.


This month they of Amsterdam sent (by the hole of the broken dike, joining to
the Inn, called the Heart, half way from Harlem to Amsterdam) three and thirty
ships of war and three galleyes into the sea of Harlem, to hinder the
navigations of the besieged toward Leyden and other places. The Harlemois
having discovered them, they presently sent forth their third galley, in the
which captain Buckhorst and captain Monregnant

The ninth of April, the prince of Oranges ships, to the number of a
hundred, departed from Caege, sailing toward Fuyck, to charge them of
Amsterdam; they of Harlem being advertised thereof, sent twelve of their
ships, but two of them could not go forward, but the men were forced to go
to land, and to join with two hundred men that were issued out of the town by
the water gate, who seeing these two ships abandoned, retired again into the
town with the loss of seven or eight of them. In the mean time

The twelfth of that month the princes ships came before the castle of
Hemstede, situated upon the shore of this sea, at the mouth of the channel
that goes to the town. The besieged thinking that they would land their men
there, sent out by the port of Zyel a hundred and fifty soldiers, by the
Watergate five hundred, and by that of Schaelwyc two hundred. But these ships
putting not any to land, and they which were issued forth, being hotely
charged by the Spaniards, they retired skirmishing even unto their ports. In
this Stenenbourg was shot in the reins, and captain Christopher Vader in the
foot. The same day seven or eight presumptuous Spaniards only, with two
ensigns, advanced to mount into a bulwark, crying, Victoria, Victoria, The
town is ours, but they were soon dislodged, and one of these ensigne-bearers
remained with his colors for a pawn of their presumption.

At the last, the Spaniards made so many sconces along by the water side, that
they of Harlem and the princes ships could not pass, nor get one unto the
other: they of the town likewise had made sconces without the town, that they
might come at their ships and them, and therewith also to defend their cattle
that pastured in the meadows, which they held there as long as they had any,
until the twelfth of June: but after that by means Sonoy and they of
Enchuysen twice sought to cut the Dremer dike, (being a ditch that parts the
Suyer sea and the Amstel from the Harlem mere and the waters within the land,
and is the only way, by the which they of Amsterdam get all their provision by
land) thinking through that dike to get into the Harlem mere and the other
waters, but they were by them of Amsterdam put back, and beaten from it, with
great loss of their men, and yet had begun to make a sconce. They likewise
took Oudekerke, thereby to strengthen themselves the better: but the Spaniards
came so strongly upon them, that they overthrew certain of the princes
companies: and having slain one captain Anthony Oliver (a brave soldier of
Berghen in Henault) at Oudekerke, Philip Coninghe, the soldiers within were in
such a rage, that presently they sent for eleven prisoners, and causing them to
be hanged, with their beards all cut after the Gueux

The enemy on the other side having made a platform without in their camp,
on the seven and twentieth of May they raised a pair of gallows upon the
same, and on it hanged certain soldiers and bourgers of the town, some by
the necks, others by the feet, who the day before thought to have brought
certain powder into the town: whereat the common soldiers within the town
being mooned, presently set a pair of gallows upon Lambert, M. Querin,
sometimes bourgomaster of the town, and Vrsel his daughter, being a nun,
such as held with the Spaniards, as also one Adrian van Groeneuen of Harlem,
who not long before had been brought into the town, being taken in a skirmish
by captain Claes Iorison van Dicke, and five soldiers, and a boy, and a
priest, which they (against the magistrates will) hanged, the nun and another
woman being drowned, and ran into the town to fetch more.

Thus were the prisoners on both sides daily and continually hanged, and
unmercifully thrust through, and put to death; which consumed many men. Without
the town, amongst the enemy, there were many slain by assaults,
skirmishings, sallies, and blowing

Dom Bernardin de Mendoso in his history writes, That all those that were of
the counsel of war, were shot and hurt, and Dom Frederic himself, but not
sore wounded. He says, there was slain about four thousand men of all
nations, whereof eight hundred were Spaniards, and among the rest, Dom Iacques
de Caraunial, Lorenzo Perea, Dom Esten de Quessado, Toribro Zimbron, John de
Ayala, Dom Marcus de Toledo, John de Vergas, Dom Sancio de Lodouigna, and
others of great account. They within, during the siege, lost not many men,
although the Spaniards ceased not still to shoot, blow up mines, assault and
assail them, thereby to lessen and diminish their number, having caused a
great number of mines to be dug and blown up, and they within did the like;
they likewise cast great store of fire bals into the town, wherewith they did
no great hurt, but more with great shot, which spoiled many men, they within
the town daily telling, how often they shot, found, that they had shot above
ten thousand three hundred and sixty great bullets against the town,
wherewith they did great hurt unto the walls, towers, and houses of the same.
Upon the platform they set up four mastes, whereas with cords they drew up on
high a wooden house, open both before and behind, wherein there stood certain

The same day the Protestants of Zeeland having drawn two companies out of
Flessingue, Zeeland.
and as many from la Vere, with some Flemish soldiers that came from
Zirickzee, The siege before Soubourg
morning with three pieces of Ordnance, which they had brought from Flessingue,
and yet the besieged seemed to be nothing amazed. This battery was continued
but two or three

The news being come to Middlebourg, that the said castle was besieged, there
issued forth four hundred soldiers to go and succor it, against whom were
sent three or four hundred of them that were at the siege. At their encounter
there was so furious a skirmish, as they of Middlebourg having lost many of
their men, were forced to return unto their town. The next day there sallied
forth again two hundred men out of Middlebourg, not to skirmish with the
assaylants, but to give a sign unto the besieged, to save themselves in the
best sort that they could, knowing well, that they would soon want victuals.

The besieged having lost all hope of succors, demanded a cessation of arms
on the Tuesday morning until six of the clock at night, the which did much
rejoice the besiegers, who (for want of powder not able to make a breach) were
resolved to retire the night following. Six of the clock being come, without
any show of succors, they were summoned to yield, whereunto they agreed, upon
condition, that they might depart with their lives, arms, and baggage safe;
the which was granted unto them, and so they were conducted unto Middlebourg.
The besiegers put a company of the garrison of la Vere into the castle. The
place being visited, they found that they were not pressed with want Soubourg
yielded by accord, and burnt.
of victuals or munition belonging unto war: and after they had kept it nine
or ten

The fifteenth day of April the Harlemois sent forth a galley into their sea
of an hundred and eight foot long. And the eighteenth day there entered into the
town five captains, Serraets, Rostowe, Blondel, Dorhem, Maligan, and other
commanders, to the number of fifteen, bringing with them some soldiers and
powder.

The next day the princes ships put two thousand men on land, joining to the
five houses, to awake the Spaniards: but for that they of the town did not
issue forth, they did not any thing. The night following, captain Ballour with
his Scottishmen gave a camisado to them that were at Russenburch, which they
forced, and defeated a great number, carrying away

The four and twentieth of the month, at four of the clock in the morning,
they discovered Zeeland.
from the rampars of Flessingue the fleet of Antuerpe, prepared for the
victualling of Middlebourg, the which was presently assailed by the ships of
Zeeland; but they kept so close together, and in such good order, as leaving
the Zeelanders scattered and under their see, they cast anchor betwixt
Flessingue and the Ramekins, attending the flood, having not yet received any
loss, the which did amaze the inhabitants of Flessingue, who had such an
opinion of the fleet of Zeeland, as the Spaniards could not resist them. Being
at anchor, and the wind A fight at sea.
them: another which had run on ground, was burned by her own men, which saved
themselves. This ship was laden with corn, which the poor men of Flessingue
went to fetch in sackes, being not burned to the bottom. That which gave the
beginning to this victory, was the hardy attempt of a mariner of Zeeland,
which undertook to cut the cable of a Spanish ship called the Elephant,
whereas the Seignior of Blicqui commanded with other gentlemen; the which
being well executed, the said ship came among the Zeelanders, where was
burned, laden with corn, and another was cast away upon the sands, near unto
the Charles Grenet (brother unto the Seignior of Werp, who was in Middlebourg)
was carried prisoner to Flessingue; where, at his first entrance, he was in
danger to have been massacred by the mariners, if the women had not saved his
life. There was in this defeat about nine hundred men slain and drowned on the
Spaniards side, and but few taken prisoners.

The rest of the month of April was spent at the siege of Harlem in light
skirmishes on either side, and then there was forged in the town a certain
piece of silver, carrying Holland.
on the one side the arms of the town, and on the other, their device, Vincit
vi^ Virtus.

In the beginning of May the Seignior of Roulle, governor of la Vere, having
gathered together a thousand men out of his own garrison, Flessingue,
Zirickzee, and other places, Zeeland.
made an enterprise upon the Island and town of Tolon, which he thought to
carry, relying upon his friends and intelligence there. But presenting himself
before the town, about six of the clock in the morning, as soon as he was
discovered, they saluted him with the canon and small shot, so as captain
Ambroise le Duke, and some of his soldiers being wounded, they were enforced
to retire. And although there were no hope of good success in this enterprise,
being thus discovered, yet they continued there so long, as they of the Island
and the town being joined together with all their forces, went to charge them
Schooneuall and his ensigne-bearer were slain, and almost all his company,
being for the most part of those that had remained almost six years in the
woods, having been at the surprise of Audenarde, as we have said before. The
Seignior of Roulle was also slain by his own men, accusing him, that he had
brought them unto the slaughter. Captain Jacob Simonson was taken prisoner,
and some few soldiers, who (being put into the Spanish galleys) were drowned,
except some few, which T^t Worst, admiral of Flessingue, a captain as free
from ambition and covetousness, as valiant and hardy, in whose place there
was another chosen, very well tried for his great valor.

The ninth of May (being Whitson eve) the Spaniards did cast a man's head into
one of the bulwarks at Harlem, with a note containing these words, Behold the
head of captain Oliver. Holland.
The besieged had two pigeons drawn out of their doue-houses; the which they
carried often unto the prince of Orange his camp, from whence they let them
fly, with little scrowles tied about their thighs, the which came into the
town to their Pigeon houses they were called Flying messengers.

The ships of Amsterdam did so keep the sea of Harlem (being very many) as
little could come that way unto the town, the which was so straightly
besieged, as nothing could come in or go out, but with extreme peril and
danger, if it were not to make some sally, or to skirmish; as they did upon the
sixteenth of the month, when they went to charge them that were lodged in the
fort by the Wood, whom they chased from thence, and the next day they took
the fort of Fuyck by assault: then they went as far as the house of John
Pitteman (the which was held by the Spaniards) whereas they slew two sentinels,
and brought away three cloakes, and the covering of a bed.

The besieged of the town of Harlem did sometimes blow up a mine of their
rampar, at the foot whereof, the enemies were lodged, which did much annoy
them. There

The 17 of the month the fleet for the victualing of Middlebourg, being behind
the castle of Zeeland.
Eloy and Bernard: at their encounter the skirmish grew so hot, as they of
Middlebourg, having many of their soldiers hurt, and some slain, retired. And
it is worthy the noting, that although the skirmish continued four hours very
furious, yet there was not any one of them of Flessingue slain nor hurt.

The five and twentieth of the month, the Spaniards having recovered the fort
of Fuycke, Holland.
they sallied forth about five hundred men, and came and assaulted the fort of
Russenburch, Oliver, whereas they remained all the day following: at which
skirmish there were some forty soldiers hurt, the which were put into small
barks by their companions, and carried to their quarter. And as they made
their retreat, it happened that John Schatter, holding a little barrel
Serrats, with seven or eight more, were very sore burnt: but to recompense
this mischance they had a chain of gold weighing three hundred crowns, from
one of the Spanish captains. All this time of the siege the kine and other
cattle fed without the town along the ditches. The Spaniards went in good
numbers to fetch them away, and although they had taken seven or eight, yet
were they so hotly pursued by them of the Filth, as they were forced to abandon
them, and to fly, paying for their rashness by the death of six of them. They
returned two days after to have their revenge, but they had the like
entertainment, with the loss of a sergeant and four soldiers.

The 27 day the Spaniards set up a gibet, about nine of the clock at the
night, upon the first Lambrecht, and M. Quirin (sometimes bourgmasters, and
then prisoners for suspicion of treason) Adrian Grouentuych, certain priests,
a boy taken in the wood, and with them five soldiers; the daughter of the said
M. Quirin, and a Wallon woman taken in the wood, were put in a sack, and cast
into the river. These twelve were thus executed through the fury of the
soldiers, without the authority or consent of the magistrates and captains.
Without doubt this was a lamentable war, whereas commonly they that first
begin these executions, are the first that smart for it, and repent it.

The 27 of May the Spanish fleet began to set sail, and to advance unto the
end of the sand, which is along the dike of Ramekins, and for that the ships of
Flessingue were there at anchor, attending to fight with them, the Spaniards had
sent men along the said dike, to seize upon the head of it, and to furnish it
with artillery: the which being done, they began to shoot at the Flessinguers
with such fury, as they were forced to abandon the place unto their enemies,
who came and ankered there, attending a prosperous wind to finish their voyage:
But the same day the small ships of Flessingue coasting them, having gotten the
wind, went to skirmish with them with the canon, for the space of five or six
hours so as many of the enemies ships were A sea fight.
shot thorough in diverse places, and one hoy laden with salt carried away: the
great ship, called Virgin of Antuerpe had her maine mast carried away, in the
which there died by the canon a great number, as well soldiers and mariners,
as bourgers, women, and children, which they had taken in Middlebourg to carry
to Antuerpe: besides the fire fell in the powder, and consumed many, and the
ship had been quite burnt, if the Spaniards had not brought some pieces

The next day, the Spaniards seeing their ships greatly spoiled, and many of
their men hurt, they retired, from whence they came under the castle of
Ramekins, and the Zeelanders to the same place, where they had charged their
enemies, for that they had quit that head, and retired their artillery.

The eight and twentieth day of the month the Spanish ships, to the number of
three score Holland.
and three, being upon the sea of Harlem, did charge the prince of Oranges
fleet so furiously, as they defeated them, and took one and twenty: for which
victory the Spaniards made bonefiers. The princes ships defeated.


The thirtieth day the Spaniards blew up a mine, which carried away three
soldiers of the town, and there was captain Couchy and captain Vemy in
great danger of their lives: for Vemy was buried in the mine, so as the pioners
were feign to dig him out. There was a soldier cast with the earth that was
under his feet, over the rampar into the ditch, having no harm, so as
notwithstanding all the shot that were made at him, he mounted up the rampar
again, and got safely into the town.

The first of June the Spaniards caused eleven more to be hanged upon their
bulwark at Harlem, and the besieged to have their revenge, sent forth forty
harguebusiers to seek for Spaniards in the wood, but finding themselves too
weak, they returned back into the town without any exploit. The third day the
Spaniards built a little lodge of fur boords, open on the top and behind,
hanged in the air upon four masts, being raised up and let down, as with a
pully, in the which they placed four musketeers, to shoot into the town
continually, specially at them that should present themselves upon the rampars:
but they had not discharged twice, but the besieged discovering it, cut asunder
the ropes whereby this lodge did hang in the air, with a chain shot, so as
the ropes and a piece of the lodge being carried away, ^three of the soldiers
fell down with a lamentable cry, being in truth an idle invention to
castaway

The third day of the month the army of Antuerpe went and lay under the
castle of Ramekins, as if they would retire toward Antuerpe, but it was to no
other end, but to find means Zeeland.
to get into Middlebourg certain boats laden with corn, which were at
Ter-Goes: for having shut up the channel with their great ships, and fortified
themselves with artillery upon the dike, they sent their small vessels toward
Ter-Goes, who easily forced the Zeelanders that were planted there to guard the
passage, for that eight or nine of their ships that were best armed, were gone
upon the coast of Flanders, to keep some English ships laden with merchandise
from entering into Scluce. In which attempt the Spaniards used such diligence as
the same

The fourth of the month the Spaniards being returned from their voyage of T^
^oes, presented themselves in great numbers to recover this head, which the
Flessinguers had begun to fortify, to hinder the entry into the haven of
Middlebourg: but the sort not being yet in defense, and seeing that the
Spaniards came with artillery, and a great number of soldiers, they being but
few, they did abandon it; and fly, with the loss of one of the bourgers of
Flessingue,

The sixth of the month about noone, the fleet of Antuerpe began to set sail
toward Antuerpe, having the great ships of Zeeland in front of them, and the
lesser behind. At the first

On the ninth day the Flessinguers being advertised that two other great
Biscain ships were yet behind, they sent after them two great ships, and five
or six smaller barks of Zeeland: and although the Biscaines, as soon as they
had discovered them, sailed toward Antuerpe, yet were they soon overtaken,
and one of them was so battered with the canon, as they were forced to run on
ground, and the men to abandon her, in the which they found twenty five men
slain, six pieces of brass ordnance, and some pillage, the which having
drawn forth, they fired

The fleet of Antuerp being retired, they were troubled at Flessingue for the
payment of their soldiers and mariners, who called for money: To whom answer
was made, That there was no means to recover money, but in going to fetch salt
in the road of Arnemuyden, whither they went with their smaller ships of war,
and many soldiers in them, and setting certain sails (which they carried
with them) to the hulkes that were laden with salt, they brought nine away to
Flessingue. The tenth day at eleven of the clock at night died the seignior of
Berlant, governor and bailife of Flessingue, a man well affected to his
country, and careful in his charge, who had great credit among the bourgers
and mariners of Flessingue, by reason of

The twelfth of June there was a proclamation made in Flessingue in the prince
of Oranges Liberty given by the prince to traffic.
name, permitting al merchants, French, English, Scottish, Germans, and
Esterlings, to traffic freely into Flanders, Brabant, and other places of the
Netherlands, and to bring al sorts of merchandise thither, except those that
should be excepted by proclamation: provided always, that they take their
passeports at the places mentioned therein, and to pay the ordinary customs:
upon pain of confiscation of all their ships and goods to them that should
infringe it.

This month was spent at the siege of Harlem in blowing up of mines and other
martial Holland.
attempts. The besieged having received no refreshing of a long time, and
fearing they might

On the foureteenth day the Spaniards put themselves in battle, preparing to
give an assault, and withal blew up a mine, wherewith forty of the town
soldiers were slain, and then they came resolutely to the assault; but seeing
the besieged attend them full of courage, they retired suddenly.

The seventeenth day the seigniours of Serrats and Houtin were sent out of the
town with some troops of harguebusiers to Fuyck, to inform the prince of
Orange of the estate of the besieged, carrying many pigeons with them. Being
safely arrived, they gave them notice from the Spanish camp: and as for their
succors, he made all the have that possible he could. Marguerites cloister
unto Saint Great famine (...) Harlem.
John's gate. The famine began to grow great within the town, for that for want
of victuals they began to eat horses, dogs, cats, and such like.

The two and twentieth they sent a pigeon into the town with letters from the
prince, sending them word that he would come speedily to succor them. They had
many such messengers, to encourage the besieged, who sometimes made sallies
toward the sea, to see if they might have any refreshing of victuals from the
princes ships; but they profited nothing, although at that time there was
nothing in the town but bread of Linseed and Turnups, and the flesh of horses,
dogs, cats, and such like.

The Zeelanders knowing by experience how much the head of the dike which is
betwixt Zeeland.
The seignior of Laten sl^ine
Middlebourg, was hurt upon the dike, with a falcon shot from the Zeelanders
ships, which lay at anchor right against them, whereof he died soon after. They
left also one of their pieces of ordnance, the which was carried by the
soldiers into the Zeelanders trenches. The same day the seignior of Boisot
arrived at Flessingue, being appointed governor there by the prince of Orange,
after the death of the seignior of Berlant. And the 14 day did also arrive
there the lord of Lorges, son to the earl of Montgomery, with about 200
harguebusiers French, brave

About that time doctor Iunius governor of la Vere, and the seignior of Boisot
governor of Flessingue, thought to execute an enterprise, which had bin long
secretly practiced, upon Middlebourg, with a master gunner of the same town,
who bragged that he had two or 300 bourgers which favored this design: which
was, that the said governors should come and lie in ambush with their men in a
garden near unto the town, and at the same instant an allarum should be given
both by sea and land, at Arnemuyden, causing it to be given out, that the
forces which they had gathered together, were to assail Arnemuyden, to whose
succor in such occurrents there usually went two or three companies of the
garrison of Middlebourg, and then the gate next unto the ambush (which they
called the port of Dam) should be opened by the the company that was ready to
go forth ran to the rampar, and the others that were gone

The first of July about eleven of the clock in the forenoone, captain
Pelican, and Cornellis Holland.
Matthew, with either of them a soldier, went out of Harlem by the port Zyel,
and came into a place whereas they did white clothes, to confer with some
Spanish captains, and their A conference betwixt them of Harlem and the camp.
provost general: Who said unto them, That their colonel desired to speak
with the governors and commanders that were in the town; as they did the same
day at five of the clock in the evening. Then there came the earl of
Ouerstein, with four of his captains, and the bourgmaster John van Vlyet,
with the captains Steenbach, Rossigny, and Pelican, who conferred

The next day the Spaniard planted all his artillery against the town; he
shot furiously at the tower of Pin, and at Rauenstein, so as the tower and the
wall were beaten down; they shot violently among the houses, and the tower on
S. Katherines bridge was beaten down: then they brought into the ditch two
floating bridges, to go unto the assault, but they that brought them were so
roughly entertained, as twenty of them were left upon the place. That day the
besieged hung a black cloth out at their steeple, to let the prince of Oranges
ships understand in what misery the town was, the which they did again two
days after. The fourth day there returned a pigeon with a letter from the
prince, who promised to come and succor them

The fifth day the besieged entered again into conference with the Spaniard,
whereas there were six of either side. For Dom Frederic came the earl of
Bossu, the earl of Ouerstein, and four others: for the town, the bourgmaster
John van Vlyet, the captains Steenbach, Rossigny, Sohay, Pelican, and
Cornellis Matthew, but they could not agree, the soldiers refusing to depart
without their arms. The same day the princes ships showed themselves to them
of the town; whereof the besieged being very joyful, went out in great
numbers to second them. The Spaniards seeing this, gave the allarum at the
bulwarks, which made the soldiers return again to defend their rampars,
from whence they chased the Spaniards; and that day

The ninth day there came another pigeon, aduertising them that the princes
army had bin The succors of Harlem, and the princes army defeated.
defeated at Mannepat, coming to succor them under the command of the baron
of Battembourg, lieutenant to the prince: in which defeat the said baron, and
the seigniour of Clotingen

The tenth day the besieged prepared to forsake the town, so as it was
ordained, that seven companies should make the foreward, and nine the rereward,
that in the battle the bourgesses and sworn companies should march all in
arms, and in the midst of them the magistrates, women, and children. But this
design was broken by a letter from the Spaniards that were quartered in the
wood, assuring them, that all that remained in the town should have

The eleventh day at night five companies of Wallons went out of the town,
being followed

The twelfth day the two bourgmasters, captain Steenback Rossigny, and
Christopher Vader, A composition to yield the Town upon unsure conditions.
agreed upon certain conditions to yield up the town to the Spaniard. But
this accord did not please Rossigny, who advertised the other captains French
and Wallons: whereupon they drew up the bridges of the town, that the
Spaniards might not enter, yet in the end upon Bordet, a French man, hearing
them speak of yielding to their mercy, called one of his soldiers, and said
unto him, Soldier, my friend, come hither, thou have done me many good
services, do me now this last, shooting me through the body with thy
harguebuse: the Border, not feeling the cruelty of his enemies, and scorning
to die by the hand of a hangman. The cause of this Roman-like act was, for that
the Spaniards had declared, that there was no mercy for them that had been
besieged at Mons in Henault, where the said captain Border had been.

The foureteenth day the companies were sent for to the towne-house, to know if
they did The yielding up of the town agreed unto.
consent to that accord, by the which the bourgmasters had redeemed the town
from spoil, for two hundred and forty thousand florins, at two paiments, one
hundred thousand within twelve days, and the rest at three months. Whereunto
having consented, the deputies went to confirm this agreement, the which being
thus concluded, the town was put into Dom Fredericks hands: Then commandment
was given, that at the sound of the great bell all bourgers and soldiers
should bring their arms into the state-house, that the townes-men should go
into the cloister of Zyel, the women into the cathedral church, and the
soldiers into the church of Bakemisse, but the Germans and Scottish men should
still keep the guard at the rampar. This done, Philip Martin, sometimes
bourgmaster of the said town (who during the siege had remained with Dom
Frederic) went to the cloister of Zyel, to entreat the bourgmasters and the
bourgers, to provide the money that was promised speedily, least that by
delays the town might be spoiled.

The same day the Spaniards being entered, commandment was also given to the
Scots and Germans to bring their arms unto the towne-house, and from thence
were led unto S. Katherines Vrsula, where they were given in guard to certain
Spanish soldiers: This done, Dom Frederic, the earl of Bossu, with some other
noblemen, entered into the town, and presently all the Ensigns of companies
(having the day before delivered up their colors into the Spaniards hands)
were put in prison, and afterward sent with a guard to the castle of Cleef.
Whilst that the poor bourgers were thus guarded within the church, the
Spaniards spoiled some of their houses.

The fifteenth day of that month Dom Frederic caused about three hundred
Wallons to The mercy of of the duke of Alu^ and his son at Harlem.
be hanged and headed: and the same day the duke of Alua came from Amsterdam
before the town of Harlem, where he made the circuit of the town, to view it
on the out side, and then returned, from whence he came without entering into
the town.

The next day captain Riperda and his lieutenant were beheaded, the minister
Steembach was hanged, and two hundred and seven and forty soldiers were
drowned in the Sea of Harlem.

The seventeenth there were a great number more executed, and the eighteenth
day there were three hundred more as well soldiers as bourgers, which lost
their heads, with the minister Simon Simonson.

On the twentieth day the seigniour Lancelot of Brederode, captain Rossigny,
and the receiuor of Bryele, were executed by the sword in the village of
Schoten.

The regiment of Lazarus Muller, with the captains, being Germans, were
conducted the seventh day of August out of the town, whereof a part of them
went to serve the duke of Alua: And the eleventh day following, all the English
and Scottish were beheaded. And to fill up this sea of blood, all the wounded
and sick were beheaded before the hospital dcore.

They that lay without in the sconce, as being forgotten in the contracts,
while they The soldiers in the Fuyck sconce ste^ued to death.
were executing the rest of them in the town, and forgetting to give them
meat, were found

The sixteenth day of August the Dutch soldiers being about six hundred
strong with their captains, were led out of the town with conuoy, but passing
by Nienwer church, monsieur Sonoys soldiers, with the aid of them of
Enchuysen, setting upon their conuoy, overthrew them, and so set them at
liberty.

Thus were all the soldiers in Harlem, being above two thousand men, with
their captains, executed and murdered, except some few, that got secretly
away, and a Scottish captain, called Balfour (that upon promise to do some
exploit against the person of the prince of Orange) was set at liberty, which
he himself told unto the prince, esteeming it a matter

After this victory gotten against Harlem, the duke wrote letters unto all the
towns of Holland, offering pardon and grace. but none of them would give ear
thereunto, namely they of Rotterdam made him answer, saying, That they would
be obedient and dutisul unto the king of Spain, but would not acknowledge any
other lieutenant under him, than the prince of Orange.

See what the taking, ransoming, murders and massacres committed by the duke
of Alua, This siege continued 31 Weeks.
and Dom Frederic his son, in the town of Harlem were, for the succouring
whereof the prince of Orange had done his best endeavors: I will forbear to
speak who was the cause of it, for my meaning is not to tax any man: but long
resolutions, and slow executions, are

The siege of Harlem having endured seven months, although the Spaniards had
the victory, yet notwithstanding it much diminished their credit and
reputation, being found to be able to be withstood, and not invincible,
although the duke of Alua called his three regiments of Spaniards that he
brought with him, the one Tales quales, the second Inuincibiles, and the third
Immortales; and gave the towns of Holland time to resolve, and prepare to
defend themselves: and the rather, for that the duke of Aluaes soldiers at
Harlem were at contention and strife amongst themselves, for that the soldiers
that stayed without the town,

During this siege of Harlem many complaints were made against the lord of
Lumay, earl of The earl of Mark accused before the States of Holland, for his
cruelty against churchmen.
Mark, before the prince of Orange and the States of Holland, for many
oppressions and cruelties, committed in diverse parts, especially against church
men, priests, and monks, whom he persecuted with all sorts of cruelties, to
revenge (said he) the death of the earl of Egmont, sued for his pardon, and
promised amendment, he had been punished. Yet the earl did

Being freed from prison, and dismissed from his charge, he retired himself
out of Holland, much discontented, yet he had afterward a regiment of foot in
the States pay, at the camp of Gemblours, against Dom John of Austria: but
being retired before the battle of Gemblours, and returned to Liege, he died
in the year of our Lord 1578. Some said that he was poisoned.

The duke of Alua finding with what toil, charge, and loss of men he had won
Harlem, and hearing that some of his troops were in mutiny for twenty eight
months pay, having yet many towns in arms against him, and thinking to
begin first with Alcmar, he

During the siege before Harlem the duke of Alua had procured the earl of
Bossu to write The earl of (...) seeks to ^ue the princ^ of Orange betred
out of the camp unto one Huych Ianson, bourgmaster of Delft, persuading him
not to let slip so good an occasion of obtaining peace from the king, as to
procure some means to have the prince (being there) to be taken, and sent to
the duke of Alua; which if he would do (saying, that he advised him thereunto
upon mere love he bare unto the town of Delft) he assured him not only to
purchase their pardon, but also promised upon his faith and honor, to procure
them such freedoms and liberties, as they should desire: and that therefore they
should be resolute and careful to perform this worthy and meritorious act,
whereby they should not only purchase peace and quietness for their town of
Delft, but also for all Holland,

The duke of Alua having taken Harlem, and as he conceived daunted the
Hollanders courage, thinking the prince of Orange and the States to be unable
to manage and fortify any place like unto it, and it may be, presuming that
his cruelty extended upon that town would terrify any other garrison, who
would not willingly adventure the hazard of a siege, he resolved with his
counsel of war to attempt Alcmar, as one of their strongest towns; which
being taken, the rest or most of the other towns would yield. Whereupon he
sent Dom Frederic Chiapin Vitelli, campe-master general, before Alcmar the one
and twentieth of August, and with him the baron of Noircarmes, lieutenant to
the general, with Dom Gonsaluo of Braccamonte, Dom Pedro of Velasco, Dom Pedro
of Toledo, Stephano de Varro, Julian Romero, la Motte baron of Goignies, master
of the artillery, Ferdinando of Toledo, colonel Poluiler, the baron of
Liques, then made governor of Harlem, the baron of Cheureaux, Monsieur de
Capres, Ionian Fronsberg, and the earl of Ouersteen, with some hundred and one
and twenty companies, which were esteemed 16000 men. Within the town were
1300 fighting men, bourgers and inhabitants, besides strangers and peasants:
they had a garrison of eight hundred soldiers, James Cabilliau was their
governor, and William van Sonneberg his lieutenant. During the dukes
preparation, the prince of Orange and the states of Holland sent five or six
expert captains into the town, especially Smith and Cornellis Scottish men,
with some four hundred soldiers, most of which captains had been in Harlem,
and were a great means for the preserving of Alcmar.

They of Alcmar seeing this storm approach, began to fortify their town,
enlarging it with four bulwarks, and making a strong sconce upon the
Scheermer, thereby to free their haven:

The town of Harlem having been thus besieged 31 weeks, during the which the
women, maidens, and boys, did as valiantly as might be, until that through
want of victuals, and poverty, they were forced to yield (as we have said) to
their enemies, the thirteenth of July, having during the siege slain many a
brave captain of the Spaniards and Wallons. The duke

Alcmar being thus freed, the counsel of the town (fearing that the duke of
Alua would not be so satisfied) thought good to furnish the town with corn,
and other munition of war, what they could recover by their own means, or
from their neighbors of West-Friseland: Which done, by the order of Charles of
Boisot, who commanded under the prince, they began to fortify the town: but
they had scarce begun the work, when as the Spaniards returned The Sp^ return
(...) ^uest A^.
of the channel, toward the East, to stop the passage as well by water as by
land: But the bourgers and some soldiers set fire on one of the mills at these
entries, the which they could not do to the second, nor wrest it from the
Spaniards: who to stop the passage unto the town, sunk a ship full of stones
at the entry of their haven. Then the Protestants, who had a fort at Ton upon
the banks of Scheermer, fled and abandoned the place to the Spaniard. The haven
and all access by water being taken from the besieged, having no free passage
to bring in victuals and munition, they resolved to make their way by force,
and to chase the Spaniards from some quarter, and especially from the way to
Oudt-Dorpe: and issuing forth of the town with such horsemen as they had, and
some foot, they went to charge the enemy, but the Spaniards

The seignior of Beauvoir chosen admiral by the duke of Alua for Zeeland, made
preparation Zeeland.


In the end of July the governor of Flessingue and la Vere, having gathered
together their Ramekins besieged by the Zeelanders.
garrisons, and those of Ziriczee, went in the night to camp before the castle
of Ramekins, upon the dike toward Middleburg, where having entrenched
themselves with incredible speed, they began about four of the clock in the
morning to play with their canon, as well from Eloys company guarded the trench
about the castle, and that of captain Bernard was near unto the sluice of
Middlebourg, to make head against the Spaniard, if he offered himself to
trouble them on that side. And for that the besieged made no show of amazement,
and that they had not powder sufficient in Flessingue to continue their
battery, until there were a breach, it was resolved to undermine it, being
persuaded that the bulwarks that looked toward the dike were built upon
arches: the which was performed with such speed, as within four days they
came under the bulwark, wherein the governors, captains, and soldiers,
wrought continually with great resolution. And for that they had resolved the
fifth day of the siege to set fire to this mine, and withal to give an
assault, they caused ladders to be made ready, and other engines

The besieged seeing the preparations that were made to assail them, as well
by land as by sea, and doubting a mine they began to faint, and to demand a
parley: whereupon they agreed to yield up the place, upon condition to depart
with their lives, arms, and baggage, but they would have it deferred to the
next day. Whereupon as the governors were resolved to set fire to the mine the
next day, and to give a general assault, they pressed them to deliver it up the
same night: in the end it was agreed they should not depart until the next
day, but for assurance

The next day being the fourth of August, the place was yielded by six of the
clock in the ^e castle of (...).
morning, into the which captain Eloys company was put: where also the
governors entered to see that performed which was promised to the besieged, who
were safely conducted with their arms and baggage near unto Middlebourg:
Which done they caused all the soldiers to assemble that were in the castle,
where a sermon was made, with thanks to God for the happy issue of the
enterprise: then the place was visited, whereas they found eighteen brass
pieces, four barrels of powder, and a great number of bullets and victuals, as
flesh, wine, and come, for above three months for the garrison that was in
it. It is a place of great importance,

During this siege, which continued but five days, the fleet of Antuerpe
prepared with all speed, not only to carry victuals and supplies to
Middleburg, but also according to the haughty designs of the Spaniard, to
reconquer all the towns and islands of Zeeland, and to reduce them under the
duke of Aluaes obedience. This fleet should be conducted by the seigniour of
Beauvoir, who was admiral, and by colonel Mondragon with all his regiment,
having all things fit for the execution of this goodly design.

This army consisting of threescore and four vessels of all sorts, appeared
before Flessingue the ninth of the month of August, by four of the clock in
the morning, as if they Martin Iansz, being of thirteen or fourteen hundred
tun, was admiral of the Zeelanders fleet) and fifty smaller vessels, the
which were near unto Flessingue, attending the coming of the said Spanish
fleet.

The small ships of the Zeelanders lying houering upon that coast, the lesser
vessels of the The first skirmish of the two fleets.
Spaniards went to assail them, where they did skirmish long and furiously
with their great ordnance and small shot, till in the end the Spaniards retired
to their fleet.

The next day, being the tenth, the Spaniard presented himself again twice:
the first with his small ships only, and the second time both with great and
small: and had not the Flessinguers

The eleventh day the Spaniards showing themselves more hardy (finding that
the Zeelanders would not fight but under the favor of their forts) came and
presented themselves before the haven of Flessingue, and shooting off their
ordnance at certain small ships which lay there, some bullets flew into the
town, and slew a boy in the street of ten or twelve years old: then they
retired unto Flanders side before Bresquen, right against Flessingue. This
brauadoe of the Spaniard struck such a terror into the Flessinguers, as in
less than three hours, all their walls next to the sea, were bordered with
pipes full of earth, to serve as a

The twelfth day the Spaniard leaving the coast of Flanders, sailed toward the
sea, coasting the walls of Flessingue, making some shot into the town, from
whence they also shot at their ships. Being come to the downs of Zoetelande,
they cast anchor: the Zeelanders fearing they would land, sent all the men they
had in Flessingue thither. But the thirteenth day the fleet went so far into
the sea, as they almost lost the sight of it: then they entered into a strait
betwixt two banks of sand, and from thence came into a place called the
powder, or the Haek, a league from Campuere, there to unlade their victuals,
and so to have it carried by carts to Middlebourg.

Being busy at their vnlading, there rose a storm with a Southwest wind, in
the which they lost three of their great ships, and one gallie. Another of
those ships which they call Bouyers, was driven by the tempest among the ships
of Flessingue, and taken: those that were cast away were not unladen, of the
which nothing could be saved, but the ordnance.

A while after there was another skirmish betwixt the lesser ships of the
Spaniards and Zeelanders, where after many great shot spent, in the end the
Spanish viceadmirall was boorded The Spanish viceadmiral taken.
and taken: it was in like sort laden with corn, having six brass pieces, and
eighty four men in her, the which were all cut in pieces, and cast over
board, except fifteen that were brought to la Vere.

The eighteenth day of August the Zeelanders that were in garrison at la Vere,
went to skirmish with them that kept the trenches which the Spaniards had made
right against the Haek, that they might with more safety discharge their
victuals, upon whom they sallied forth in such numbers, and with such fury,
as they made them recoyle near unto their ports: but being succored with
some new and fresh supplies of soldiers, which the seigniour of Boisot brought
them in person, they charged the Spaniards in such sort, as they forced them to
return presently to their trenches: The which the seigniour of Beauvoir their
admiral seeing, he sent a good number of harguebusiers more to land, with the
which the Spaniards taking courage, chased away the Zeelanders near unto their
town, in which skirmish they lost eight men, and some others were wounded Eloy
lost one of his eyes. But of the Spaniards (by the report of them that came
afterward to serve the Zeelanders there) died about threescore.

On the six and twentieth day the Spaniard having left the place, put to sea,
as if he would

The besieged of Alcmar in Holland, to find some means to recover their
channel, they did endeavor with barks to set fire on the other house, which
they could not do at the mouth Holland.
of it: the bourgers with one of their bourgmasters, and some soldiers, went
in boats to skirmish with the enemy; another company was gone by the salt
pits, to charge the enemy by land. But the Spaniards having sent some of their
men by the new port, toward the town (making show as if they would assail it
on the South side, at a place called the Geest) as soon as the alarm was
given in the town, the bourgers quitting the skirmish returned to the rampar,
and so this enterprise proved fruitless.

The next day the Spaniards told the besieged, being upon the rampar, That they
desired Cabelliau, and the counsel of the town being assembled, it was
resolved among the bourgmasters, captains, and chief of the town, not to
treat in any sort with the Spaniards, no not to hear them speak: the which
was delivered unto them. From that day the Spaniard seeing himself contemned,
and that they would not once hear him speak, began then to resolve to war,
and to shoot at the houses in the town, without doing any great harm to the
rampar, the which the besieged did fortify day and night.

The five and twentieth of August the Spaniards made a false alarm toward the
port of Harlem, as if they would assail the town of that side: And the said
day they sent a drummer with captain Steenbach (as it was thought) to the port
of Friseland, demanding of the Cabelliau, or with one of the bourgmasters: but
whilst that one went to deliver the message, he was known by a soldier:
then they cried unto him that he should retire, and as he recoyled a little,
they that were in centinell shot at him, calling him traitor, and that he had
been the cause of the loss of the town of Harlem, the which he
understanding, drew forth his sword, and threatening them, he presently went
his way.

Three days after the Spaniards put themselves in battle, an hour after
midnight, as if they had meant to have given an assault, the which they did
(as it was thought) to see the countenance of the besieged, and how they were
resolved to defend themselves: but there John Arentsz minister, who being at
the extremity, and hearing that the Spaniard was at the rampar, prayed God
with all his family, to preserve his dear country, that it might serve as a
refuge for them that make profession of the Gospel.

The night following the Spaniards made a trench before the port of Friseland,
to approach their canon nearer, and notwithstanding the continual shooting of
the besieged, yet could they not hinder their work; so as about noone they
sallied out of the town, and chased them from thence: but the Spaniards having
doubled their forces, they returned, and

The first of September, of many messengers which the besieged had sent out,
there was one only that returned, who brought letters from the Seignior
Diederic Sonoy, governor

In these letters he did grieve that they were so straightly besieged: The
which he had no Letters from the Governor Sonoy, which comfort the besieged.
sooner understood, but he did his best endeavor to send them a company of
supply: but he could not do it, by reason of the base retreat of their men,
which they had upon the lake of Schermer, yet he would not fail to employ his
person to succor them, and to help to raise the siege: That he had written to
the prince of Orange to that end, doubting not, but their forces (if they would
patiently attend succors) would disappoint the attempts of their enemies. And
touching that which they had desired, to have the dike broken

Those letters of the States of West-Friseland, assembled in the town of
Horn, contained.

That as for the powder which they daily attended, as soon as they had
received Letters from the state of West-Frisela^d to the besieged
endeauours to succor them by water and by land, entreating the bourgers to be
of good courage, and the rather, for that Cont Lodowic had written unto Philip
vander Aa, to exhort the Hollanders not to faint for the loss of Harlem, but
trusting unto the equity of their cause, to show themselves more valiant for
the defense of their liberty and the country, hoping they should be soon
freed from the tyranny wherewith they would oppress them.

Some that were well affected, gave it out, that there were letters come to
some private persons, That duke Christopher, son to the Cont Palatine, was
upon the frontiers of Gueldres with two thousand horse and five thousand foot,
and that Cont Lodowic followed him

The Spaniard in the mean time did not neglect the work which he had begun,
but finished the trench at the Friseland gate, with an intent to bring the
canon nearer unto the town, or else to undermine and blow up a bulwark: for
the hindering whereof, the besieged

All this time it seemed the Spaniards sought but to abuse the besieged,
sometimes pretending sought with great labor to make a bridge near unto the
town; but the besieged which were

On the eleventh day there were seen (more than was usual) a great number of
horse and carts, on the which the Spaniards did lade their artillery, not
without difficulty and some loss by reason of the continual rain, which made
that quarter of Friseland so foul and my^ie, as carriages could hardly pass.

On the twelfth day they brought near unto the red tower, on the East side, a
great number of long Fur plankes, with hurdles, and in the night they planted
some gabions before the gate of Friseland, to cover their canon, and to no
other end: For to think that they had an intent to famish it (having compassed
about the town) was a folly, having neither all Peter's tower, lying betwixt
the Friseland gate and the Monks tower, to disturb the pioners which brake
down the old wall: for at that place there was a piece of the wall fallen,
joining unto the priests tower, whereas the besieged would make a rampar, the
which lay open to the enemies shot; so as many which carried earth to this
work, being slain, and others hurt, the rest were so terrified, as for that
day they left the work imperfect. But the next day three squadrons surprising
the Spaniards in these trenches of S. Peter's town, chased them from thence, and
wanting tools to cast it down and lay it even, the Spaniards returning with

The besieged receiving no news from their associate neighbors, and that by
reason of their straight siege no spy^s could pass to give them intelligence,
it was resolved by the governors and captains, That the night following,
which was the fifteenth of the month, they would make a sally on the South
side upon their enemies, which were busy about a new trench, and that they
should seek to take some prisoner alive, as they did, taking a Spaniard,
called John Ieronimo; if they had not then busied themselves about the spoil,
they might easily have carried away as many as were there: so as that which the
besieged could not learn from their friends and confederats, they understood
from their enemy, for this prisoner told them, That Dom Frederic had received
commandment from the duke of Dom Frederic had resolved to assail them in
four places at one instant, that he might force one of the quarters, where
there was least resistance, and yet there was some dispute betwixt him and the
lord of Noircarmes touching that point: That the bridges, plankes, hurdles, and
all other necessary instruments were ready for an assault, and that before
they would give an assault, they would batter down the wall betwixt the gate
of Friseland and the red town; but upon Harlem side they would make an
assault upon bridges, and toward the Salt pits with boats: That if he took
the town by assault, he would murder all, young and old, men, women, and
children, without any respect either of sex or age.

Whereupon all went to pray unto God, with tears in their eyes, That it would
please him for his holy names sake, to turn from them that tyranny and
inhumanitie. Moreover, being demanded, What number of men there might be in the
camp, he said, There was about six thousand six hundred men, although after the
raising of the siege it was otherwise known: for Dom Frederic, accompanied with
the lord of Noircarmes, Julian Romero, and many other men of account Spaniards
and Wallons being lodged in the village of Oudt-dorpe, had in his quarter two
and forty companies of the old bands, to the which were joined eight other
companies newly come out of Italy. Dom Frederic had a thousand five hundred
horse for his ordinary guard, besides other four hundred horse that were
lodged in the same quarter. Dom Ferdinando of Toledo, cousin to Dom Frederic,
was at Huyswaert with eight companies of Spaniards, every one being of two
hundred. In S. Pancrats village were six companies of Germans of Colonel
Polwyller, and other five of the garrison of Groningen. At Leedyck was the
baron of Liques, governor of Harlem, with twelve companies of John Schenks
cornet of Reisters, where there were also seven companies of Spaniards newly
come, twelve of Landtsknechts, under George Frousberg, and three of the earl
of Ouersteyns. So as at the beginning of this siege, there were in Dom
Frederics camp one hundred twenty one companies of footmen, which made at the
least six and twenty thousand men, out of the which, some were drawn to put
into Schellinckwout, and into the ships, to fight with the Hollanders upon
the water: The bourgers and inhabitants able to carry arms, were found to be
thirteen hundred, besides strangers that Sonoy before the last siege had
drawn forth two, and afterward one, with two small pieces of Ordnance, the
which were sent into Waterlandt, where he said they had great need.

The sixteenth of the month there fell near unto S. Peter's tower a piece of
the wall, the which had begun long before to sink, and now through the burden
of the new rampar, that was laid upon it, fell quite down: but the same night
the besieged stopped that breach with great diligence: so as that wall which
had been built in old time in steed of a rampar for the defense of the town,
was now but a trouble and toil unto them to beat it down, and to make

The same day the Spaniards planted nine Canons against the port of Friseland,
and seven at the red tower: but for that the ground on the North side was more
mierie and lower than to the South, both by reason of the rain, and by the
opening of the sluices of the sea, the which the governor Sonoy had caused to be
done, the Spaniards were much encumbered in the planting of their ordnance; yet
the night following they raised the ground of their first trench, the which
they approached near unto the port, having an intent to blow up the bulwark,
the which had been built upon the bodies and roots of trees, bauins, and other
wood, fit to prevent a mine.

The seventeenth day the Spaniards showed themselves in such sort, as if they
had been ready to give an assault, aduauncing their plankes into the ditch
upon the North and the

The night following there appeared a prodigious sign in the air: for the
Moon (which was in her last quarter) began about nine of the clock at night
to shine, against the course of nature, whereas it should not have appeared
before midnight. This prodigy was a good presage unto the besieged, and gave
them more courage: and so (by the grace of God) it succeeded better than the
lamentable estate of the town could hope or expect for: most of the soldiers
of the garrison were yet fresh, and unaccustomed

The eighteenth of the month the Spaniards began to batter furiously with
twenty pieces of ordnance, so as they made that day two hundred shot, as well
in ruin upon the houses, as at the rampar, where there were six men of the
town slain. The Spaniards having beaten down the fronts of the port of
Friseland and of the red tower, about three of the clock in the afternoon
they began to give a furious assault, making their way at the port by the
materials, which had fallen and filled up the ditch, and at the red tower, by a
bridge which they had let down: and to strike the more terror into the
bourgers, they prepared to assail the town at the port of Harlem, and at the
Salt pits, on the one side by a bridge, and on the other side one keeping his
place and rank, not shrinking a foot, but repulsing their enemies as valiantly

The first assaylants having done their charge, and being repulsed, and weary
of fighting, there came other fresh men in their places, who had no better
success than the first, carrying nothing away but blows and wounds; and in
this sort the Spaniards were twice repulsed: yet they fainted not, but sought
to force it, at what price soever, coming to the third assault like Lions: who
having passed the breach, and won the rampar, they cried Victoria, Victoria:
Of three Ensigne-bearers which came up to the rampar with their colors, two
were slain, one of their colors was burned, and the other two were torn in
pieces, every one striving to have his part: but it was not known what became
of the third Ensigne-bearer. In the end the Spaniards being not able to hold
out or endure the skirmish any longer, they were constrained to retire with
shame and loss. And so this Friseland port was freed from three fierce and
mighty assaults of the enemy.

On the other side, at the red tower, they did no less: The assaylants having
approached unto the rampar with their bridges, the besieged were much troubled:
For before they were to encounter the enemy upon the rampar, and to repulse
them from the breach,

In the end, the Spaniards (mad with rage and disdain) returned the third
time to the assault with greater numbers than before, thinking now to carry
it, as it was to be feared, considering the multitude and fury of the
assaylants. The besieged notwithstanding, after a long defense (setting the
danger before their eyes) made no show at all, as if they were either wearied
or tired: but with the help of pitched hoopes fired, burning straw, boiling
water, stones, and all other things of resistance, which the wives, daughters,
maid servants, and boys did bring, they defended themselves valiantly until
eight of the clock at night,

Touching the Spaniards attempts at the salt pits and at the port of Harlem,
that cannot rightly be called an assault: for those that were slain at the
Salt pits, taught their companions to tarry in their trenches: and those which
on the South side labored (but in vain) to conduct the bridge, showed, that
they would not give the enemy an assault at so dear a rate: for it had been a
great folly for them to offer it, for that the Canon of the town might
command as well the bridges as the boats that should offer to come unto the
assault. Notwithstanding, they must attribute the honor unto God alone, who
would not suffer it: for if in these four quarters (although two of them
seemed very

In these furious assaults (which the night brake off) having fought almost
four Diericke Duyuel of Amsterdam, and Conrade of Steenwike, captains,
whereof the one was at the gate of Friseland, and the other at the red tower,
behaved themselves valiantly. Colonel Cabilliau (a man of a mild disposition)
although he were sick, was at the rampar, to give some courage unto the
besieged by his presence.

There was also a Scottishman called Cornellis, who had been an ensign in
Harlem, having escaped the Spaniards hands, and come to Alcmar, did wonders
against the enemy: of whom (during these assaults) he slew above twenty with
his own hand, the which did free them from the jealousy which they had before
of him. Of two Pontons or bridges, which the Spaniards had thought to bring
unto the red tower, the inhabitants burned one of them the night following.

The same month the dukes John Casimire and Christopher his brother, sons to
prince Frederic, elector Palatine of Rhyne, meeting upon a heath with certain
carts laden with powder, the which were sent out of Germany to the duke of
Alua. These princes knowing whence they came, and whether they went, causing
them to be unladen, and the barrels

The duke of Alua being advertised hereof, made his complaint unto the
emperor, who writ unto the said princes. Whereunto duke Casimire made answer
by letters from Heydelberch the twelfth of October, by the which he confessed
freely, that he had done it, knowing to what end that powder was intended, that
is to say, to the ruin and desolation of the good towns of the Netherlands,
as they had done at Harlem; the which the princes of the empire should in no
sort suffer, That such a Tyrant as the duke of Alua was, should in that manner
destroy the good Netherlands, their near neighbors, that in the end the king
of Spain having suppressed them, and reduced those countries into servitude,
the duke would Casimires answer, of whom the duke of Alua could get no other
satisfaction for all his storming.

The twentieth of September, about nine of the clock in the morning, the
Spaniard renewed his battery at Alcmar, with the which he did more annoy the
houses than the rampars, the which were presently repaired with earth which the
bourgers brought, and that day they made seven hundred shot: after noone he
drew his troops out of Oudt-Dorpe, to assail the red tower again. But as
they would have approached the other bridge which remained, the shot came so
thick from the town, as the captains (notwithstanding all their threats and
blows) could not draw the soldiers to the assault, although (as they said)
they slew above fifty, refusing to go, for which cause the tower was not
assaulted that day. And although Dom Frederic promised much and largely unto
his soldiers, if they did win

And in this sort the Spaniard by his wilfulness did inure the besieged to
manage arms,

Behold how God showed himself unto them of Alcmar, who although they had no
assistance from their neighbors, yet did he not forsake them in their greatest
need: for even it seemed the heavens and the winds would fight for them; for
that the wind did suddenly change, even as the Spaniards thought to approach
their bridge, which made them to recoile back, and favored the besieged,
blowing full in their enemies faces from that time the Spaniard seemed as if he
would raise his camp: For the two and twentieth day he dislodged

And although at that time the besieged seemed to be somewhat assured, and did
not much care to know their enemies designs, yet it fell out, that the man
which was sent to

The governors of the town did easily believe it, for that he had so freely
and plainly revealed some of the enemies secrets. The bourgomasters, captains,
and chief of the swome companies, promised one another, not to impart unto the
common; what the Frenchman had declared unto them; but only they should give
them to understand, That within fifteen days the enemy would raise the
siege, knowing well, that the Germans would come to succor them: yet this
French soldier was safely kept.

Among other things which he discovered, he said, That the Spaniard was much
discontented, that having continued his siege so long before the town, he
could never learn by any that came forth, nor by any letters from the
Catholics, in what estate the besieged were, and what their resolution was,
nor whence they did recover that whereof they had need: which showed, that some
bourgers were wrongfully taxed and suspected (as oftentimes soldiers cannot be
silent) to have been in the Spaniards camp, or to have given them some
aduertisements by letters fastened unto arrows. For this cause they sent not
forth any more messengers to their neighbors, fearing they should be taken,
and so discover the secrets of the town, and the estate wherein it stood.

The five and twentieth of the month, the Spaniard (whom the besieged had
taken the day, should not be in danger for his not returning; and therefore
this Spaniard was hanged

The governors and magistrates had promised the soldiers of their garrison,
That if it pleased God they might preserve their town, they would give them all
new clothes: but they changed their minds, for that there was not cloth
sufficient in the town; and if there had

The next day (this money being suddenly coined) it was distributed to every
soldier that had a single pay, six of those dallars, to him that had a double,
twelve, and so to officers and captains accordingly; so as the whole sum
amounted to 10000 Florins, but the soldiers were not well satisfied therewith.

The Spaniards having had such bad success in all their assaults, began to
think upon their retreat, and to trusse up their baggage: for the five and
twentieth of the month of nine pieces which they had planted at the port of
Friseland, they saw but three, and of seven at the red tower, but three also,
which had their breeches turned; and the next day those which were remaining at
the port, were no more seen; but the culuerins at the myll and the three
pieces at the tower were yet remaining.

The Spaniards did nothing all these three days but lade their artillery and
munition; for the carrying of which away, they must of necessity repair the
ways betwixt Oudt-Dorp and the town, being all broken by the inundations of
the sea, so as they were forced to carry away a great part in barks to Egmont.
From the first of October to the sixth, the Spaniard did nothing

The seventh day there came a man, who reported, That upon the Scheermer, the
Protestants ships of Holland had fought with them of Amsterdam, who were
retired after that they had lost one of their ships. He said also, That the
Waterlanders, which are the towns of Edam, Monikendam, and Puremende, imitating
the example of them of Alcmar, were full of courage, resolving rather to hazard
body and goods, than to yield to the Spaniards: That he had heard an old
soldier of the enemies say, That he had never seen such furious assaults, and
so continued, as those that were given at Alcmar, in the which there died above
1400 men, and among

The eight day all the Spanish forces made their retreat in order of battle,
marching from Oudt-Dorp toward Berghen; some of the besieged sallyed forth,
and without the consent Alcmar freed from the siege.
or knowledge of their superiors (accompanied with some soldiers and mariners
of their galleyes and ships of war) went to Oudt Dorp, an ancient and well
renowned village, which they burned.

And thus passed the siege of Alcmar, after it had continued seven weeks,
whereas the bourgers showed themselves not only to have the courage and hearts
of soldiers, but of Lions: whereof the Proverb grew; That the duke of Al^a
during his government had made the merchants and mariners of Holland soldiers;
the neat herds of Spain Hidalgos that is to say gentlemen; the A Proverb.
Germane soldiers bribers, the Wallons thieves (who were wont to be good men)
gentlewomen and honest virgins strumpets, and whores and bauds ladies and
gentlewomen.

At that time the emperor Maximilian (according to his bounty and natural
clemency) The emperor seeks the peace of the Netherlands.
king of Spain to give some rest to so many miseries, entreating him to be at
peace with his subjects. He writ also to the prince of Orange, exhorting him to
peace, promising to be a means for him to recover his goods that were seized
on in the Netherlands and in Bourgoigne (these were practices come from Spain,
to make him abandon them of Holland and Zeeland) or else to cause him to have
recompense for the same of some seigniories in Germany, or in the county of
Charolois. But the emperor prevailed nothing on either side; the king of Spain
(having begun to know the humor of the prince) continuing firm in the answer
which he had made in the year 1569, to the archduke Charles the emperors
brother, who was sent into Spain to the same end, with ample instructions, to
seek to mollify the kings heart. On

The Spanish fleet (commanded by the seignior of Beauvoir) being returned to
Antuerp, the Zeelanders were advertised, that the Spaniards intention was to
send him back speedily unto Zeeland.
Middlebourg, whereof colonel Mondragon gave great suspicion, causing the head
of the haven Poyet, a French gentleman, who was sent by the prince of Orange to
command the forces. And for that the bourgers of the town were very much
tired, and that the Spaniard was ready to descend, he led those troops to
Soeteland, in the which was the regiment of Hellin, of four companies of
Germans, and one of Wallons: besides, the ordinary companies of the garrison
of Flessingue went thither, and soon after the Scottishmen arrived, and the
company of Grenu from Zirickzee.

The said captain Poyet, on the last day of August, before his coming to
Flessingue, surprised in the prince of Orange his name, at the break of day,
with a wonderful dexterity, Geertrnydenberg surprised by the prince.
Draek, the governor, saved himself, with nine or ten soldiers more, by a
window, which looked into the towne-ditch, casting himself down, leaving
behind him upon his table, the lendings which the day before he had received
for his soldiers, to be divided among the princes soldiers, who had the
booty.

As matters passed thus at land, after the deliverance of Alcmar, and the
taking of Geertruydenberg, the duke of Alua meaning to be revenged of the
West-Frisons (of which number those of Alcmar are) caused a great fleet of
thirty ships to be prepared at Amsterdam, to subdue them, whereof he gave the
charge to Cont Bossu, whose admiral ship was called the Inquisition; which
earl having sailed with his fleet a little in the Zuyderzee; he met with the
ships of the West-Frisons, of Enchuysen, of Monykendam, and the Waterlanders.
These two armies being met, made a furious fight both with their canon and
their small shot: when they came to join with the Frisons, it seemed at the
first that the victory inclined to the Spaniards; but being succored by the
Waterlanders their neighbors, the chance turned presently: for Cont Bossu was
environed on all sides, and boorded by the Protestants, casting wild fire from
their two castles upon the Spaniards: so as the earl seeing himself abandoned
of all his fleet, having fought from noon on the eleventh day all night, until
the next day at noon, defending himself valiantly, after great loss of his
men, in the end he was forced to yield. The Spaniards The other Spanish ships
seeing their admiral taken, fled as swiftly as they could to Amsterdam:
Westhen was sunk with the Canon. Cont Bossu with his Inquisition, and all the
rich booty that was in it, was carried to Horn.

This battle at sea was the two and twentieth of October. It seemed that Cont
Bossu did undertake this battle, more for despite (to the end he would not
be called cowardly Fleming, as it happened to cont Aremberg in Friseland) than
for any hope he had to vanquish the Protestants: for those Spaniards being yet
in Amsterdam, had said in disdain and mockery, that the Enchuysens had no
artillery but of painted wood, the which they felt to their cost in this
battle.

The duke of Alua being in Amsterdam after this defeat, was not quiet in mind,
fearing a mutiny of the people, and the rather, for that he had attempted (but
failed) to bring in a garrison of Dom Frederic his son secretly out of the
town, and went to Brussels.

The siege of Alcmar being raised, and the duke of Alua and his son seeing
themselves out of hope to take any place by force, he resolved to patience, and
to vanquish them in making the wars long, presuming, that holding the
country in their subjection (which the States could not yet hinder) they
should weary the towns, and in the mean time they might practice some
intelligences, or for want of victuals take some place of import. This project
was not without good consideration: for the truth was, that Leyden, one of the
four chief towns of Holland (after the which they gaped more than any other,
the seignior of Noyelle, a gentleman upon the river of Escaut being then
governor) was very ill provided, whereof they wanted no

When as the duke of Alua advanced to besiege Alcmar, he sent Francisco de
Baldes, master of the camp, with his Tertio of the league, five cornets of
horsemen, and some twelve companies of Wallons out of sundry regiments,
commanding him to march in the bowels of Holland, and relieve his troops in
the rich villages, where he should think best, betwixt Leyden, Delft, and the
sea coast, as far as the river of Meuse and the town of Brill, charging him
not to attempt any thing without his priuitie and consent, unless it were upon
very sure intelligence with some of the towns.

Baldes being entered into the rich village of the Haghe, he found it capable to
lodge double his troops all in houses, and most in beds. Having lodged there
some few days, he caused all the villages to bring him in such necessaries as
he pleased: then he advanced some of his companies to a village called
Risricke, in the way toward Leyden from Delft, the which he entrenched and
barricadoed, and he entrenched his first guards at the bridge, in the mid way
betwixt the Haghe and Delft, whereas the troops on both sides had many a hot
skirmish, both near unto their guards, and sometimes hard at the ports of
Delft. Colonel Morgan his regiment, and diverse companies of Frenchmen, were
lodged in the villages betwixt Delft and Rotterdam, very safely from the
enemy, by reason that both these towns covered them both behind and before,
and great ditches on either side, which were

These troops were always ready to thrust into Delft, Rotterdam, Delfts
haven, or Maeslandt Sluice, where the enemy should first attempt. In Leyden was
Monsieur de Lorges, son to that brave earl of Montgomerie, with a goodly
French regiment, and other companies of Scots, and of the countrymen and
bourgers, well armed. In Delft was captain Chester, with two hundred
Englishmen, whom afterward the prince made colonel of those troops, by reason
of some spleen against colonel Morgan. There were also in it three fair
companies of Frenchmen, besides the bourgers, who were all well armed. In
Rotterdam were some companies of Scots, and of the countrymen, besides the
bourgers. At Delfts haven was Monsieur de Maysonfleur, with sundry bands both
of Monsieur de S. Aldegonde and Terlon, with some twelve hundred, most of them
countrymen, with many pesants and bourgers.

The garrisons wrought continually to fortify these two last mentioned, so as
both were Monsieur de Poyet, for the better assurance of Leyden, being the
nearest place invested by the enemy, thrust himself into it. Baldes had made
diverse practices to have surprised Leyden and Delft by treachery, but they
succeeded not. After which fruitless attempts he advertised the duke of Alua
of his affairs, and that no good could be done without an army, and
artillery: whereupon he requested more troops, or leave to retire.

The duke of Alua remembering his disgrace at Alcmar, fearing his army should
mutiny, if he should ouer-charge them with travel, having no treasure to
content them, he resolved and determined to retire unto Brussels: but before
his departure, he sent Julian Romero, Baldes. He also commanded Monsieur de
Capres to procure his regiment of Wallons to do the like, and the regiment of
Frousberg, a Germane. All which colonels had charge to procure them to march
willingly, and not to force them at all. He also commanded Mendosa, general
of the Horse, to send six of the best cornets with them.

These regiments and horsemen being well content to enter into Holland, and
sworn to obey their colonels in all services, the duke of Alua gave the chief
command unto Julian, and next unto him Baldes, making Verdugo governor of
Harlem, with his regiment Frousberg his regiment. Julian and his succors
being arrived, and having conferred with Baldes, they resolved and determined
to attempt Maeslandt Sluice; whither they marched from the Haghe with six
pieces of battery, carrying with them (in wagons) skutes and small boats to
make bridges over ditches, with all other things necessary for their
enterprise: so as they took the great ditch on both sides of the Sluice, having
mounted their artillery on both sides of the dike, they dismounted theirs
within the town, which did beat the dike: Then turning their Ordnance toward
the river of Meuse (which is above a league broad in that place) they beat away
such vessels as the defendants had ankering before their fort. Monsieur de
Terlon being admiral and governor of Briel: seeing their success, Aldegonde
and his garrison. So as having no means to avoid the danger they were in, nor
any hope of succors, the soldiers compounded for their fort, delivering and
yielding Maesland sluice yielded.
up unto the enemy their governor S. Aldegonde, with others, with their
ensigns and arms.

Thus this fort was lost, partly, by reason, that the States ships of war
durst not adventure nor hazard to dismount the enemies artillery, the which
they might have easily done, if they had showed their accustomed valor and
courage therein: but the especial reason was; for that they of the fort did
not cut the dike on both sides of the fort,

Whilst that the Spaniards did wander freely in the good villages of Holland,
the Zeelanders slept not: for the five and twentieth of October captain Poyet,
lieutenant unto the (...).
prince, departed from Flessingue, with the garrison of the town, the company
of Grenu, one of high Dutch, and some forty French, and marching all night
along the dike of Ramekin, they went and made a trench within canon shot of
Middlebourg, to keep in the Spaniard, that he should not hinder him from
making of a fort at the head of the channel of Middlebourg, which they held to
be fit, to cut off the passage for the victualling; wherein they labored with
such diligence, as this fort was in defense, before their enemies Poyet left
his Frenchmen to guard the said trench, with the Wallons of captain Barnard,
Eloy, and Grenu, putting into the fort which the Spaniards had on the side of
Arnemuyden, some other Wallons and Flemings.

The same night Mondragon being advertised of the coming of the Zeelanders,
sent Mondragon advertised by them that the Protestants had entrenched
themselves there, sent forth by the break of day three companies of the
brauest men of all his regiment, who like desperate men came to assail them
that guarded this trench, and by reason of a thick foggie mist, they approached
so near, as they were ready to come to handie blows: but the Spaniards
seeing captain Failli and some four or five others overthrown, began to
faint, and to retire. Those that were in the trench were resolute, and had
promised one another, rather to die in the place than to abandon it, although
they were not above fourscore men, and that they saw the high Dutch and
Flemings which were behind them upon the head, begin to fly. There was among
them thirty Frenchmen, the

At this assault there was hurt captain Ambrose le Duke, sargeant mayor, the
Seignior of Ferriere, a French gentleman, with seven or eight other soldiers,
and four of the Protestants side slain: and of the Spaniards, two captains,
Failli and Raphael, three lieutenants, three Sargeants, five Corporals, ten
or twelve Soldiers, and about fifty were hurt.

In the mean time they fortified the long head of the channel at Middlebourg,
on Ramekins side, every one judging, that it might serve much to hinder the
victualling of the said town, if the Spaniards did attempt to pass that way:
but the season was so rainie and so tempestuous, as the soldiers showing
themselves impatient, as well in their work, as by reason

The sixth of November, the army of Antuerpe began again to set sail toward
Zeeland, and having stayed some time in the river near unto Lillo, the
Spaniard caused his small boats to pass by Berghen upon Soom, to get that way
to Arnemuyden: the which they might easily have done, having chased away those
that guarded the passage on that side, if the tide had not failed them, so as
they were forced to cast anchor, and so the Flessinguers which attended them on
the other side, had leisure, to come and meet them, the tide serving them. Then
the Spaniards seeing the Zeelanders have toward them, being resolute to charge
them,

In this flight the Spaniard lost one of his ships, the which being run on
ground, was taken by them of Zeeland, with two others; who not knowing the
Zeelanders, nor what to do, fell among the midst of the Protestants. The
Spaniards being retired to Berghen, most of the Protestants ships came about
Romerswael, where they besieged about a hundred soldiers which the duke of
Alua had sent thither with artillery, to stop the navigations betwixt Holland
and Zeeland; which soldiers compounded with them the next day, to disloge with
their lives and, arms saved.

The next night there was a Sargeant of a band taken, who brought store of
powder and Romerswael yielded to the Zeelanders.
ordnance, and five hoyes laden with munition for Middlebourg. And for that the
Zeelanders received advertisement, That the duke of Alua would send greater
forces thither than before, they were forced to set fire on it.

In the mean time the Spaniard sought all means to pass his victuals to
Middlebourg, and The prince of Oranges coming into Zeeland.
knowing that the ships of Zeeland were in guard before Berghen, the eight of
December there passed in the night from Ter Goes two small hoyes carrying 436
sackes of corn; who answering the Zeelanders that were at the passage, That
they came from Romerswael, and that they went to Flessingue (of whence they
said they were) passed without any difficulty: it could not be known whether
it were willingly done, or that they did let them thus slip by simplicity.

The thirtieth of December the prince of Orange arrived at Flessingue, where
he was received with great joy of the inhabitants; whose coming gave unto
them such courage, as suddenly they armed out many small barks, to keep guard
round about the

The duke of Alua seeing by the bad success of the siege of Alcmar, by the
taking of Cont Bossu his admiral, by the yielding up of Ramekins, the chief
fort of Zeeland, and the small hope and likelihood to succor Middlebourg,
being much distressed by the Protestants of Zeeland, and by the loss of two or
three armies at sea, which he had sent, the one under the Seignior of Blicqui,
the other under the Seignior of Beauvoir, that in the end his affairs would
not prove successful, knowing also, that for his cruelties he was not
beloved: he labored in Spain (by the means of Cardinal Granuelle) to be
called home, and discharged Dom Frederic, of whom they said, Egregiam vero
landem and spolia The duke of Alua's retreat.
ampla refertis, tuque puer que tuus, and memorabile nomen. His Secretary
Armenteros and his chief counselor John de Vergas, president of the counsel
of Troubles, followed them, who had not forgotten to enrich themselves with the
ruin of the poor inhabitants of the country, which the duke left wonderfully
estranged for the king his master, and work provided for Dom Lewis of
Riquesens, commander of Castile, his successor in the government, who arrived
at Brussels the seventeenth of November, to be instructed in those affairs by
the duke, before he retired out of the country, and the designs which he had
proiected, as well for the siege of Leyden, as for the victualling of
Middlebourg, and the recovery of Zeeland. Behold how the Netherlands had
successively two strange governors, against the rights, liberties,

Being come to the end of the duke of Alua his government, I think it not
amiss (to satisfy What the duke of Alua's enemies write of him.
the mind of the reader, that may be desirous to know more particularities
touching him) to make a brief rehearsal of the said dukes actions,
governments, and cruelties, the which are set down in writing by his
adversaries.

First, they charge him, That he had counseled the king to use all
extremities in all causes concerning the Netherlands, and was always the head
of such as were worst affected unto those provinces.

That he was the only means and nourishing of the disliking and contention
between Dom Charles prince of Spain, and Dom John de Austria, and between
others and him, by his bad reports. And that having gotten the charge and
government of the Netherlands, that he had procured his instructions and
commission to be made according to his own will and desire, conformable to the
ancient hatred that he had conceived against that country; adding thereunto,
That he had been received more peaceably and friendly into the Netherlands,
than he hoped or desired, which was only in regard of the honor and duty they
owe unto their natural prince, and upon the promise made by the regent, the
duchess of Parma, who would have seen all things past forgiven and forgotten,
for that every one had done his best endeavor, to the uttermost of his power,
for his Majesty's service, and the peace of the land. But the duke being come,
he presently declared, That the privileges and

They say further, That his cruelties were so unnatural and ungodly, that
neither Nero, Pharaoh, Herod, nor any Heathen tyrant, could ever have devised
or invented greater. That he had brought the king into a contempt and great
dislike of the Netherlands, although they were his patrimoniall inheritance,
contrary to the admonition and counsel of Aristotle Alexander the Great, That
to the Grecians he should show himself a father, and as unto a free Nation;
but to the conquered Barbarians and strangers, as a lord and commander.

That he had caused judgment to be given, and execution to be done upon
noble men and great personages, by strangers, defamed persons, and men of base
condition and Anthony Vtenhowe a gentleman, to a stake with a chain,
compassing him about with a great fire, but not touching him, for the Spaniards
to pass the time withal, turning him round about like a poor beast: who was
forced to live in that great pain and extremity, roasting before the fire, so
long, until that the halberdiers themselves, having compassion of him, thrust
him through, contrary to the will and intent both of the duke and Spanish
priests.

That he had moved the king to help himself by four tyrannical means:
First, to disarme the country, not suffering the inhabitants to exercise
arms, but to employ strangers in his wars. Secondly, to make and keep them
poor by oppressions, and laying great taxes upon them. Thirdly, by making of
castles and citadels (which some call the dens and nests of tyrants) to
bridle them. And further by feeding and nourishing of division among his
subjects for religion.

They object, That he had withholden the king for so many years (in so great
dangers) from coming personally into the countries of the Netherlands, as the
emperor his father did, only for the town of Gand.

That he had incensed the king so much against the Netherlands as he would not
vouchsafe Granuelle into Spain.

That he had contemned the general estates of the Netherlands, persecuting,
judging, condemning, and executing the nobility and gentlemen thereof, as
traitors to their country, having only presented an humble petition to the
Duchess of Parma, being Regent, to crave an assembly of the general estates.

That he was not content to have destroyed and brought so many noble men,
gentle men, rich and poor people unto their ends, and to have banished and
driven so many out of the country but had so hardly and badly used those that
remained in the country, as they

That his cruelty appeared by his ransacking, spoiling, ruining, expelling,
destroying, imprisoning, chaining, banishing, and confiscating of men's goods,
burning, hanging, beheading, breaking upon wheels, hanging men alive by the
feet, and with most horrible and incredible tormenting, racking, and murdering
of so many noble and unnoble, rich and poor, young and old, widows and
orphans, men, women, and young maids of all estates and conditions: So as he
bragged sitting at meat, That he, having done the best he other tyrannous
means, had murdered and miserably consumed, and brought unto their Vergas,
the president of his bloody counsel (that went with him into Spain)
complained, and said, That Nimia misericordia (too much mercy) spoiled the
Netherlands. Which his too much mercy was such, that a man could hardly keep
and preserve his own goods for his and his soldiers covetousness, his wife
or daughter from their lechery, and his life from their bloud-thirstinesse:
nobility, riches, honesty, nor yet any forepassed merit or service, could
neither help nor avail any man, if he were once fallen into hatred and
dislike of him.

That he used to help himself to effect his will by suborning of false
witnesses, as it appeared at Dornicke, at the death of Martin Hutten, who was
the kings officer, executed for

That without respect of any jurisdictions and ordinary customs of the
country, he took all authority from the judges, both of criminal and civil
causes, which in any sort might concern the confiscations, used and executed
by his bloody counsel, whereby neither spiritual nor temporal persons,
widows, nor orphans, poor hospitals, lazer houses, orphans houses, nor
spiritual hospitals, that had just and due pentions, and yearly rents,
coming, proceeding, and to be yearly paid unto them, out of the revenues of
the banished and executed persons goods, could be paid. But he to the contrary
drew it all into his own hands, without giving any charge to see the said
rents paid out of the confiscated goods and lands once registered: The list
whereof he sent unto the king, amounting as he set it down, to about,

That the unreasonable and unspeakable exactions and taxes one following the
other (besides the confiscations aforesaid) exacted and laid upon the poor
people, were exceeding great, as the hundredth pen^e granted unto him for six
years, which amounted unto many millions of guldernes; the twentieth penie,
and also the tenth penie of all goods, moouable and vnmoouable, yea and of all
wares bought and sold he asked, and sought by all the means he could to
execute the same (against the advice of all the estates and counsels of the
country) not only proceeding of the clear gains of the things sold, but the
tenth and twentieth penie of the capital and principal value of all things
sold: so as they should have driven all

That he caused the English merchants goods that did traffic in Antuerpe
(upon hatred of religion, and thinking thereby to drive them from thence)
amounting to seven hundred and Lutherans in the towns within the heart of the
country: which he used not against

In his time in Brussels there was above one hundred and thirty bourgers
murdered, and cruelly brought unto their ends by the Spaniards. In Gand in a
certain uproar made by the Spaniards, there was sixty or seventy bourgers at
one time, and after that an innumerable number of men and women slain and
murdered. In Ypre likewise at the execution of a preacher, there was two and
twenty bourgers shot through and killed, besides those that were hurt. In
Dornicke at a certain uproar between them of the castle, and the towns
garrison, Spania, Spania, and therewith wilfully killed fifteen bourgers: And
there likewise they forcibly entered into the widow Pottiers house, in the day
time, and killed her daughter, and her cousin, thinking to have found great
store of money in her house, for the which there was no other execution done
upon the offenders, but only, they that had done the deed were sent away from
thence, and put into another garrison.

In Flessingue was there not a bill found about Pacieco (that was kept prisoner
by them) wherein was the names of an innumerable number of men, both gentlemen
and others of the chiefest bourgers, which by the dukes commandment should
have been murdered in the year 1572, in diverse towns, thereby to compel
them to yield to the tenth penie? What Dom Fredericks name, is manifestly
known to every man, where he caused all the soldiers (not sparing their
young boys and pages) to be executed, suffering their dead bodies stark
naked to lie a whole day and a night upon the scaffolds, and in the market
place, to the great shame and fear of the women and maids: and some of them
that had delivered the town unto him, he determined to send them into Spain,
to be gally slaves: and those that lay in the Fuyck by Harlem, he suffered
them to die for hunger, saying, That he promised them their lives, but not to
give them meat. The good bourgers he compelled to be pioners before the town
of Alcmar, that so he might bring them unto their ends.

There is no honest nor godly Christian, but abhors and is ashamed to do
any injury. unto the bodies of the dead, and the burial of the dead is
thought a fit and an honorable thing amongst the Heathens and Barbarians: but
the duke of Alua caused diverse dead bodies (to spite both God and man) after
they had been buried and layne certain days in the ground, to be dug up
again, and to be drawn under the gallows, and there to be hanged or burnt,
alleging that they died without receiving the Sacrament, or being confessed: but
in truth it was done only, that according to his proclamation he might
confiscat their goods.

The state of marriage (the only foundation of all society in every place and
town, and the bond of love and peace, the right ground of all good life and
conversation amongst bestow the rich women upon his soldiers for a prize: To
conclude, he did openly break

He likewise profaned the holy Sacrament of Baptism, causing the children
that had been openly and publicly baptized, in the name of the Father, the
Son, and the holy Ghost, to be Baptized again, because they had been
Baptized (as he said) by heretics, which was against the decrees of Counsels,
and all the laws both of God and man.

To show his extreme pride and high mind, in the castle of Antuerp he caused
his image to be made and erected of brass (like Nabuchadnezer) placing under
his feet the nobility and states of the countries of the Netherlands: and at
Antuerpe, in the market place (where he published a pardon) he caused a
princely throne to be erected, which is used to be set up, only therewith to
honor princes and kings, which he of himself caused to be set

This is that, wherewith the countries of the Netherlands, both of the one and
the other religion do charge him.

The duke being safely arrived in Spain, was well esteemed and accounted of by
the king, but not of the common people, which appeared when as he was committed
to prison by Bulloa, his own provost in times past, in the Low countries, for
the marriage of his son Dom Frederic, whereat the people generally rejoiced:
the cause was, for that his son Dom Frederic that lay prisoner in
Tordesilias, because he would not marie one of the queens maids of honor,
was by him counseled and provoked to get out of prison, and to be married to
Alua Maria de Toledo, daughter to Dom Garcia de Toledo, who being married,
returned into prison again. After that he was always one of the principal of
the kings privy counsel (with one Dom John Idiaco, a man of his own humor)
and he made him general of his army (...) duke of (...).
in the conquest of Portugal, where nine years after he died upon the
twelfth day of September, in the year of our Lord God 1582, and in the
seventy fourth year of his age.

He was a tall lean man, going very upright, with a long lean visage,
hollow eyes, (...).
stern and four of countenance, having a great and a very proud heart, a man
well experienced in subtle courtly policy, endowed with great gifts of
nature, good understanding, and great experience. He was neither covetous nor
liberal, but very costly, and exceeding Charles the fifth, nor of the king of
Spain his master, although he had served them both for the space of
threescore years. He was an old and well experienced soldier, not only
surpassing all Spaniards, but one that in his time gave place therein to no
man, and a very strict obseruer and keeper of military discipline, when need
required. He was a man of great judgment and understanding to conduct and
lead an army, in regard that for the most part he had used defensive war. He
was courageous and bold enough of his own person, when he adventured
himself: but to come to a battle Charles, and the king of Spain his son,
in their principal wars, as in the countries of Italy, Spain, France,
Hongarie, Germany, the Netherlands, and Africa, complaining that he had not
seen the Turks camp^. He never got less honor and reputation, tha^ Charles
the fifth (his father) often said, That his son was the sowrest, sternest
prince in the world, and that the Netherlands should find him so, and yet the
duke of Alua surpassed him.

This is that which both his friends and foes speak and write of him; although
for mine own part, I delight not in discovering so foul cruelties and
imperfections in a public Governor.

LVDOVICVS REQVESEN. MAGN. COMEN* REG. CAST. R. M. CON. GVB. ETCAP. GENESIS BELL.
DOM LEWIS DE REQVESENS, GREAT Commander of Castile, Governor, Lieutenant, and
Captain general for the King in the Netherlands.
My predecessors course, that me the way had led
I held, and in his government I was established:
Where while I ruled I did the Kings navy behold
Orethrowne and vanquished, and their great pride controld.
My actions to my Prince did little good prooure,
And at my hands the States did none or little hurt endure.
My death (by Spaniards mutiny) to them did guie
A great means to help themselves, and their estates relieve.

The Argument of the tenth book.
THe great Commander by the calling home of the Duke of Alua being entered into
the government of the Netherlands, and continuing the Dukes first course; the
town of Middelbourg being reduced to extreme necessity and famine, he sent a
fleet by sea to succor it, the which he see defeated before his own eyes,
whereof followed the yielding of Middelbourg, the which Colonel Mondragon
delivered up to the Prince of Orange. Cont Lodowic the Princes brother came to
succor the Netherlands with an Army; the Spaniards leaving the seege of Leyden
go to meet him, they defeat him, and he is slain with Cont Henry his Brother
and Duke Christopher. A mutiny of the Spaniards in Antwerp called Fuora
villiacos. The Spaniards after the defeat of Cont Lodouic take their lodging
again before Leyden, which had been long blockt up, there are fair wars
betwixt the Prince and the Commander, who proclaims a general pardon, and
seems to desire a peace. A Petition made there-vpon to the king of Spain. By
the Princes advise the States resolve to drown the country to succor Leyden,
the which they do, and in the end the Town is delivered by the Prince through
the dround Land, after that the Town had endured much misery the Spaniards
being mutined, take Francisco valdes their General prisoner, and fail to
surprise Vtrecht. The Commander making a show to desire peace, resolves to
wa^re, and Oudwater is beseeged and in the end yielded with many other towns
to the Spaniard. The seege of Bomell, which the Spaniard wins deerly. The seege
of Ziricxe. The States consult upon their presernation, and send to demand
succors in England. The death of the great Commander to whom the Council of
state for the King of Spain succeeds in the Government. The Spaniards mutiny,
having failed to surprise Brusselles, they fall upon Alost, they are proclaimed,
all the country is in arms against them. The Council of state is seaz^d on by
the states of Brabant, who write unto the other provinces to join with them to
chase the spaniards out of the Country. The death of the Emperor Maximilian,
the Sack of Antwerp^: The coming of Don John of Austria. All the Provinces of
the Netherlands united at the pacification of Gand, after which the Castle is
beseeged and yielded to the states, with many other towns, the Spaniards
depart out of the Castle of Antwerp, the which is put into the states hands.
Don John is received for Governor, who seeks occasion to renew the war
against the Prince of Orange he goes to Namur, complains of the states, they
sue unto him, he discouers himself, and they grow Jealous of him. Many
Castles razed in the Netherlands, as harbors for Spanish tirants. Don John
proclaimed an ennemy to the country. The Archduke Mathias (the Emperors
Brother) called for Governor. The states, and Don John in arms. Jealousy
disperceth the chief of the states, whereby their army was defeated by Don
John, who recovered many towns: the states raise a new army and calin the
Duke of Aniou to succor them. Duke Casimire comes also, but to small purpose.
Arthois and Henault begin to fall from the general union of the Netherlands:
troubles in Arras, the death of Don John of Austria.

DOn Lewis of Requesens being entered into the government of the Netherlands, by
the Duke of Aluas retreat, thought to succor Middelbourg, the which endured
much poverty and misery, as well by famine as otherwise; besides a great number
of Bourgers retiring themselves by boat were daily taken, and many which came
flying to Flessingue and la Vere, only to have a mouthfull of bread, where
after they had fed them, they sent them back: who not suffered to enter into
Middelbourg, for that they head fled out of it died in the fields (or at the
Town gates) many soldiars coming to yield themselves through famine were
entertained, for that they had need of them. There were letters of the 10. of
January, 1574. written in cipher by Mondragon surprised; Those of Middelbourg
in great extremity.
by the which he did advertise him that he could not hold out above the 15. or
16. of the month; there were others intercepted written upon the back of a
Pasport, the which was red holding it before the fire, by the which he
entreated the great Commander to advertise him speedely, if he had any hope to
succor him. The 14. day of the month they of Middelbourg ruined the fort which
they had without the town toward Flessingue, for that many soldiars which
were put there in guard fled to the Protestants. The 19. of the month Hans Cocq
a mariner passed with a bark from Antwerp to Middelbourg, bringing letters
from Don Lewis, containing hope of succors which made the souldiars beseeged
resolve, to attend yet some days, or else they had been ready to parle. The
next day Cocq returned to Don Lewis, to inform him into what extremity the
Towns of Middelbourg and Arnemuyden were brought. And that day a ship coming
from Danswic meaning to go to Scluse, having the wind contrary Lewis sent
Instructions to Iulien Don Lewis his (...).
Romero, what he should do in the Conduct of his army for the vitteling of
M^ddelbourg, the which fell into the Zeelanders hands. The tenor whereof was as
follows, An Instruction of that which Julian Romero the Master of the camp
is to do with the Sanchio d' Auila shall make, who parts this day from the
port of Antwerp with his Army, and shall go on without stopping of any tide,
until he descouers the I Will of Walchren. And the other army which goes under
the command of the Master of the camp must do the like that both the armies
showing themselves an one instant to the ennemies, they may the more easily
effect that which they desire, and concur to that end with the said
Chastelaine. That which they pretend cheefely to effect with this army: is, to
put all the boats laden with vittells into Middelbourg, that no one may
miscary, and in these boats Mondragons Regiment. And we believe that for the
due execution thereof, the said master of ^he camp has already given
couenient order, appointing a place whether the said boats landed with vittells
should go, in respect of the other ships of the army; and that he has already
named the person that shall have special charge of those barks laden with
vittells, and has appointed him what to do, and in what sort he should put
them into Middelbourg. It is certainly believed, that the enemy hearing of the
good order of this army, will not attend them, and that they shall not fight,
especially if they see them sail with that care and circumspection that is
requisite. But if it happened otherwise, and that they should oppose their army
to ours, to stop the passage of sucours, in that case they must fight, and
strive to defeat them, and to open the passage to put in the said succors,
which done it shall be at Sanchio d' Auila, and to treat together what is to be
done, as well for the poursuing of the ennemies army and the whole defeating
thereof, as for the attempting of any other enterprise upon the I Will of
Walchren, or in that of Zirecxe, seeing they have bin advertised of that which
may be done upon the one and the other, and that all have good knowledge
thereof. The succors being set down, there is no certain rule can be given,
for that which is to be done, for that all does then depend upon the estate
wherein they shall be found: wherefore it is referred wholly to them to treat
and resolve with Sanchio d' Auila, who has great knowledge and experience in
those quarters, GOD giving Isidore Pachieco, that he may show what diligence
he can therein: And the like shall be done for the corn that is at Scluse,
the which being put by the Governor of the place into boats, shall be also
conducted unto Middelbourg. There shall be also given unto Romero with this
present Instruction, a letter which I writ unto Collonell Mondragon, that after
the said succors shall be sent unto him; succors given, the which will be
presently known throughout all the Islands of Zeland, Sanchio d' Auila may
understand what order is given unto the master of the camp, the like
instruction has bin sent unto him, to execute for his part that which does
concern him, as well in sailing with the army which he conducts, omitting not
any one point, and discovering himself Don Lewis of Requesens: and underneath,
Domingo Camillo.

The 24. of January parted from Antwerp that great sea-fleet which the
commander had prepared from his first arrival for the victualing of
Middelbourg, which he assured himself to do in despite of all the forces of
Zeland, and of all other Protestants, whom he would see fight with his own
eyes. At the departure of this Armadoe, one of the Giles Hofman of Antwerp, did
run on ground and was lost: in an other ship a piece breaking 30. men were
slain, and the ship lost. The same day two Sea-captaines of Flessingue, men of
great experience, lying at anchor before Arnemuyden, went forth to refresh
themselves at Flessingue; and coming upon the ^ike, for that the wind and
tide was against them, they were taken by the garrison of Arnemuyden, one of
them having first thrust one of the soldiers through with his sword that took
them. During all this time, from the last of October 1573. the town of Leyden
was besieged a far of by the Spaniards, of whom the besieged by their sallies
and skirmishes The town of Leyden besieged.
did some times get; for they were not so straightly besieged, but they might
issue forth and feed their cattle in the meadows about the town: the
Spaniard endeavoring only (seeing that by assault they could not gain much)
to famish them in Brave sallies made by the besieged of Leyd^n.
way to the Hage, along the river, where they met with a conuoy of ten Lasts of
Beer, 20000. loaves (every one waighing eight pounds) and a great quantity of
Butter and Cheese, the which came from Amsterdam, and was going to the Hage,
where they had likewise some Spanish prisoners: this was a great relief and
refreshing to the besieged, and did greatly disapoint the Spaniards, dispersed
betwixt Delf, Rotterdam, Goude and Mondragon (after the yielding up of the
town of Middelbourg) and of Sanchio d' Auila, who were gone to encounter the
army which Cont Lodouic of Nassau brother to the Prince of Orange brought to
succor the Hollanders: but let us return to the fleet of Antwerp. The 27. of
January six small Barks appeared about Ter-Neuse, betwixt the The small
Barks of the Spaniards give an alarm to the Zelanders
Hont and the Dullard, so as the Zelanders thinking that all the fleet would
follow, made themselves ready to receive them. But they retired the same day,
and were not seen until the next day, appearing only to discover the
countenance of the Protestants, the which of the Prince, not caring to prepare
themselves, until they see the enemy, the which they Honte and aproached within
a league of Flessingue. The Protestants of Zeland seeing them come made toward
them, and after the spending of some great shot, forced the^ to retire, without
loss of either side. And the same day about two of the clock in the
afternoon, the signior of Boysot Admiral of the Protestants, went with his
army to assail the Spaniards at Romerswael, the co^bate continued about two
houers with such fury of their great shot, as it seemed that heaven and earth
should A victory of the Protestants.
soldiars and mariners that were found in them, were either slain or cast
into the sea, to the number of 6. or 700. men. The Zeelanders took 30. goodly
brass pieces, and many of Iron. The other Spanish fleet presented themselves
the same day before Flessingue, but the tide failing them and the wind being
contrary, after that they had skirmished a little with the Zeelanders, they
retired and cast anchor. Sanchio d' Auila commanded this fleet, and Julian
Romero the other that was defeated before Berghen nere to Romerswael. All that
had any charge in the Protestants Admiral were hurt with the small shot or with
the splinters that were made by the enemies cano^: for that the signior of
Boyset had forbidden The signior of Boysot hurt.
and so lost an eye: captain Eloys ancient having received many wounds, died
the next day in Flessingue. Captain Schot with the wodden-leg, lost an arm,
so did captain Valentin. The reason why the Zelanders went first to charge the
enemy, was: for that the Admiral had received letters from the Prince of
Orange, comanding him to send 4. ships of war The Commander a spectator of his
men's overthrow.
which he promised to himself, he see his men so miserably entreated, that some
were brought back to Antwerp without heads, and some without arms and legs.
His greatest comfort was to exclame and curse, sometimes blaming one, sometimes
an other. To conclude Gabriel Cite Attorney general of Arthois had both his
thighs carried away, whereof he died soon after. Iulien Romero saved himself
in a boat, some say by swimming. As for the army Iulien Romero sau^s himself,
and d' Auila flies, with his troops.
which Sanchio d' Auila commanded, lying at Anchor before Flessingue, he seeing
ten ships come from the victorious fleet of the Protestants (which had fought
before Berghen, and join with the other ships of Zeeland) he presently
wayed Anchor and fled toward Antwerp. They of Middelbourg on the 30. of
January, in the morning, hung a sail out of their steeple, which continued
there 2. hours: and the 3. of february captain Strenchant went out of the
town, carrying letters of credit to the Co^mander, with instructions to hasten
the Spanish fleet, to let him understand how long they could yet hold Captain
Strenchant taken.
out, and what hope of succors there were. But that night he was taken, with 4
mariners and a boy, and led to the Prince: seeing themselves cast upon the
sand, and the Zelanders approach, captain* Strenchant tied his letters to a
piece of lead, and cast them into the sea: but they that took him perceiving
it, stayed till the sea was spent, and then found the The instruction of
Strenchant, to inform the great Commanders excellency of 4 points. Afire
shall be made every night upon the tower of Middelbourg, from 10. of the clock
unto a 11. signifying that Middelbourg and Arnemuyden, hold yet for his
Majesty, the which shall begin on Monday next, and in case they shall desist
from doing it, it shall not be then needful to send any army to succor them,
but to recover the Island. The 2. point is the weakness of the soldiers, whereof
there dies every day above 20. and the small hope the have, seeing the army
returned: saying they had rather be cut in pieces at some exploite then to eat
bread made of Linseed, for that they hold themselves assured to die after it,
and yet they have not sufficient of that but for ten or twelve days. They 3.
was, that they Iulien Romero. At the end of the said instruction were written
the signs that should be made in the I Will of Ter-goes, as soon as the army and
the succors should be out of Antwerp, and as it did advance or retire. So that
the collonell Mondragon, governor of Middelbourg and all the Spaniards,
promised unto themselves assured succors and a certain victory, being ignorant
of all that had past. The 5. of February they of Flessingue gave aduertisment
to their ships of war, that were in guard about the Island of Walchren, that
colonel Mondragon was resolved to abandon the town and to save himself, to
the end they should keep good guard, promising two hundred crowns to any one
that could take and bring the Mondragon prisoner, and a hundred crowns to him
that should bring Hans-Cocq. The thirteen of the month captain Strenchant who
had been taken the third day after that he had bin carried toward Antwerp, to
show him that the Spanish fleet was Strenchant exchanged for ^uert and M^.
retired, he was sent home, in exchange of Euert and Marin, two sea captains
taken by them of Arnemuyden, as we have said. And the said Strenchant had
charge to say to the^ of Middelbourg, that the Prince gave them yet 4. days
respight to determine of their co^potision 2. days after the Prince received
letters from Mondragon, by the which he declared what captain Strenchant had
delivered unto the captains of his regiment, by the Princes commandment: and
that they were resolved to demand a pasport of him, for one that Mondragon would
send to the great Co^mander, touching the yelding up of the town. Strenchant,
yet for the explanatio^ of his mind, he would send the next day to Rammekins,
if he might be advertised that night that he would send any of his part, without
any longer delay, for that the Prince was pressed to depart for some urgent
occasions, which Mondragon should afterward understand: the same day at night
the Prince received an answer from Mondragon, Deputies of either part at
Rammeken to mak^ a composition f^r Middelbourg.
who demanded a safe conduit for them that he should send, who should
understand the Mondragon: who having had his advice and others therein, should
return to Rammeken, with the deputies of the town of Middelbourg. On the 17.
day the Prince sent him a pasport for 8. or 10. persons, aduertising him that
his deputies should be at Rammeken by noone to acquaint them with his
intention. And to prevent all inco^ueniences for Boisot, Ianuis and van Dorp,
Governors of Flessingue Lauere, and Ziriczee, and to the Seignior Bonchard, to
authorize them in their charges of Deputies, with instruction of the articles
which they should propou^d. And so they parted toward Rammeke^ before noone,
where they met with some sent from the spaniards, and the town of Middelbourg,
where after two days parle, they concluded upon the articles which follow. As
Christopher of Mondragon Knight, Seignior of Remerchicourt, and Colonel of
aregime^t A composition for Middelbourg.
of Wallons, being at this present within the towns of Middelbourg and
Arnemuyden, Strenchant had made unto him coming out of prison, required by his
letters of the 16. of this present month, of the high and mighty Prince of
Orange Earl of Nassau, to send certain deputies to the castle of Rameken to
treat with the^ of his party, touching the yielding up of those Towns.
Whereunto his Excellency yielding, his deputies had propounded a certain
capitulation to them that had been sent by the said Seignior Mondragon, by
means whereof their yielding was acceptable, whereof report being made of
either part, and the conditions debated betwixt the Deputies, in the end they
have concluded according to their comissions and authority, as follows.
First that the said Seignior of Mondragon, abandoning The conditions.
the towns of Middelbourg and Arnemuyden, without any demolition or defacing
Mondragon shall promise upon his faith, to yield himself into his Excellencies
hands, if within two months next ensuing, he shall not cause to be delivered
out of prison, and sent safely into Holland or Zeeland, to some place that is
under his Excellencies command, Phillip of Marnix Seignior of Mont S. Aldegond,
Captain Jacob Symonsz: An Italien prisoner at the Hage called Cittadelle, the
Lieutenant of Willeken van Augren and Captain Petani. And if the said
Mondragon refuses to make this promise, then three Captains, as many
Lieutenants, (...), Sargents and Corporalls of his Regiment, shall remain
prisoners of war to his Excellency, until the aboue-named be fully delivered.
All vittelers and gunners shall in like sort depart, with his comissaries,
Manriques, Ioan-Lopez and James padilla, with their servants, books and
baggage, and so shall all Priests and Monks do, with their ornaments only. His
Excellency shall give order that departing out of the Island with their goods,
they shallbe embarked and transported unto Flanders side with all safety. The
said Deputies promising upon their faith and honor to cause this present treaty
to be ratified and accomplished by the said Mondragon respectively in due
form. And for the better assurance and accomplishment thereof, sufficient
hostages shallbe given of either side. And so it was made and concluded in the
castle of Rammeken the 18. day of February. 1574. signed by the Captains de
Hen, Gilles de Vilain, Anthony of Grenet, Iunius of Ionghe, Charles of Boisot,
Aernt van Dorp, and Francis Bonchard. Then followed: we William by the grace of
God Prince of Orange, Earl of Nassau of the one part etc. and I Christopher of
Mondrago^ Knight, Seignior of Remerchicourt, of Luz, Insanille etc. of the
other part, having seen and red, that which was done, capitulated and
concluded with our consents, in the above recited treaty, ratifying and
confirming it, we have promised and do promise by these presents, in the word
of a Prince and faith of a gentleman, respectively, William of Nassau.
Mondragon. According to this accord, hostages were given of either part, and on
the 22. day Collonell Mondragon and his regiment, leaving the town to the
Prince

In the mean time the rest of the Spaniards were at their ease in Holland,
besieging Cont Lodouic comes to succor the Protestan^s of the Netherlands.
of the town of Leyden, keeping themselves far off from blows, and yet they
did annoy them much, for that nothing could enter but by stealth and with great
danger. The prince of Orange seeking all means to make them dislodge from
thence, caused Cont Lodouic of Nassau his brother to go to horseback, who had
reserved himself since the siege of Mons for some occasion. It is true that
the succor and army which he should bring was generally for the delivery of
Holland and Zeland, and their associates, having bin levied to that end before
the siege of Leyden: but now they marched so fitly, (being accompanied by duke
Christopher son to the Prince elector Palatin, the said Cont Lodouic and Cont
Henry his brother) as the Spaniards had a whot alarm, abandoning The Spaniards
leave Leyden.
Dutch, had joined with that of the Prince of Orange, with whom many came to
join by reason of the happy success in Zeeland, the which they found by
experience in the town of Nymegen. To keep this German army from entering
into the country, the Commander sent Sanchio d'Auila, who came to Maestricht
the 4. of March; being there, Sanchio d'Auila views the Protestants army.
he sent to discover these Noblemens camp, and busied in making a muster and
view of their men, and seeing that their forces increased daily, he would
gladly have given them battle, if he had bin strong enough, but he durst not
do it, until the coming of Collonell Mondragon with the rest of his regiment,
being newly governor of Middlebourg. Mondragon ioynes with Auila.
These Noblemen hearing that the Spaniards were daily fortified, raised their
camp, and went to lodge by Faulquemont. Sanchio d'Auila followed them, which
made the Earl to draw most of his army into the town; and seeing that he
should hardly pass the river of Meuse there he marched away, making show as if
he would retire with his forces into Germany: d'Auila (doubting that the Earl
would seek some other passage) did also rise (his troops with those of
Mondragon being about five thousand) and retired, setting good gards along the
river of Meuse: and at that time he was advertised that they of Nymegen had
intelligence with those Noblemen, and that they would yield unto Cont Lodouic,
and so get a passage there: for the preventing whereof d'Auila sent a garrison
Mockem, a commodious place: d'Auila seeing that he could easily charge them,
marched with all speed toward Grave a town of Brabant, where having made a
bridge upon Boats, he past the Meuse and with all his forces went to charge
them. The two armies incountred upon the heath of Mockem (which they call
Mocker Heyde). The Protestants Landtsknechts, when they should fight, began
(according to their cursed custom) to cry ghelt, ghelt, and refused to fight:
yet these Noblemen seeing themselves pressed by the The defeat and death of Cont
Lodouic of Nassau.
Spaniards, were forced to make it good; but in the end all their resistance
prevailed nothing, but being abandoned by their greatest forces, they were
quite defeated, and all there slain, where there died above 2000. of their
men, 21. Ensigns, and some guidons

The Spaniards having gotten this honorable victory at Monckerheyd by
vrinnenghen, Sancio D'auilla (if they won that victory) promised to give the^,
but no money being ready, they began to mutine, and drove their captains from
them, and rent their ensigns, resolving altogether to go to Antwerp, whereof
Frederick Perenot, Baron of Champigni, Governor of Antwerp, being advertised,
upon the 19. of April, began to make provision to defend the town, and having
there 4. companies of Wallons of his own regiment, 24. companies of duchmen,
in whom there was no great trust to be reposed, for that they seemed to
pretend to have many months pay due unto them, he caused the harguebusiers of
the town to be armed, aduertising the great Commander thereof, being then at
Brussels, desiring aid for the defense of the town, if they in the Castle
should let the mutinous spaniards enter into Sancio D'auilla the captain of
the Castle seemed to be ill affected against the town. At the first the
great Commander seemed not to believe it, but at the last upon the 24. of
April he came himself to Antwerp, where Champigni gave him council to enter
and to take the Castle into his own custody, saying, that both the service of
the King, and the safety of the town required it. But the Comma^der thought,
by means of that mutiny to force them of Brabant to yeald to contribution, for
that they had seemed to Sancio D'auilla to pacify them with fair words, but
he could not be heard, compelling him, as he said to lead them till they came
hard by the castle of Antwerp, where they arrived the 26. of April, about
eleven The spaniards come to Antwerp the 26. of April.
of the clock at noone, as Champigni was in the Towne-house, to make a motion
in the Comma^ders behalf, for 400000. guilders to be lent him. This coming of
the spaniards before the town being heard, he caused his soldiars to be armed,
and to go toward Champigni presently caused his captains Deuers and stereke
to shoot at 30. or 40. Spaniards Champigni would have beaten the spaniards out
of the town.
that were already come to the hole (which as then lay open between the town
and the castle) wherewith the Governor himself came presently thither: and
finding that they began to shoot, he commanded them to abstain, willing
Champigni himself, with all his wallons and duchmen to leave the place and give
over, thereby to shun an uproar, which by that means might happen in the
town. Which Champigni thought very strange, but for that the Governor general
commanded him so to do, he might not refuse it. In the mean time some
spaniards entered into the ditches, and Chiapini Vitelly: where-vppon Champigni
thought it best for him to retire into the new town, and there to fortify and
in-sconse himself, with the sails of the Kings navy by Sea that as then lay
there, the which he did. The spaniards being entered, put themselves in
battle, in the plain between The spaniards being by the castle, enter
Antwerp where they mutine.
the town and the castle, setting watch at every place that entered into the
same; The commanders willing them not to come any nearer then S. Georges
Churchyard, if they had any thing to say: but they perceiving nothing but
words, and no deeds to Dineros y Wallones fuora, that is, money, and out with
the wallons, mean time the townse-men were in great fear, to be all
murdered and spoiled of their goods, many Burgers flying out of the same. And
for that this was so notable a mutiny, and that many others were made by the
spaniards in the Netherlands. I thought it good to set down this one at large,
for an example of all the rest, that men

The mutinous Spaniards, (being about 3000. strong) finding they could get no
money from the Commander, made no long delay, but presently marching in order
of battle, entered into the town, as far as the meer-bridge with great
noise of drums, shooting of their pieces, and crying out Dineros, Wallones
fuora, fuora Villiacos. That all the town runge thereof, the Governor Mounsire
Champigni (to whom they had the greatest quarrel) had gotten into the new
town, and kept in the Easterlings house, caufing part of his household stuff
to be carried thither, yet they took much thereof from him, breaking down his
house, windoes, doors, and glass, calling him, Ladron, Villiaco, and toward
evening when they began to be hungry, they left the bridge, and went into the
market place, and there seized both of it and of the Towne-house, placing Los
Signores Soldados, that the Governor with his Wallon soldiars, should leave the
town within twenty fourehoures after, upon pain to be driven out by force,
and therewith sent a messenger expressly to advertise the governor thereof, being
in the Easterlings house: but he made answer that he would not do it, but if
the Governor general would command him, he would prepare himself thereunto:
and for that cause upon the 27. of April he sent for all his soldiars,
fortifying all the bridges and entries into the new town, with carts, wagons,
and wool-sacks, holding their ships of war with Hamsted the Vize-admiral, and
his sailors, that sought nothing else, with certain Wallons, but only to
fight, being sufficiently assured of the Burgers aid. In the mean time
Chiapini Vitelli, Mondragon and others, went from the one to the other, to
pacify them, but all in vain, all the Spaniards crying, Wallones fuora, fuora
Villiacos, so that at the last the Co^mander to bring them to some better
pass, commanded Champigni with his Wallons to go out of the town, which he
presently did, and so went to Eeckere^ and Wilnerdouck, whereupon the mutinous
Spaniards placed a guard at every gate, and took the keys from the Magistrates,
still making a great noise and crying about the town, thereby to hasten the
Burgers, to gather and bring in money to pay them, who as A Jesuit preach^ng
in the market place they said they would have money and n^ preaching.
of great estimation amongst them, would have preached unto them in the market
place, to show them of their insolent behavior, and to tell them what a number
of women they had caused to miscarry being with child, whereof he said they
were the murderers. But they asked him if he had any money: and so with noise
of drums, made him hold his peace, and leave his exhortation. Mean time the
richest of the Burgers were sent for to the towne-house, who were rated every
one according to his ability, toward the payment of the soldiars, which done
the Electo was willed to appoint a place for them to muster in, and that the
next day they should be paid. The Comma^der giving them to understand

The 29, of April, they being al sent for to come unto the market place, their
Electo, that they ought to behave themselves honestly and ciuilly. Wherewith
they all cried, that justice should be done upon all such disordered persons,
and that they should pass through the pikes, showing themselves, that they
should choose two deputies out of every company to speak with the Marquis
Chiappini vitelli, and to show their mind unto him by writing, which they did,
saying that they desired to be paid every penny that was behind unpaid unto
them, as well for the dead as for the living. The Marquis Chiappini vitelli
offered them ten months pay in ready money, and five months that they would
make report thereof unto the seignores Soldados, for which cause they were once
again assembled in the market place and then the Electo leaning over the
railes, showed The (...) sp^ch to the mutinous souldiars.
them what the Marquis had offered them, wherewith they made a monsterous
noise, crying out and saying, todo, todo, dineros Y non palabras, that is, all,
all money and no words. The Electo having gotten them to be silent, once again
spoke unto them, and sharply reproving them said, That they were all rebels
unto the King, and that they had all deserved to die. First for that they had
taken Antwerp one of the Kings towns, not as friends, but like enemies,
breaking their walls and fortifications. Secondly, for that heard speak any
more crying todo, todo, todo, contynuing still in that manner until it was
night, and that they were weary with crying, but when night came they began
again to run up and down the streets, like devils, knocking and
thundering at the gates, doors, and windows, and pulling all the bel-ropes of
the houses in pieces, shooting in at the windows, causing great fear, and
offering as much dispight unto the fuora fuora, villiacos, driving and
compelling their companions (that hipocritically seemed not to be of these
disordered company) to do as they did, every one making show as if he were
compelled thereunto by the strongest part of them, that in time to come, one
might not be accounted to be in greater fault then they other, every one
pretending to be constrained thereunto, against his will, and when the saw any
one amongst them whom they suspected to be unwilling to do as they did. They
forced them with blows to call, cry, and speak as they did, and so made it
one general offense.

The 29. of April, the great or common counsel of Antwerp being assembled to
take order about the same, the Commander asked the town 400. thousand
guilders, in ready money, esteemed to cost the Bourgers above six thousand
gilders every day, for they would

The 30. of April, a drum was sounded to gather the soldiars together: where
the Eletto once again began to speak unto them, who leaning over the railes
before the towne-house and taking a letter out of his bosom, (sent unto him by
the soldiars) containing the contents of their demand, with great threatenings:
and withal letting him know, that if he spoke so much in favor of the
townes-men, and not for them, that they Dineros, todo, that is money and all. At
the last the Captain of the Castle Sanchio d'auilla leaning out at the
towne-house window, prayed them to accept the five months pay, in wool,
linen and silk, which they had most need of, at such price as it was sold
within the town in every shop, and the rest in money, whereunto they began
somewhat to hearken, but not all of them, and began to persuade one the other
to consent thereunto, by reason of other words used unto them by Sanchio
d'auilla and their Eletto, and when the Eletto said unto them, That if they
would behave themselves like Spaniards and good subjects to the King, they
ought to accept the offer made Fregose a Spanish Jesuit, stood up upon a chest
by the ship, hard by the towne-house, to preach unto them, showing them their
insolent behavior, and what shame and infamy they had brought upon the name
of the Spaniards, by Julian Romero, who with ten or twelve captains and
officers more being lodged by the Burse in the house of Jacques Hoffenagle, they
went to fetch out of his house to murder them, with great noise and cry,
shooting at the gate: whereupon Julian Romero fearing to be spoiled by them,
fled and hid himself in the top of the house, but at the last their fury
being somewhat past over, they let him ride out of the town without eating,
and all the rest with him, their Ensigne-bearers only staying by them to make
up their accounts, and so they past Sanchio d'Auilla the captain thereof to
leave it, and to deliver them the Keys of the castle, which he refused to
do, saying, that he would dye before he granted thereunto, in regard that
he had sworn to hold and keep the same until he dyed: and amongst them they
did choose Chiappini Vitelli went to the Castle to take order therein, and
being upon the bridge, he called their Eletto to speak with him, and he went
in, leaving the Eletto upon the bridge, where he was suddenly stabbed by an
Ensign bearer called Saluaterra, and his body presently cast into the ditch,
the like also was done unto the Sergeant Mayor, by which means the rest
acknowledging their faults, Chiappini Vitelli came out again, and so the
mutiny in the castle was appeased, for which Saluaterra was forced to fly,
upon whose horse were imbrodered these words Castigador de los Flamingos, that
is, the corrector or punisher of the Flemings.

After that upon the eleventh of May, when the payment of the five months in
Ericke Duke of Brunswicke, that were already to come into the country, as also
for the two or three regiments of Switzers and other Soldiers coming out of
Italy. In some sort threatening them, seeking if he could to breed a division
amongst themselves. But therewith being once again moved, they made rather
worse and greater noise all the night long Franciso de Bobadille amongst them,
whom they used in most vile manner, commanding likewise that Saluaterra who had
slain the Eletto of the Castle should be delivered unto them. And at
midnight they assembled all in the Market place, having first driven one
another out of their lodgings, and there with one common consent, discharged
their first Eletto of his place, as suspected by them, and chose an other, who
at the last had the bastinado for his labor.

Being day, they made an Altar of Chests before the towne-house, where they had
a Maffe song, which done, they all took their oaths to be true and faithful
unto their Eletto, and that they would not be satisfied but with their full
pay; and to The town of Antwerp was forced to pay 400000. gilders to appease
that mutiny, and so it was ended.
be accused of theft, the which was strange, and that no such act was
committed in such a great tumult. After this they were pacified with money, and
otherwise, and at last contented. The Burgers were constrained (besides the
charges they were at in feeding them, all the while they lay in the town,) to
provide four hundred thousand guilders, and the commander the rest: at which
time, upon Whitsonday they being all bravely apparrelled in Silks, Velvet, and
Gold-lace, like great Lords, and chief commanders, they got a general
pardon of the great Commander, for all that had passed, which was assured unto
them at a solemn Mass said in the great church, as also with great feast and
triumph made by them in his honor upon the Mere bridge:

They had caused all the ships of war that were in guard before the town, to
retire, The Zeelanders takes the ships of war of Antwerp.
five, and burnt three: the fifteen were carried in the Commanders sight into
Zeland, whilst that the Spaniards plunged in all delights and voluptuousness,
did dominere in the town of Antwerpe: in which ships the Zeelanders found a
hundred and two pieces of brass ordinance, besides those of iron: the
Commander who was called Hemsted was taken prisoner. After that the Spaniards
were retired from Leyden, to go fight with these three Noblemen at Mocken, the
town was not victualed in the mean time, nor furnished with things necessary,
as it was fit, notwithstanding the good opportunity and means which they had.
But God does sometimes wonders worthy of his greatness, as he would have it
appear in the delivery of this town, by means far Lodouic and in his
army, for the preservation of the country. The Prince had done his endeavor to
have it victualed, and did constantly believe that it had been so The
spaniards return to Leyden.
for a long time: as they that had the charge, and upon whom he relied, did
assure him. But the Spaniards knowing the contrary, returned to their old
lodgings, blocking up the town nearer then before, in building of other new
forts. The which was done under the charge and command of Francisco Valdes a
Spaniard, with the regiments of the holy league, and of Lombardie, some
regiments of Wallons and high Dutch, and 300. horse, being in all about 7000.
men, wherewith all the fortes about Leyden being furnished, The spaniards
about Bomel and Gorrichom.
which they did not, seeing them well furnished of all things necessary to
attend them, as all good towns of war ought to be. The Spaniards holding
this summer well spent, to have with little resistance won Vandrichom and
Lierdam, the first belonging The taking of Vandrichom and Leerdam.
to the Earls of Horn, the which they burnt and destroyed, into the which the
Prince had sent five companies to keep them play, being returned from the
insolences which they had committed at Antwerp. For being come thither,
matters

After these two petty exploits, the Spaniards thinking they should get little
to attempt any good town of war, they did forbear, putting all their hope
in the sea The Spaniards bu^d forts upon the river of M^use.
army, which they attended from Spain. And they began to build two fortes,
one upon either bancke of the river of Meuse, beneath Gorrichom, to stop the
passage of the river, making an accoumpt by one means to bridle four places:
Bomell, (about the which they had left some forces) Buren, Gorrichom and
Louuestein, if they might cut off the passage of the river of Meuse to those
places. And in very truth they made many a shot with their Ordinance, at the
Boats which past and repast too and fro, sometimes killing or hurting some
one, but yet they did not much hinder the Navigations.

The great Commander had then three several desseignes in hand at one instant:
Three diverse desseignes of the Commander.
the one to shut up the river of Meuse, the other to win Leyden by famine,
and the third to get West-Frislandt and Water-landt by force. But his men were
so courteously entertained, as he lost not many less then two thousand men in
that

Some other Spaniards had at the same time a desseine by practice and
intelligence A vain enterprise upon Delfe.
upon the town of Delfe (where-as at that time the Seignior of Poyet, the
Princes A general pardon given by the King in the Netherlands.
from the King, given at Madrill the eight of March, the which at his best
commodity he caused to be proclaimed in the towns of Brusselles and
Antwerpe, Aluaes pardon: yet some trusted unto it and spedde well, yet many
were freed from prison, who if it had bin in the Duke of Aluaes time (according
to his rigor) had lost their lives.

In the mean time Leyden was brought to great extremity, there being no
means left to relieve them, but by some extraordinary and unexpected accident:
so as the Spaniards did assure themselves of the Town: yet knowing that the
Prince was a man who would not omit any thing, that might serve for the
succor and preservation of such a Town, and that he wanted no invention,
practicing the means which had been often used in the time of troubles, both
in France and the Netherlands, not superficies whereof at the first sight is
pleasing) gave it out, that they The spaniards seem to desire peace.
did wonderfully affect and desire it, and that it was the Kings pleasure. For
proof whereof, and to sound the Prince of Oranges mind, they sent upon his
simple pasport, and without hostages, two men that were not very opposite to
the Protestants religion: the one was John of Matenesse Seignior of Riuiere,
and the Advocate Treslon, who obtained this pasport of the Prince, under
color to follow some private business of their own, as they said: but it
was most to confer with some of the States of Holland. They were some time at
Rotterdam, where as the Prince was then also, going up and down with all
liberty, which many did not like of. But the Prince propounded would be a
fatal and deadly war, the which notwithstanding they detested: Bossu, they
resolved ^o send upon good hostages (that is to say of the Signior of Carnesse
and of doctor Iunius governor of la Vere) the Signior of Saint Aldegonde who
they knew to be well beloved of the Prince, giving him (...) on Ferdinando
Launoy Earl of la Roche a high Bourguignon (Governor of Holland in the absence
of Cont Bossu that was prisoner at Horn) and the Signior of Champaigne,
brother to the Cardinal Granuelle, with certain Instructions to treat of a
peace Difficulties upon the order of the treaties of peace.
means to proceed which had been propounded, the which was not likt of by the
great Commander, under color that the Kings authority should be thereby
somewhat blemished, who thought it more fitting that the towns of Holland and
Zeeland should first address themselves unto the king by way of petition, to
the end that the effect of the accord Matenesse and Treslon had had with the
States at Rotterdam, there was a writing given unto them at their retreat by
the States, in form as follows. Upon that which has bin propounded to the
States of Holland and Zeeland, touching the troubles and present war, and for
the quieting thereof by a firm peace, for the good of the country and of his
Majesty's subjects, the States protest that they never intended to take arms
against his majesty. But that in discharge of the bond and duties of their
charge, and to maintain his reputation and dignity, together with the sworn
privileges, rights, laudable customs, and liberty brings with it. So as by
this means a dangerous and prejudicial decay is to be feared,

This answer made by the States did not please them that had sent the signior
of Matenesse and Treslon, the which does well appear by a letter which the
Lord of Cha^paigny writ unto Saint Aldegonde, being, yet with the Prince and
States, dated the 2^. of July: where he says amongst other points, speaking
of this answer (which he confesses to have received) these words following.
But that which (...) letters t^ Sa^ Aldegu^de.
they have brought is far from the present affairs. For neither the title
which they take in this writing can be usurped by them, nor the reasons which
they give for their distraction, do concur with his Majesty's reputation:
notwithstanding that they say, that their intention was to maintain his
greatness, the which has no ground. not commit any thing that might be
demanded of them with reason, and to show that they did seriously demand a
good peace, that might be firm and permanent, they would not show themselves
unwilling to propound their greeuances and demandes by petition, directed unto
the King, the which was delivered to Saint Aldegonde returning to Vtrecht to
prison, who delivered it to the Lord of Champagny, to

To the King.
MOst humbly showing: the Nobles, Knights and towns of Holland and Zeeland.
That they have ever like good and faithful vassalls and subjects, in all
things as well to your Majesty, as to your Predecessors A petition of ^e St^es
of ^lland and (...).
of famous memory, yielded all humble obedience duty and service whenever,
for the preservation of your Majesty's oppression of your majesty's subjects:
Having no other design, but to subject the said

If the writing carried by the signior of Matenesse and Treslon, had not much
pleased them that were dealers about the peace, for the Spaniard; this petition
liked them much less. The which the Lord of Champaigny showed plainly by his
letter This petition more d^slikt then the first.
of the thirteen of August unto Doctor Iunius Governor of La Vere, at his
return Iunius: which letter the Doctor answered, and for that the answer is
succinct, and as were an abridgment of that which was done by way of
discourse, more particularly, I would not omit

My Lord, I have lately received a letter from you, dated the thirteen of
August, Doctor Iunius letter to (...).
with the petition which Monsier Aldegonde had brought unto you to Montfort,
from the States and towns of Holland and Zeeland: the which I have not failed
to impart presently unto them, and to deliver into their hands: whereat they
have been wonderfully amazed, being not able, to comprehend the reasons
contained in your letter to be sufficient to move you to reject and send back
their petition in this manner, which happily might have served for a greater
good: And therefore seeing themselves entreated in this sort, not as the Kings
subjects and vassalls (as they have always carried themselves, where there
has bin question of his Majesty's honor, state and greatness)

Signed I. Iunius.


This discourse whereof mention is made in this letter, being very tedious,
we have thought good to omit, and the rather for that we have not heard that
Champaigny or any other has replied unto it. And so these practices of peace
vanished to smoke, The Princes advice to the States.
great danger to be lost, by a fault of very great consequence; and that he
did see well that by the loss thereof many other good towns would be shaken
and in danger: finally that it would cause a great alteration in their
affairs, wherefore they should resolve to provide for it speedely: seeing no
other means but to cut the dikes, and raise all the Scluses, to drown the
country; yet before they did it, they should set before their eyes the ruin
of the Champian country, and other losses which thing, or having regard to any
public or private commodity: they made answer A courageous resolution of the
States of Holland.
were lost, that they would rather see their houses heaped one upon an other,
then the Spaniards should enjoy them. And were it not for the succor of
Leyden, yet they would do it, to chase the Spaniard out of the country. God
knows how this free and voluntary offer of the States did move the Princes
heart, who was wonderfully perplexed, as well to see this town in danger to
be lost through the negligence of some, (for the which a Prince of the Empire
and two of his Brethren had lost themselves to save it once: and yet the
opportunity which they had bought with the price of their dearest blood was to
no effect) as for that he did foresee, that the blame

The Spaniards after their return from their victory, having taken up their
old lodging at Leyderdorp, whereof three companies went to Zosterwoude, where
they intrencht themselves, and a part at Leysdsendam, which is the Scluse of
Leyden, where there had been a fort, which after their departure the
Protestants of Holland had neglected to ruin, and to break the Scluse.
Captain Nicholas Ruyckhauer being in garrison at the Hage, heard of the
Spaniards return so late, as he could hardly retire his men: yet he
entertained the skirmish so long The endeavor of captains Ruyckhauer at the
Hage.
with the Spaniards, as the inhabitants had means for to save all the best
part of their goods. Francisco Valdes Lieutenant of this camp had brought with
him a part of the troops of Vtrecht, the which he sent before the fort, which
the Protestants held at the Scluse of Goude and Alphen: and the other part
which came from Noortwic and Walkenbourg, whereas the Protestants had two very
strong Forts, either of them manned with five Companies of English, of the
which Edward Chester was Colonel. This Regiment endured the first charge of
the Spaniards. The Fort at the Scluse of Goude, was first of all most furiously
assaulted, and then they were oftentimes repulst and put back again by the
English, over whom Captain Gainsford, a true soldier, commanded. But as the
Spanish horse had no means nor way to enter into Holland but by these Fortes,
they did so pre^ forward with cudgells and swords upon the foote-men that did
assail it, as the English were forced to quit the place: the which had not
been so soon, if those which were at Alphen (which is but half a league
off,) had defended themselves Some English defeated.
Alphen, they found it also won and gotten from them, and so both the one and
the other were defeated and cut all in pieces, the which happened the
seventeenth of May.

Those of Vtrecht ran thither and razed these forts and that which was at
Leyderdorp. Francis de Valdes, with an other troop which came to Nortwick,
went to a great forte that was unfinished, which the other five companies of
English did hold in the village of Valchenbourg, the which they abandoned
before they had seen any enemy; although the day before they had required some
horse from them of made them of the town to doubt the worst. After this
skirmish, the English approached Boschuysen and the town. Then Colonel Chester
entered with some of his men into the town, and gave a sign unto the Bourgers
that if it happened he were forced by the Spaniards that he would make his
retreat by the port of the Hage, the which the Bourgers agreed unto, and that
the enemy approchin g, (against whom they should continue the skirmish) they
should make them a sign, which was, that when they should take down the
coulors that should be upon the port, they should open themselves and retire
on the one side, that their canon from their rampar might pass through the
Spanish squadrons: this condition did nothing please the English, as it
appeered sone after. The English rewarded for their treachery by the Spaniard to
whom they had yielded.
For as soon as they were gone out of their trenches, where-into they were
retired at

The Spaniards knowing well that they got little in battering of Leyden, and
that the battery which they had made at Harlem against a bare wall, had been a
great charge unto them, with loss of men, they brought no artillery to batter
it, assuring themselves The Spaniards mean not to batter Leyden.
that in the end they should famish it. And in the mean time to make it
shorter, they spared nothing that might avail them, by goodly promises, or
practices, to induce the besieged to yield; and to acknowledge the King.
Wherein they employed many of these Bourgers and others that were of their
party, who wanted no letters of advice: to whom they of the town would never
make any other answer, but by a letter, in the which there was nothing written
but this latin verse. Fistula dulce canit volucrem, dum decipit Auceps. A short
and resolute answer of the besieged at L^yden.

And seeing that they prevailed nothing with all their letters and persuasions:
(the which did animate and encourage the Bourgers the more) they meant to shut
them up more straightly, building forts upon all the passages, both great and
small.

Some Bourgers which by the sudden siege of this town had been excluded, with
the Prince of Oranges leave and the assistance of the Magistrate of Goude, did
laid thirty barks with wheat and rye, the which two peasants and a Balyfe of a
village, had promised to conduct by a covert way to Copier-ka, the which they
peeced, and there they attended them to guide them unto the town. These barks
furnished with good mariners, having every one two hargubusiers, advanced to
Copier-ka, which they found pierst, but no peasant to guide them: yet they past
on, and in steed of taking the left hand, A happy encounter vnex pected for
them of Leyden.
ships, one was burnt and the other sunk. The Spaniards being at Leyderdorp,
thought to take these barks in their return, and to reskue the booty; but
the besieged putting Peter Quaetgelaet, who was taken in the said ships, and
as a Traitor executed and quartered, and his quarters set upon the town gates.
The signior Thierry of Bronckhorst Thierry of Bio^chhorst Governor of L^yden.
in June, to make them last as long as it was possible; and having taken a
view of the corn, there was found but a 100. and ten lasts, and fourteen
thousand mouths in the town to feed therewith. The first two months every
one was stinted at half a pound of bread by the day, the which a laborer would
have eaten at his breakfast. The Spaniards finding that the besieged drew
many commodities and refreshings from their Kitchen gardins without the town,
the which they had sowed A t^xe upon the victuals.
in the beginning of the spring, the seauenteene and eighteen of July they
built Money coined of paper at Leyden.
and twenty stiuers the piece, where there was of the one side graven. Hac
libertatis ergo. And of the other. Nummus obsessoe vrbis Lugdunensis, sub
gubernatione illustrissimi Principis Auraici cusus, and of them of fourteen
Stiuers. Lugdunum Ba^auorum.

The town was then besieged more straightly then before, a certain Spanish
captain called Carrion had entrenched himself at Waldinge, whereby he did
very much mischief to the besieged, for the avoiding whereof, it was resolved
to sallie forth upon him and his men, in the manner that follows. That Gerard
Vander A sallie made by the besieged.
Laen should go forth with a galley well appointed with Men, Artillery and
Muskers. John van Duyuenworde captain of the adventurers or forlorn Hope,
some being armed with harguebuzes and some with half pikes, should sallie
forth at the Vlyergate. Adrien Schot with his company, by the port of
Rhynsbourg should seize upon the way to Poelbrug: the companies of John
Vanderdoors, and the signior of Noortvic with Mees Hauicx, should set upon the
fort at the bridge of Boschuysen, Ianus Dousa (a Gentleman of great learning,
as his writings do witness) and Mees Havicx with their companies. The
Spaniards being but threescore 1574.
men, defended themselves very valiantly with their musket shot. But the
besieged (although they were Bourgers) without any fear of their shot, ran
desperately to the foot of the trenches, from whence they cast balls of
wildfire, stones A surious sallie of the Burgers of Leyden.
had forced these trenches, where they slew, burnt and buried alive in the
ruins of the fort (which the souldiars ruined and spoiled as much as they
could) all the Spaniards that were within it, not taking any one to mercy,
although they cried out for mercy.

The signal of fire had given the alarm throughout all the Spanish camp.
Those of Lammen came to succor Vaddinghen, and so did they of Leyderdorp,
Voorschote and Vassenare, which are all villages within a League of the Town,
where the Caualerie lay, who came running in all have, but they gained nothing
but musket shot, so as they were forced to retyer with shame and some loss of
men. And a great supply; they retired with good order into the town, having in
these skirmishes

Here-vpon whilst that through the pulling up of the scluses and the breaking
of the dikes in diverse places, the water did rise in the country: the Prince
fell so extremely The Prince of Orange ve ry sick.
The great resolution of the besieged of Leyden.
and resolution to keep their faith given unto the States, as they would never
enter into any parle with the enemy. In the mean time there were many sent
from them unto the Prince and States to hasten the succors, the which was
promised, if it pleased God to send them water enough. Here-vpon the Spaniards
writ unto them many letters full of goodly promises and cruel threats, still
assuring them that the Lewis of Boysot to come out of Zeeland with about forty
Captains both for Sea and land, and The Admiral Boysot sent for by the Prince.
some 800. mariners, and good store of Artillery fit for such flat boats, as
were fittest for the execution of this desseine. The water in the mean time
did so get of the country, as it forced the Spaniards to abandon some of their
villages. During the which, the Guard, and the Councellor Wasteel to Delfe, to
see how much the water was risen on the side of Delflant; for you must
vnder-stand that the three Jurisdictions: which is Separation of three
Jurisdictions.
that of Rhinlant which is under Leyden; of Delflant which is under Delf, and
of Schyelandt which is under Rotterdam, are divided by a dike called
Landt-scheydinghe, that is to say separation of the country, which makes a
triangle, like unto three lines which part from one center. The water entered
into Delflant, by a hole made near unto Rotterdam, and by the scluses of
Rotterdam and Delfhauen: Entering into Schyelandt by a breach of the dike made
in the river of Issell, near unto Capelle: and in the river of Meuz near unto
Issellmonde: so as it remained only to know what height it was of Guard and
Wasteel went on the side of Delflandt, the Admiral went into Schyelant, where
having found the water high enough, for that the breach near unto Rotterdam
had been made long after that of Issell. Having made report unto the Prince, it
was resolved to stay

Those of Sootermeere came with the Spanish foot only, who began a skirmish,
the which continued long, in the end having some supplies, they made a show as
if they The spaniards come to skirmish.
would march directly to the Protestants trenches, as it were to draw them
forth, for the which they had no great reason, for the Protestants were
favored by their boats, who

From that time the Admiral Boysot, made show (as he has always done in the
like occasions) of a great desire to fight, and to pass on: yet going to
council with the Seignior of La Guard and the Captains; it was not held
expedient to attempt any more with so few men, being thought a matter of no
small importance, to have gotten the

The Protestants consisting of Netherlanders, French, Wallons, English,
Scottish, and Germans, seeing their entry reasonable good, were of opinion
to advertise the Prince. Besides they thought it best not to retire from thence
but to cause the whole The army aduanceth tosuccor Ley den.
army to advance, and the victuals that were appointed for the town, to the
end that if they found any passage, they might loose no opportunity. The which
the Prince allowed Boysot caused the ships of war to come of either side, to
flank the trenches, being distant one from an other about a harguebuze shot:
being there they must pass on, wherein there was no small difficulty: for
they knew well that all the Spanish forces were there, and in the villages of
Soetermeer and Wilsueen, which they had upon their flank, not above half a
league off. They might see them fortefie upon a bridge, and in houses that were
of either side, from whence they might annoye them. The signior of La Gard^
caused

Heerevpon the signior of La Guard went to the Prince to Delf, to inform him
of all things, and to deliver his opinion, which was not without many
difficulties, for that they 1574.
could not judge of that which the eye could not see, by reason that the water
covered Colonel la Guard informs the Prince.
all the chanells, so as they were very hard to find. Whereupon having
understood his pleasure, he returned the next day to the army, carrying with
him four demie cannons in flat bottom boats which did not draw above two
foot of water, and some salve with these four demie cannons, and some
threescore other pieces which they had in their The Protestants charge the
Spaniards.
boats in diverse other chanells. This battery continued long, some shooting
at the Bridge, others at the houses, which they thought to make them abandon,
but the Spaniards

In the mean time the Protestants labored to approach to land, and to force
them, but they found that their chanells went not so far, but ended within
harguebuze shot, the which could not be discovered, for that they had gone but
in small boats, and by reason that the Inondation covered all, they could not
judge that there was less water at one end then at an other, whereby they were
much abused. To remedy the which, they made their pioners to labor, and to
open them some passage, but it was not possible, for a day would have spent
before they could have done it in all places, and in the mean time the
Spaniards should have had leisure so to fortefie themselves, as all the
Protestants attempts had been but vain, and their time lost, which did import
them went at large with his boats. This was the seventeenth of September.

Without doubt God did wonderfully favor the Protestants, in that they could
not pass for want of water, being very likely that of all that had landed, not
any one had A fault is some times profitable.
escaped, for that they must have thrust themselves among houses which did
flank one an other, being rampared fifteen foot thick, besides other small
trenches which they had before and a good parapet all along the dike, full of
harguebuziers which attended them with great devotion: The which the
Protestants could not well discover by reason of the reeds and oziers. And it
is wonderful there were no more slain, being within fifty paces of them, but
in my opinion I have told the cause. It is true that this retreat was not
without some loss, which happened by a great mischance: for the Captains
Catteuille and Durant, having planted themselves behind a heap of turffs
Captain Catteuille and others drowned.
as Catteuille, and Gailleresse Lieutenant to Durant were drowned, with ten or
twelve soldiars.

At their return the Admiral and La Guard having entreated Seignior
Vander-Aa, to go and make report unto the Prince of all that which he had
seen, and of their opinions consulting upon all difficulties, and propounding
whether it were expedient to seek some other passage, and to go and batter the
fort of Leydstchen-dam, and assault it, and thereby seek to enter into Vliet
(for it had been to the like effect as the passage of Wasteele (who slept
neither night nor day to advance this busmes) came to tell the chief of the
Protestants that being advertised of an other passage, by some that knew the
Country very well, he would not fail to make search An other passage to
succor Leyden.
thereof: and that he had found that by Schyelandt, it should be easy to
enter into Rhinlandt, having not so many ways nor dikes as where they were,
and that there were passages enough, where they should not want any water; the
which the Seignior of La Guard resolved to view with two or three small boats:
But considering afterward that they must make a great circuit, and that
happily it should be necessary to lodge

It seems that in all this action GOD did guide the Protestants: for neither
they A passage into Rhinlandt.
steeple, which might discover them, for they did it but by stelth, and a good
way from their army: And if the Spaniards had had an Alarm, they might easily
have prevented this disseine, being so few men: yea it was to be feared that
they should have been shut up in these chanells, yet being resolved to
pass as far as they setting threescore Pioners to work, which they had
brought with them, to The Protestants entrenched at the passage.


There remained with the Admiral, Citailelle Lieutenant to the signior of
Noyelles, Colonel of the Wallons, captain Derriere and some others, which lay
all in the trenches. And it was also concluded that the signior of La Guard
should return, to cause Guard after that he had drawn all forth, remained
behind with five and twenty harguebuziersl, to free a certain boat of Delf
called the Ark of Noah, the which being heavy and uneasy to manage in these
chanells, did very much trouble them, being laden with Artillery, in the
which there was but one only Mariner to govern and guide it, the charge
having been given to rascals, who in the night slipped away, and without the
diligence of captain Cornellis Classz, Vice Admiral of Flessingue, who came
to retire it, it was condemned to be burnt: this disturbance continued at the
least three hours. The Spaniards quit their lodging to the Protestants.
to say, Benthuysen the first day the Protestants arrived there (whether the
Admiral sent Ciuitelle with some shot) and the next day at night Soetermeer.
The whole army being come to the Admiral, and having good passages to this
way, (you must imagine that all the ways of the country, are like to little
Dikes or Causies, betwixt Guard (who remained behind to imbarke and to pass
with those that were appointed) seeing the Admiral so far advanced, and the
circuits they must make by the chanells, and many houses about them, hearing
no news of them, was much perplexed: for he knew not what he might
encounter in front or in flank: alleging to some of his followers that he
had been at the taking of one of the French Kings royal galleies, in the
river of Charente, which they resolved not to leave it, that the Colonel la
Guard and the Vice Admiral should The Protestants enter into the lake of Noorda.
meaning to batter this house, and to take it from the Spaniards, and moreover
to give order for their passage and to assuer their retreat, for which cause
they had concluded to guard the village of Benthuysen, and the trenches which
they had first made upon the way: yet Colonel la Guard having been upon the
place, as well to view it, as to cause Citadelle to march with his Wallons
(whereof there arrived three or four compaines more) And having certain
aduertisment that the Spaniards had left Soetermeere, he took a new resolution
with Citadelle, abandoning Benthuysen (although it were reasonably The
Protestants lodge a^ Soetermeer.
well fortefied) for they had no need of it being sufficient for them to guard
Soetermeer: to which place la Guard sent Captain Cret of the contry of Orange,
to command

One thing had much abused the Spaniards, and taken from them all Judgment of
the Protestants dessein having left six boats at their first lodging of
Landtschedingh being doubtful what to conceive of it. The Protestants went
early in the morning into Noorda with all the rest of their forces, where they
found that the Spaniards had the night before abandoned their fort. Being in
the lake they must of necessity attend the will of GOD: for it was impossible
to pass on without morewater, the which entered daily by the breaches: Then
came the Seignior of Noyelles unto them with some companies of his Regiment
where as they spent some days without any great exploit. In the mean time the
beseeged of Leyden were wonderfully pressed both by Those of Leyden distressed
and importun^d
army and the succors which they attended: Franci^co valdes did some times
write very kindly unto them, and sometimes roughly, The Earl of Roch who
termed himself Governor of Holland, writ unto them from Vtrecht by a Trompet,
with other letters signed by ten Bourgers of Leyden: whereunto the beseeged
answered and demanded a pasport for their deputies, that they might enter into
conference: but all they did was only to have the better means to send their
messengers unto the Prince. The Commanders of the army had often news from
them, for there were many that entreated to be sent, but there was not any one
that could be entreated, or That as long A brave answer made by the beseeged,
of Leyden.
as they had one hand to eat and an other to fight they would never yield.
During the seege many unacquainted with warlike affairs had used foolish and
in supportable speeches, for they blamed all the world in that they did not
proceed in this exployte, the which was impossible. As for the Commanders they
were much grieved yet they lost no opportunity, for day and night, they labored
to descouer some passage, but all was in vain where upon they entreated the
Prince that it would please him to come in person, and see their procedings, as
well for his own content, as to stop all slanderous The Prince comes to
visit the army.
(being the twenty three, of September) with two hundred harguebuziers upon a
way or dike called Stompischwech, notwithstanding all apparent difficulties:
but it was to content some of the country who did wonderfully urge it. The
Prince after he had visited his army, spoke unto the commanders and captains,
exhorting every one to do his best endeavor in so comendable and important an
enterprise, promising to gratefie and reward every man in time and place.
Having set good order for all things to the end that if the Spaniard made any
great resistance in the passage, nothing might be wanting that might hinder the
execution, he returned to Delfe, leaving every man they caused many gabions to
be made, that they might be the sooner in defense, for (...) Pro^s (...)
^uance (...) succors all ^y can.
from an other. The Admiral would go himself: they put certain
harguebuziers in two Galleots, and the rest in other small boats: there were a
hundred French should land upon the right hand, and a hundred Wallons on the
left: and some captains, to have a care of the placing of the Gabions, and to
set the Pioners to work: finally all things were so well ordered and disposed
as they would not fail in the execution, if it were possible: for all the
importance of the Action consisted in making of a passage to Leyden, escaping
at unawares by some places, and making their way by force in others. This last
means had always seemed (as indeed it was) very difficult, yea altogether
impossible, without sufficient water, that they might fleet The Protest^nts in
great (...).
should have water sufficient: but they feared that they of the Town were
reduced to that extremity, as they should be forced to yield, not able to
attend the event of so uncertain a thing, which depended upon the wind, for
in truth to attend the increase of waters that might rise by the tides, were a
vain thing, for that the bosom or circumference of the country which
received the water, was to great and spacious,

Thus the Protestants discoursed what was with them, and what against them, and
did find that of necessity they must direct their passage betwixt Soeterwoude,
the castle of Swyetten and Leyderdorp, as the Spaniards did rightly conceive,
and there attended them: for they must pass betwixt them within a musket shot
of both sides. And moreover there was a way going for Soeterwoude to the
castle of Swyetten near unto Lyderdorp, along the which the Spaniards kept
great guard, as well on the land, as in boats or the chanells which are of
either side of the way, which made the passage some Stompischwech attempted in
vain.
of a passage, even unto this way, the which they could not possibly find, for
the chanells dceiued them, as those of Cromwech had in like manner done; and
without doubt they had been well beaten there, the Spaniards having many
Corpse de Guard very

The beseeged on the other side were wonderfully importuned by their enemies;
Don Fernando of Launoy Earl of Roche, promised them all good usage: and
Francisco Valdes on the other side threatened to hang them; if they did not
yield to his mercy and discretion. But all this did nothing amaze them that
were well affected to the cause: although they did see some ill enclyned, which
cried out openly that they must yield, three hundred and more of them
assembling together about the Townehouse, A tumult in the t^wne ag^st ^he
Magi^te.
crying out of the Magistrates that they would ruin the town, and that it was
a folly to attend any succors, neither could they nor would they any longer
then in that of the Spaniards. An other time some of the inhabitants came unto
Peter Adriansz Bourguemaster, laying before him the miseries which they
endured, and the great famine there was, making great complaints accompanied
with threats: to whom he answered in few words. You see my Brethren, and fellow
Bourguers that I have made an oath the which I hope by the grace of God to keep
inuiolably. If my death may any way avail The courageous answer of the
Burgeumaster of Ley^en.
you, for I must once die, neither do I care whether I die by your hands or by
mine enemies (for my case goes right) take my body, tear it in pieces and
divide it among you, as far as it will go, I am content. The Burguers were
so da^ted with this answer, as they retired without any more words. The
Maiestrates aduertized the Admiral Boysot of their extremity, wherein
notwithstanding they said they were well resolved to continue: the which did
wonderfully satisfy the Commanders of the Protestants army: for seeing

The next day there came two other Messengers, who showed by their good
stomakes and their great feeding, what bad cheer they kept in the town. These
men brought five or six cople of Pigeons in a cage, with letters confirming
the former, entreating them not to loose any occasion, assuring the chief of
the army still of their A flying messenger.
who (although their succors were within half a league of them, and might
easily see the town, yet the Townsemen could not see them, by reason that the
trees which grew there abouts, being higher then the masts of their boats,
took away the knowledge of them) but they understood well by the daily
shooting of the great ordinance that they could not be far off. In the mean
time, whilst that the Protestants were ready to force a new Channel with
their Pioners, to go unto that way betwixt the castle of Swietten and
Soeterwoude (for they did assure them that beyond it the water was Vnexpect^
succors which God sends by the wind.


The Admiral with half the boats of war went upon the left hand toward
Soeterwoude: the Vice Admiral with the other moity took the right hand toward
the castle of Swietten, being a good musket shot one from an other, and
betwixt both was the ordinance, for there was but one of them that had any.
Some of them thought to The Spaniards amazed.


Collonell La Guard was advanced a little in a small boat with two owers, to
give order for this landing, to plant the gabions and to set the pioners to
work, for he did imagine, the Spaniards would not so easily have left it;
being thus advanced in this little skiffe he landed first, and at the same
instant, Ot^ran, Bouchard and other captains on the left hand: Grenu and La
Derriere landed on the right, with the soldiars that were appointed for that
enterprise, whereas the Pioners were presently set to work and the gabions
planted. The Spaniards had begun to plant many trees there and pieces of wood
a cross, to make a palissadoe from one village to an other, but they A passage
opened.
foot deeper, for that their boats drew no more water. This was finished in
two or three places an hour before day, and yet the Spaniard never sallied
forth to hinder their work: neither was the ordinance of the Protestants ships
(who lay before their lodging) idle all this time, for they shot all night into
the villages through their corpse De Guard, and at all other places, whereas
they could discover either fire or light. The Spaniards played sometimes on
them, but coldly, with a bastard, and an other smalpeece, and likewise with
their small shot.

The passage being opened, the Admiral who was landed to advance the work,
embarked again, and past of the one side, and the Viceadmirall of the other,
according to The Protestants pass the dike.
the order above mentioned, and the boats with victuals and munition betwixt
both. They were not far past but they wanted water, for the great boats did
in a manner touch the ground, so as they must make a virtue of necessity:
wherein, doubtless the Zeelanders showed their valor, going most of them into
the water to keep their boats a floate, as if they would have carried them
upon their shoulders. After they had labored a little to pass, they entered
into a fair great channel called Meerburch, upon the which there were certain
Spanish boats toward Soeterwoude, the which the soldiars abandoned to save
themselves: but they could not run so swiftly but some of The Spaniards ^e.
him to command some boats to advance unto this bridge, the which he
himself did, after that he had with much pain and difficulty entered into
this great channel of Meerbruch. Being at the bridge, he caused it presently
to be broken to pass the boats into the lake, and to pursue their enem^es,
the which he did so fitly, as there were many of them cut off, as well with
the ordinance, as the small shot, and by them that leaped into the water after
them and slew them with their daggers. The which was chiefly done by them of
Flessingue who were so incensed against no less disorder, for that the boats
which the Protestants had left upon the lake of Many Spaniards perished in
this* out*
whether they went, by reason of the Inondation; finding great and deep
ditches in the drowned lands, where they were presently swalloed up. Two things
did help to amaze the Spaniards in Soeterwoude: the one was, that the
Protestants coming to Meerbruche, went and fired some houses in the village,
with a general alarm, the other was that the great Ordinance which they had
left under the charge of Phillip Asseliers Comissary, being upon Noorda, never
ceased to play upon them on that side, the which did strike a great terror into
the Spaniards.

This was the very judgment of God, to abate their proud presumption, for there
was The Spaniards loose above 100. boats.
never seen a more dishonorable and shameful rout, having lost above a
hundred boats, great and small, wherewith they had made an account to fight
with the whole army of the Prince and States. Those that saved themselves
toward the Voorschote, stayed at a fort which they had made at the house of
Jacob Claes, upon the great channel which goes from Leyden to Delf, called the
Vliet in the which they had a Culuerin, and an other piece or two with the
which they began to shoot, but did no harm. At the first they might see them
of the fort of Lemmen amazed and wavering, and if the Protestants had gone
directly thither, it is thought they would have abandoned it: But it was not
possible to effect so many things at an instant. It was also a matter of no
small importance, to seek to force a mighty strong fort well furnished with
artillery

In the mean time besides the plague and other diseases which grew through
poverty and famine, there was a division in the Town, which grew by the ill
affected Bourgers, who neither could nor would suffer any longer: for in seven
weeks they A division in the town of Leyden.
had eat no bread, nor drunk any thing but water. In the richest houses
horseflesh was as delicate as a partridge, dogs and cats roasted was
wonderfully pleasing unto the taste: it were impossible to express the
diversity of pottages that were made: some did eat vine leaves with salt,
others made diverse sauces with the leaves of leeks, and the roots and stalks of
coleworts, min^'d cabbage was an ordinary meat. The Gentlewomen The extreme
famine in Leyden.
did eat their little dogs wherewith they were wont to play. If any beast were
killed, the poor boys were there gaping like unto hungry dogs, to see if any
little morcell would fall, the which they gathred up and devoured raw: the
skins of dried 6000* persons dead at Leyden during the siege.


Their succors being so near unto them, one of the Bourguemaisters being
upon the rampar, said unto thepeople that were about him. Behold my friends
behind yonder Fort is now our bread, what think you, shall we leave it
there? We will rather go and pull down this Fort with our nails, then loose
it so. You may imagine what contentment these poor famished forlorn creatures
had to see their succors so near them. But all was not yet done; for the
Spaniards were betwixt the town and their succors, the which was not without
some difficulty, seeing the doubtful events of war: and if it happened that
they should not force this fort of Lemmen, all that they had formerly done was
in vain: or else they must have stayed a month longer, until the waters had
been higher, which the besieged could not endure. Where-vppon the Captains
went to Council and resolved (seeing there was no other expedient) to lodge one
night upon the way which goes from the said fort of Lemmen to Leyderdorpe,
betwixt the which What the fort of Lemmen was.
holding it to be of canon proof, and was situated in a plain champian where
there were no chanells but were stopped, being distant a quarter of a league
from the town. The water which goes to Delfe passes byas-wise near unto the
one side, on the other side there is a channel by the which they enter into the
Rhine, and on the third quarter that which goes to Soeterwoud, the rest was
very easy to intrenche, for there were trees

The approach being viewed, the chanells vnstopt, and the Admiral having sent
the second of October at night, Captain Grenu, Asseliers and Henry, to see
where they The spaniard^ abandon the fort of Lemmen.
might best plant their battery, it was now time to go: for the spaniards that
remained in the fort had no intent to do any better then those of Soeterwoude
and others had done: they only made a little show to retire their ordinance,
the which notwithstanding they

In the morning it was not known, neither within the town nor without, that
the Spaniards were retired out of this fort of Lemmen, and as they had heard
all the night from the rampar of the town a great noise before this fort, out
of the which a boy had marked many to go forth with their matches light, but
none to return into it, which Gerrard vander Loen with his adventurers, who
received first with great joy the gallyes which the Admiral had sent before to
understand the truth of this retreat, for that he did not lightly believe the
first report

In this delivery, and in every particular of the enterprise, doubtless all
must be attributed The deliverance of Leyden the 3. of October.
make profession in the taking of towns (although they be by composition)
without A testimony of Gods providence.
they had carried it, the people being so weakened with famine, as they could
not endure any longer: besides a part of them were ill affected, and very many
of their best men were dead of the plague. And for an other testimony that it
was GOD only that wrought: the town was no sooner delivered, but the wind
which was South-west,

I may not forget here, that the same night the Spaniards abandoned the forte
of Lemmen, a piece of the Town wall fell down, betwixt the Cowe-gate and the
A piece of the town wall falls.
Tower of Bourgongne, about six score yeards long, the which with the ruin
made a great breach: which advantage if the Spaniards had had two or three
days before, when as they thought (upon the assurance of one Begin, that
there was no guard on that side) to take it by scaladoe: without doubt they had
not mist of it, and they would have held the falling of this wall for as great
a miracle, as the besieged have held their deliverance. But GOD put so strange
a terror and amazement into the Spaniards, as not only those that were to make
head against the Protestants, but also those that were two good leagues off
retired, abandoning in four and twenty hours, above twenty fortes, great and
small, with good artillery. GOD having by this means

The passages being thus freed and open in all places, the Seignior Lewis of
Boisot The Admiral ente^s Leyden with the army
Admiral, entered with the Vant-garde of the army into the Town of Leyden
about eight of the clock in the morning. GOD knows with what joy they
received him. The Admiral of Ziricxzee was with the Reer-ward: there was no
heart so stony, but was moved to see these poor famished creatures, devour
bread and raw Herrings which the Admirals men cast them out of their Barks,
as they came

The Prince of Orange being then at Delfe, was the same day (which was the
third of October) advertised of this success, being at the sermon, which being
ended he The Prince of Orange advertised of the delivery of Leyden.
sent the letter to the Minister, to read it publicly in the assembly of the
French. And he had received other letters from the Admiral, by the which he
gave them to understand, Francisco Valdes A gall^nt enterprise with (...).
commander of the Spanish army, in his retreat from Leyderdorpe, left in his
lodging a Plat of the town of Leyden, the siege, the channels, and the forts
which he had about it, and underneath was written; Vale Ciuitas, valete
Castelli paria, quia relicti estis propter aquam, and non per vim inimicorum,
that is to say; Farewell city, farewell little castles, whom the wators, and
not the enemies force has made us to abandon.

The next day being the 4. of October, the Prince came to Leyden, the Admiral
having sent him four galleys for his conuoy. Being arrived there, after that
he had thanked The Prince comes to Leyden.
The Princes admonition to the Magistrates of Leyden.
a Prince of the Empire, and of two of the Princes brethren, and yet they had
no feeling of their own carelessness: and then the love and fidelity of the
States toward them, who had not spared the value of above a Million of gold to
succor them, doing that which never had been done since the country was dykt:
the which he laid before them, that they might be here-after more provident and
wise, and have the more feeling A general co^lection of arms to relieve the
poor commons of Leyden.
pouldred flesh and silver, to relieve the poor of the town of Leyden, who
had no means to buy, and had not earned any thing of a long time: the which
was divided among them, to help to comfort them and to strengthen their
debilitie^, whereunto long famine had reduced them. The which did not only
relieve the poor, and ease the rich, but caused a strict bond of love and
friendship betwixt this town and the rest.

The 8. of October the Prince went toward Kage (which is a small Island and a
good Iulien Romero sent back the Seignior of Saint Aldegonde (who had continued
a year in prison) he caused two Spaniards to accompany him, who knew the
prince very well, to make a true report unto him if he were yet living: the
prince talked with them, and having used some speeches, and dispacht their
pasport, he sent them away within two

Those of Leyden being loath to show themselves unthankful to the Admiral
Boisot, for his care and pains taken for their relief; they presented him
with a goodly chain The courtesy of them of Leyden to the Admiral Boisot.
of gold, and a great Medaile (making mention of their deliverance) hanging at
the said chain. The like did the States, Nobility, and towns of Holland,
having invited him to a banquet, where they presented him with a richer chain.
Ianus Douza Seignior of Noort^ic, a gentleman of an ancient house, and at that
time Super-intendent of the town of Leyden, has written a learned Poem and
likewise made a discourse in Lattin prose, of the siege, succors, and
victualing of the said town, and of the Spaniards flight* During the siege
before Leyden, the great Commander had certain troops lodged Worcum (...) ^y
the Spa^rds.
well fortified with good garrisons, and Collonell Balfour lying there-abouts'
with seven companies of Scots to cross their desseignes, by cutting off
ditches and other stratagems, so as they could not effect any thing: whereupon
the Spaniards went and battred Worcum, lying right over against Gorcum upon the
Meuse in the which there

Chiapin vitelli likewise with his Companies of high Dutch, and certain
Spaniards, and 12. peeeces of Ordinance beseeged Leerdam, a small town
belonging to the Earl of Buren, and batred it there, being within it two
companies of soldiars, who after eleven Leerdam won by the Spaniards.
hours battry, (the Tower of the Castle being beaten down) yielded it up in
the beginning of July, departing with their arms. And not long after the
Spaniards had an enterprise upon the town of Delft, the which was to be
managed by an Ancient, who was a Wallon, thinking by some intelligence with the
Townsmen to get into it, but Francisco valdes General at that seege, being
The Spaniards mutine and take Francisco valdes prisoner
retired to the Hage, cursing still and lamenting his misfortune, fell into
such disgrace and contempt with his soldiers, as they presumed to tax him and
to object unto him that he had had intelligence with them of Leyden, reproching
him that he had received two tonnes of gold not to batter it, the which was
notoriously false. These objections The Spaniard^ leave South Holland.
Vordschoten, Valkenburg and other places, in great troops, both of horse and
foot, to the number of seven thousand men, and so they left that quarter of
South-Holland, marching toward Harlem and Amsterdam, where they found all the
gares shut against them; from thence they marched toward Vtrecht where they
thought to get their pay, Francesco valdes (who The Mutyned Spaniards fail to
surprise Vtrecht.
had escaped before out of their hands) proclaimed them mutines and Rebels
unto the King, giving leave unto the Bourguers (who needed no great
provocation) to kill them where they could. The Spaniards having failed of
their surprise, sought to fire the port of Weert with poulder, straw and pitch:
the Bourguers perceiving it, sallied out upon them, and slew some fifty. The
eighteenth of the month passing along the town ditches with their Electo,
called Joan Bianco, they came on the side of Saint Catherins 1575.
Middlebourg and of so many ships, the disgrace and affront received at
Leyden, and The great Commander makes a show to desire peac^
Noir-carmes, Champaigni and others in July before, as we have said: And
calling to mind the petition presented them by the Nobility and towns of
Maximilian, who never ceased, with all carfulness to solicit the King
therein) sent Gunter Earl of Swartzenburgh, and the Earl of Hohenlo, both
brothers in law, to be mediators The emperor Maximilian, seeks to make a
(...).
therein, who road too and fro between both parties, and brought it to such
pass, as in the beginning of March, the great Commander, governor general,
sent unto Breda for commissioners the Earl of Roche, of the house of Launoy.
The Baron de Rasingen, governor of Ryssell, Donway, and Orchie: Arnolt Sasbout,
chancellor of Geldre, Charles Suys President of Holland, who had fled from
thence, and doctor Elbertus Leoninus. For the Prince of Orange, knights of the
order, Noblemen, Gentlemen, and towns of Holland, The deputies that were sent
^o make peace
Zeeland, and their associates; as Bommell and Bueren (upon hostages delivered
for them at Dort, as Montdragon, Julian Romero, Don Michael de Alentaer, Don
Guilliaume de Saint Clement, and Don Michael de Couille) there came Arent van
Dorp, Charles Boysot governor of ^ushing, Philip de Marnix Saint Aldegonde,
William van Zuylen, Van Niuelt Scout of Dort, Jacob van Der-does, John Iunius
de Yonghen governor of Camphere, Adrian van Der-myte, and Paulus Buys advocate
of Holland.

The second of March 1575. they being all assembled, and as it seemed well
inclined to a pea^e, they of Holland spoke touching their former request
presented, requesting the that all those were strangers that were not borne in
the seventeen Provinces, and that they understood the general States to be,
such a meeting of the States, as was assembled in the time of the Emperor
Charles the fifth, when he resigned the Netherlands unto his son King Philip.
After that upon the 14. of March, the deputies for the King both by word of
mouth and writing, showed and delivered unto the deputies of Holland, etc. that
they thought it very hard, that the Spanish soldiers, being the Kings subjects
as well as they, and which had done him and his predecessors so great service
in the Netherlands, should be esteemed strangers. Neuer-the-lesse peace being

Touching the assembling of the general Estates, that his Majesty was well
content, all things being pacified, being required thereunto, to be counseled
and assisted by his estates, in things belonging unto and concerning the
country, wherein they are usually Articles of the peace ofred by the King unto
them of Holland and Zeeland.
to be conferred with-all, without making them acquainted with such things as
belong unto his sovereignty, and the good pleasure, will, and disposition of
his Majesty, wherein his Majesty or his governor were to use the counsel and
advise of his counsel appointed have no restitution, always provided that the
said Prince of Orange, Knights of 1575.


The twentieth of March the deputies for Holland. etc. made answer hereunto by
writing, signed by the Prince of Orange, the Earl of Culenborgh, Otto van
Egmont, The States answer to the King proposition of peace offered to the
Netherlands.
associates, after the manner of the estates, first persisting in the contents
of their first petition touching the withdrawing of all strangers, in regard
of their cruel and insolent government, who in regard of their service had
been well recompensed, and were become rich, for that the like withdrawing of
the Spaniards, and for less cause had been sought by them of Gaunt in the
year 1559. and accordingly granted: they denied not but the Spaniards were
subjects to the King of Spain, but not of the duke of Brabant, Earl of
Flanders, Holland, etc. nor yet of any of the seauen-teene Provinces against
the which they had showed themselves to be to much unnatural, who even at
their first coming into the land, held the Netherlands John de Sousa written
unto his Majesty, in the which he bouldly maintained, that the Netherlands,
and all the goods and lands of the inhabitants thereof, were given by his
Majesty unto them: under pretense thereof, using all kinds of force, ^iolences,
unnatural actions shameful to be heard or spoken of, as the towns of
Wherefore the Spaniards are straingers to the Netherlandes.
Gaunt, Doornick, Antwrep, Meechelen, Liere, Hertzhogenbosk, Deuenter, Vtrecht,
Rotterdam, and other places (where they lad lodged) could bear witness, so that
as then, the prophecy by their forefathers so offten fore-tolde was found to
be true, that

Therefore to seek to suffer such Spaniardes (which all the towns and Vilages
in the Netherlands sought to keep out) to remain in the land, was nothing
else, but the only way, to cause his Majesty's to loose the hearts and good
wills of his subjects, without the which no Lord nor Prince can reign, but
with greart grief and care, taking away the reciprocal and mutual loves that
should be between the Prince and his subjects, which they hoped to be far
from his Majesty thoughts, as being a thing much against his dignity and
reputation, as also contrary to his nature. Touching the service that the
Spaniards had done unto his Majesty, and his forefathers for and reputation
of his Majesty by the natural vassales and subjects of the Netherlands,
Charles in many places, as before Argile in Africa, in Italy, and else where
out of the Netherlands, and yet would not the Spaniards in the year, 1520.
endure any command of the Netherlanders in Spain, although they behaved
themselves with all ciuility, and far other-wise then the Spaniards have
done in the Netherlands.

That those of Holland and Zeeland, were forced to help themselves against

Thouching the assembling of the General estates, which his Majesty seemed as
then to put of, until all things weere pacified and ended, and that they would
limite and appoint them unto certain orders and laws, they were of opinion
that the general estates, would not assemble and meet together to that end,
nor in the quality and form as the writing sent declared and appointed, as
long as the Spaniards bore arms or were in government with-in the Netherlands,
for that it apeared there-by, that they sought to bind and restrain the
assembly of the estates with their powers and offices to certain limits, and
strict rules, which should extend as wide and as far as the common causes of
the country required, they knowing best what belonged thereunto, and that
therefore they could not other-wise conjecture by Don Francisco de Alua, that
once wrote out of France unto the Duches of Parma, Regent of the Netherlands,
that the noble men of the same must be destroyed, and the States thereof
impouerished, as the Duke of Alua had already begun, and as it yet seemed to
be put in-practise, by the means and provocation, of those that were in the
government, his majesty's profit and the preservation and defense of the land,
and the towns there

And therefore withal reverence and humility they said, that they could by no
means be persuaded to accept and allow of the said articles as they were
propounded, caling to mind the example of the Earls of Egmont and Horn, as
also of the Baron of The Kings deputies replication to the States declaration
touching peace.
and the countries wel-faire, beseeching GOD, that it would please him of his
infinite mercy to inspire his majesty, and the Lords that were comissioners,
with other counsel, knowledge, and advise.

Upon this declaration, the Kings Deputies upon the first of April made a
replication, in writing, wherein they seemed to blame the said declaration to
be too sharp and bitter against those with whom they ought to live in peace
and amity, them like-wise that they should account Holland and Zeeland to be
Earledomes

Touching the religion, his Majesty's meaning was not to yield in any thing
thereunto, but that such as would depart the land should have six months time
granted unto them for their departure, and in the mean time should behave
themselves modestly, without any scandale: and as for the selling of their
lands and goods, to advance them to the highest rate and most advantage: and
they should have 8 or 10. years time for the sale thereof; so as they suffered
them in the mean time to be used and held by Romish Catholics; that the
departure of the people out of the land, was a grief unto the King, but seeing
they would not conform themselves, to live as other men did, it was their
own and not the Kings fault, and whereas the departure out of A months time
d^manded by the States to cons^r of the ca^e.


The Earl of Swartezenburg likewise upon the sixth of April wrote unto the
great The Erale of (...) taking his (...) of the de (...) ^th (...) of (...)
^use.
The liberty of a months time sought by the deputies of the estates, was
partly granted unto them, but the Pasport required for the Ambassadors was by
the Commander vtterl^ denied. Upon the sixth of April, the Earl of
Swartzenburgh, took his leave of the deputies on both sides assembled in
Breda, showing them what labor and trouble ^e had had, both by intercession
unto the great Commander envy, that flamed in their hearts: and that although
as then there was little effected, for that the difference of religion much
hindered their proceedings, yet he was not altogether

To this oration made by the Earl of Swaertzenbrugh touching his departure,
the great Commander made answer upon the eight of April, giving him great
thanks for his labor and pains, which he knew the Kings Majesty would take
^n good part. But touching the truce he said his Majesty would not agree
thereunto, for certain reasons, and that he saw no cause why he should
desist from his disseins, but was his leave and departed.

Upon the last of May, the Deputies met again at Breda, where-in the
behalf of The Stat^ declaration in the second assembly at Breda.
June there was a wrighting presented by them, wherein they said, that they
liked well of the offer made, of holding and observing of their privileges,
for the profit of the Netherlands, but that they could not perceive how that
would or might be in any sort beneficial for them, when as they by the
articles propounded must leave and for sake the country. Moreover for-that they
perceived (speaking freely) that it was not as yet convenient for them to
forsake their native country, as also the reformed religion, they humbly
besought his Majesty, that it would please him with a favorable countenance
to behold and regard the great zeal, and holy intents of his obedient subjects
and in the matter of conscience (whereof account is only to be made unto GOD
obedient unto his Majesty and to serve him as faithfully as ever any of his
subjects in

For the securities proferred (said they) many pitiful examples do
sufficiently show how they may be esteemed by all the world, especialy, if the
towns, castles, ships, and artilery were delivered over, before the
Spaniards and other strangers were gone out of the Netherlands, and that the
estates general should have taken good order for all inconveniences: therefore
to avoid al difficulties, and so to proceed to the beginning of a good
security, they knew no better way, then that according to the contents of there
request presented in writing, the strangers should be sent out of the contry,
which might the rather be don without cause of suspicion, for that the Prince,
and States of Holland, and Zeeland had not any manner of dislike nor quarrel,
with the rest of the other Provinces,

And for as much, as that by withdrawing away of all strangers out of the
country, all troubles and Insolences would cease, and all the Provinces
without doubt would be fermly united together, they offered to stand unto all
reasonable condition of security, whereby on both sides they might live in
perfect peace, between the departing and withdrawing of the strangers out of
all the Provinces, and the assembling of the The opinions o^ the com^ers coun^
^d others ^ng the (...) and mo^ on o^ ^on.
saying further, that seeing the point of sending out of strangers was agreed
upon, that it ought to be effected upon good security, the King having natural
Netherland Catholic Souldiars enough, whereof the experience was evidently to
be seen, in the time of the regent the Duches of Parma, that had pacefied all
the controversies in the country with the subjects of the same, which as then
were well trusted before the coming of the Duke of Alua, and now are in a
manner distrusted: when as their loyalty was once again tried, in the year
1568. when the Prince of Orange entered with an army into the country, and they
kept him out, they likewise found it expedient Englishmen of contrary Religion
did, for that in the mean time, GOD might de Rassinghen, who for security
thereof kept the same against the Commanders will, who imagined, that the
offers that were made would not have bin so well accepted, and for that cause
would have it proceed no further, saying, that the King was no merchant or
would be constrained unto any thing, and that he liberally offered and
presented such conditions, which they should have accepted of when they had
time and place, and so seeking all delays, he caused his deputies to make
answer, that he would send all the proceedings of that peace into Spain,
and attended an answer The Prince of Orang and the States answer to the
assembly at Breda.
from thence, asking four months time for the same, whereupon the deputies
of Holland. etc. upon the fourteen of July, for there farewell made a
declaration in writing, the contents whereof were to show how little the Kings
deputies were always Champigny until there last declaration, which offers
they said, without all exceptions to be reasonable* as to desire all security
to be made, to be in peace and quietness during the withdrawing of the
Spaniards and other strangers, until such time, as that the general estates
being assembled, might end all controversies, to whom (from that time) they
were content to refere all other questions, not only both touching the use of
there religion, such their unreasonable and ungodly prete^ces, by all means
they could, declaring and protesting

The Hollanders at that time caused certain counters to be made of copper,
for a memory, and in witness of that contract: on the one side having the garden
or parlor of Holland with a Lion therein, and a sword in his paw, with this
inscription, Securius bellum, pace dubia. etc. on the other side a hat
signifying liberty; with this inscription, Libertas Aurea, cuius moderatur
habenas ratio. This narration being delivered upon The Kings Deputies answer
to the (...) last (...) at the breaking up of the treaty of peace.
day made answer in writing: saying, that they had seen and perused their
declaration, and therein found many high words, whereby they and others,
wrongfully and without truth accused them that were his Majesty's Commissioners
as their forepassed writings, and more then sufficient offers bare witness,
without any fained dissembling, or double dealing, and that their said
declaration, seemed to be wholly grounded upon the respite required, to
advertise his Majesty as in such cases of importance, (notwithstanding the
general commission) it is meet and usual to be done, declaring, and
assuring them, that their meanings were not to avouch nor receive the said
propositions set down in writing, other-wise then according to their precedent
request, for the effecting

Thus was this treaty in Breda ended in July 1575. whereunto the Spanish
Council, were nothing addicted, whereby each part sought their own good by
several intents, 1575
This treaty of peace, made the Princes cause to be better thought on by all
men.
in the hearts of many men, although in the war it was hurtful enough unto
themselves. But for that their request was, that, which generally all the
seauenteene provinces of the Netherlands desired, which was, the sending away
of strange soldiars, and to be unburdened of their wilful and insolent
government. And moreover that the government, and the point concerning the
permission, or abolishing of the reformed religion, was referred to the censure
and judgment of the assembly of the general States, which made every one to
think well thereof, and caused them to be favored of all men, as seeking the
liberty of their native country: the Romish catholics themselves thinking,
that they sought aid and assistance from the reformed religion, but for
beginning to mutine, and to be at contention amonst themselves, the country of
shake The commander resolves to wary.
as the Commander did well hope, he returns again to his course of war,
wherein he resolves to be obstinate. He commanded the Seignior of Hierges to go
to field with the Spaniards and Wallons, and to attempt some good exploite in
Holland or else where, under the union of the States; whereupon Hierges marched
directly before the town and castle of Buren (which is not far from Bomel,
belonging at this present to Phillip of Nassau, Prince of Orange) the which the
Governor yielded up with out any shot of The town and c^stell of Buren y^elded.
great ordynance, or any force offered him. The States would have puthim to
death for Leyden in (...) ^de an (...).
quarter, but of small importance. At that time there was an university erected
in the town of Leyden, for Holland and Zeland, by the States of the said two
Provinces, indowing it with goodly preuiledges, whereunto were called from
diverse parts, Professors in all faculties, allowing them good stipends. This
town is fair, neat and spacious, divided with diverse chanells, in the best
air of al Holland and seems most fit for the muses. The 11. of June the
Prince of Orange did marry in the the town of Bryele (one of the Islands of
Holland) the Lady Charlot of Bourbon, daughter to the Duke of Montpensier, The
Prince of Orange third marriage.
for his third wife, a Princess endowed with singular piety, by whom he had
six Ou^water be^ged.
to beseege it: he had marched with great speed all night, to the end his
coming might be unknown, which bred a great amazement in them when they first
discovered him. At the same instant the ^ort which was at the Scluse of the
dike and chanel, which goes to Montfort and to Vtrecht, within harguebuse shot
of Oudewater, was abandoned by The fort of the Scluse basely abandoned.
the Scottishmen that were in it, the which they neither fiered, nor retired
the munition, as they ought to have done. This fort had been good ^o have
busied the Spaniards for some time, and have hindered their passage; and
therefore euere man thought, yea the Spaniards themselves, that it should not
be so soon abandoned, seeing that they might have retired their soldiars at
need: And then the alarume was given in the town, and A gallant (...) made by
captain Morcant.
places. Captain Morcant a Wallon, sallied forth with some of his troops, to
fire certain houses standing upon the dike on the other side of the river of
Yssel, toward Goude, near unto the port and bridge, the which he executed,
whereupon there grew a skirmish, in the which both he and his soldiars
discharged themselves well, where there were some hurt and slain of either
side. After which time they resolved not to issue forth any Willeken van
Angren, the which was an imputation unto him, for they held the place tenable,
and might have succored the town, for that they might have raised the said
Scluse, and cut the dike or causey of either side of the fort, as they did at
Goude and Oudewater, to let the water of the River of Yssel run into the
country, and by that meames succor the beseeged with small galleys, as they had
of late done at Leyden: but the Spaniard making have to cast up a dike against
it, hindered the water town ditches the water was not above a foot deep: so
as the town was environed Resolution of them of Oudwater.
to hold good, even unto the death, if need were, and to employ all their
means and force for the defense of the town. And although it were in poor
estate, weak of all sides, and of great guard, having but four small
companies, two of Wallons, of Morcant and St. Mary, one Flemish of Captain
Munter, and one Scottish, whose Captain was Mary, Morcant, and the Scottish,
were entered but few days before, for that the Spanish camp approached: after
much denial, especally that of Moroant, who remained five hours upon the dike
before he was assured whether he should enter or not. All towns do commonly
so, refusing to receive so great a garrison (...) proffit hurts the gene^all.


Those of Oudewater seeing themselves thus beseeged, both great and small,
wives and maids, began to fortefie their town, continuing day and night, even
unto the end: first they did mure up with earth their ports, toward Issell;
that toward Goude remaining Go^d order in the town.
(which might have covered the enemy) to rampar withal, and having brought it
all into the town, they did in like sort dam up the same port making only a
little posterne. Then they rampared in all places, where they thought was
greatest need, they beat down all the tower trees and houses that might hurt or
anoy: and prepared al things that might serve for the defense of the town with
great diligence. And although they knew not well the Spaniards resolution,
whether he would batter or famish them: least that the seege should continue
too long, they set down an order for the victuals. And to the end the soldiars
should not be drunk, they did forbid the bruing of any strong beer, reserving
what there was; and the wine for their greatest necessity; and in like sort
they caused

The third of August the Spaniards began to batter with one only piece (which
he had planted the night before) the Church steeple, standing at the foot of
the rampare toward the west, the which they continued all the day: the first
boullet fell into the Church, waying forty and three pounds, the night
following he added an other to it, and with these two pieces he continued his
battery against the said Steeple meaning (as 1575.


The sixth Day of the month in the morning, the rest of the artillery being
planted the night before, being in all five and twenty pieces, The Signior of
Hierges General of the Army, caused the town to be somoned to yield unto him
in the name of the Oudwater sommoned to yield and refuses.
King of Spain and of the great Commander his Lieutenant, with promis of good
usage, using withal great threats if they did it not speedely: setting before
their eyes Morcants opinion was to say, that the soldiars were not in good
terms with the Bourguers, to stay the battery for one day, and in the mean
time to arm themselves the better against an assault. This answer being
delivered to the Seignor of Hierges, who stayed near unto the ordinance, he
presently caused all to be discharged, and so continued the battery until
night, with such fury, as the captains had never seen nor heard the like,
having discharged that day a thousand The beseeged prepare to defend the breach.
The deligen^ of the beseeg^
which they laid planks full of nails, and a great Mortar charged with the
heads of cart nails, and other pieces of iron. The breach which the Spaniards
had made in

The seventh day of the month, as the beseeged thought to have an assault
given, having preparde the day before to defend it courragiously, they made
their prayers, and set all things ready upon the rampar; the cannon began to
play again, and brake in a manner all, so as they were forced to retier the
rest, the which they could not place again. The battery continued until
Noone, noe less furious then the day before, and then they gave two or three
false assaults. A little after noone, began the great assault, the which
continued a good hour, where as the soldiars, Bourguers, wives, maids Oudwater
taken by Assault.
the chief defendants being slain or hurt, the rest were forced to abandon
the Rampar to the victorious enemy. Captain Saint Mary (who was also Sargent
Mayor) was slain there, with the Lieutennant of the Scottish company, captain
Muntre was wounded, whereof he died soon after being prisoner. Captain
Morcant was also hurt and a prisoner, and afterward delivered in exchange of
an Ancient and a Sargeant Spaniards, whom his wife bought, else there had
been no mercy for him, for that a little before he had come and yielded
himself to that party, obiecting unto him that he was the cause why the
town would not yield by Composition. The Commander did The cruelty of the
Spaniard.
infants even out of their wombes. The Preests and Monks showed themselves
most Chrestine of Queillerie Minister of the Wallon Companies, was not known,
and having remained five weeks a prisoner, in the end he was delivered for
three hundred florins ransom. In this sort the poor town of Oudewater was
taken and ruined. After the taking of this town which was the 7. of August the
Seignior of Hierges went the 12. day to inuest the town of Schoonhouen,
whether Schoonhouen (...) by the Spa^.
the Prince sent the Seignior of La Guard Collonell of the French, a gentleman
that was learned, and had been long practiced in the exercise of Arms, of
whom we have spoken in the seege and vitteling of Leyden: who not only in
war but also in matters of State has done great service to the Prince and
States, by his wi^e and grave Schoonhouen y^lded by an honest Composition.
night, fearing to have enemies both within and without, the next day the
Spaniards being ready to renew their battery) by an honorable commposition he
saved the town, his men, their arms and Bagage, for he could not have
defended it long with honor.

Whilst that the Seignior of Hierges with this Spanish army made war in
Holland, the King of Spaines Viceadmirall borne in Middelbourge, persuaded the
great The Spaniards de^ upon Ziricxzee.
and they came from one, who in sea causes had good experience, and was
welacquainted with all the passages of the country, and with that sea, The
Commander not-with-standing any difficulties that might contradict the
undertaking of this enterprise, and knowing of what importance the happy
success thereof might be, would have it put in execution. To this end he
gathered together his army and imbarkt them suddenly, going himself in person
along the Island of Tolen, near to the I Will of Schauwe, the which he would
surprise, being divided only by a river: there were in the I Will of Anne,
not-with-out great pain and toil, whereas they planted their camp in Saint
Annes Bourg, along the dike. Sanchio d'Auila who at that time was Admiral in
the absence of Cont Bossu (being prisoner at Horn) came thither with his
ships, bringing a good troop of footmen, and so they entered at a low water
into the Island of Duyuelandt on Saint Michales day. The next day he went with
his galleys toward the Island of Schouen, other-wise called Zirixzee, where
they entered also, but with great The Span^s (...) unto the (...) Ziricxzee.
together, and then gave an assault, but it was so valiantly defended as at
that time they 1575*
The siege of ziricxee.
A fleet from Spain with new soldiars.
they needed, then they came to Dunkerke, where having landed their besognes or
new leauied soldiars, and the money which they brought, they were forced to
winter, and the ships to be in the haven of Dunkerke: during the which, by
reason of great tempests, and John du Bois attorney general in the Netherlands
for the king of Spain, was sent as agent into England by the Commander, to
entreat her majesty to The Commander sends an agent into England.
banish all the Kings rebels that were retired thither. The which was at the
first refused him, the Queen finding it very strange and unworthy the Majesty
of a Prince, to chase away the poor exiled Netherlanders, who were fled into
her dominions to save their lives and to avoid the Spanish tirany, practiced
both against their bodies and consciences. Showing the mischief which had
insued, and how much the King his master had bin preiudized in the like case
3. years before, when at his request she had driven out of her Ports the Earl
of Marck, and them of his company with their ships, who being thus
Vandan-bergh and la Marck, the signior of Esquerdes and of Lumbres brethren,
Rumen, Carnesse, Noielles, Blioul, Bredam, Boisot, Saint Aldegonde, Mansart,
Vanden Dorpe, Vander Aa, Houtain, Vanden Timpel, Iunius and many others, to the
number of fifty by name. This was granted by the Wilson her agent, she had
obtained of the Co^mander, that the Earl of Westmerland and al other English
rebels should be in like sort banished out of the low-counties: and that the
English ships, 4. at once (the which she had also obtained The States resolve
for the preservation.
from the Prince of Orange) might traffic freely at Antwerp, and in all other
places. During this negotiation, the Prince of Orange and the States of Holland
and Zeland, finding by that had past at the last conference at Breda, that
there was no assurance of peace with the King of Spain, whereby they might
enjoy the exercise of their relligion, they consulted to what part they should
turn, and whom they should seek unto, to preserve their lives, wives,
children and goods against the violence of the king of Spain: whereupon they
propounded to choose one of 3. great and mighty Monarks, for their Protector
the Spaniards, as of the adverse party: besides the said Princes would never
endure, that 1576.
The united states send to demand succors from England.
having duly considered which of these three might be most available for them,
seeing that the estate of their affairs required a speedy resolution of the
one, before that their enemies should prevail more over them; they concluded
that they must seek to the Philip of Marnix signior of S. Aldegunde, John
Vander-dorpe signior of Nortwyck, William of Nyuelt, Paul Buys advocate for the
states of Holland Doctor Malson a Lawier with others, with commission, to make
a league with the Queen: or to submit themselves under her prot^tio^: or if
necessity so required, to acknowledge her for their Princess and soueraign
Lady, issued from the Earls of Holland and Zeeland, by the Lady Philipot,
daughter to William the third of that name, Earl of Henault and Holland, etc.
Whereupon the Queen, waighing of the one side the hatred of the Spaniards, the
jealousy of the French, and the great charges she must be at, if she
undertook their cause, grew cold in satisfying of their she did lay hold upon
Holland and Zeeland, before the French her natural enemies. In this ^ort the
requests of the united states were refused, giving them leave notwithstanding
to levy men and munition within her realm for their money, and to transport
it: and so p^ssed the year 1575. the Spaniards remaining before Ziricxzee. At
this time the The Co^man^ (...) of (...).
town at his discretion, as he had done the villages of the champian country,
asking 28000. gilders monthly of Antwerp, to pay Colonel Hannibal Vander-Ens
regiment, who threatened the town if they would not pay it. Then was the King
of Spain found The King of Spaines b^bt.
of fouerteene Millions and a half of crowns or ducats, besides what he
ought unto his soldiars, which sum did rise so heigh by reason of the intrest
money, whereof the Pope being advertised, he gave the King a dispensation of
all his promises, contracts and morgages, whereby he might lawfully break and
recall the same, where upon the King upon the first of September 1575. made a
proclamation, and an other the fifth of December, 1577. whereby he called in,
disanulled, and made void his contracts and promises made unto all his
creditors, reducing his debt to a smaser sum. This want of money in the King,
and his great debts were not to be wondered at, for at the same time the
Netherland wars had cost him above forty two millions of ducats, whereof The
demand of Flanders to the commander.
of the Commander, so as in steed of receiving money, the Provinces complained,
some demanding restitutio^ of their liberties, others to be freed of their
garrisons, according to his promise, others demand an account as they of
Flanders, who had promised 100000 gilders, upon condition that out of the same
they should deduct the losses they had sustained by the Spaniards, and should
have a due account of all that had been disbursed to the soldiars for service
and lodging money, as also that the soldiars should depart out of Flanders, and
be punished for the wrongs and insolences they had commit Richardot Bishop of
Arras, a learned and well spoken man. The chief points whereof were,
protesting first, that they would not abandon the Catholic Romish The request
of the comander.
be sent out of the Netherlands, and that the Nobility and natural borne in
the country might be employed in their places: that marshall discipline might
be observed, and that the contributions of the country might be employed to the
use that they were granted, that their privileges might be mantayned and kept:
that the King might be duly informed of all things, and that he might have a
council of Netherlanders by him, to have a care of all things that concerned
those Countries, and that the mutined Spaniards might be punished, and the
bands of ordinance new erected. This request being presented unto the
Commander, who was then in Duyueland he was much troubled, crying out D^os nos
libra de estos estados, and so came presently to Antwerp, where he made known
the reason why he had assembled the estates, which was to have money, and The
fort of Crimpen taken by the Protestants of Holland.
1576. they took a great fort called Crimpen, in the gulf of the river of
Leck, by the which they did warrant all places betwixt Dordrecht and Rotterdam.
After the taking of Schoonhouen the Seignior of Hierges went to beseege the
town of Woerden the which he did block up very straightly, for that he could
prevail nothing by battery, by reason of the Inondation, neither could he
approach his cannon so nere as to plant it in battery, for there were two pieces
drowned which he had planted, being not able Lewis of Requesens great Commander
of the castile, Governor and Lieutenant The death of the great Commander.
general to the King of Spain in the Netherlands died the 5. of March in
Brusselles, of a pestilent fever, or else of the plague it self. After whose
death the King not able so soon (...) dispose of another governor, which the
States required might be a Prince of 1576.
said co^tries was put into the hands of the council of State, which caused
some alterations, as we will presently show* Chiappin Vitelli Marquis of
Cetona, marshall of the (...).
king of pain, army, died a little before, being fallen out of his coach, from
the top of a dike in the land of Ziriczee (otherwise called Schouwen) wherewith
he was sore bruised being a heavy and a corpulent man: he was put into a bark
to be conveyed to Antwerp, but he died by the way: he had bin a brave soldier,
and of great experience, but a scorner of all religion being accustomed to say;
Morto mi, morto mi Caual, which is as much as to say, when I am dead, all the
world is dead, which is the proverb of an Atheist. The Duke of ^orence had
sent him to serve the King of Spain, to be rid of him, for some

The Prince of Orange hearing that Ziriczee was so distressed, as without
speedy succors it would be lost, having endured a siege of seven months, came
into the I Will of Walchren, to advice of the means to succor it. The Zelanders
prepared an army by sea to victual it, but all the passages were so guarded by
the Spaniards, and the river so strictly shut up as thinking the 13. of June to
do some great exploit, they did nothing but lost some of their ships, and many
of their men, among others Lewis of Boisot their Admiral, whose eldest brother
Charles of Boisot governor of the Island of Walchren, had bin slain before at
the passage of the Spaniards into Saint Anne-landt, Philip-landt and The Adm^ll
(...) slame.
Peter Ernest earl of Ma^s^ieldt, governor of Luxembourg, general of the
Spanish army, whilst that the said council should manage the affairs of
state, until the King should other-waies dispose thereof. The King approved
all, hoping it would prove succesfull unto him; for it seemed unto him that
matters should be managed with more modesty then they had bin under the Duke
of Alua, or the great Commander. In the mean time the town of Ziriczee not
able to hold out any longer, sent their deputies to the council Ziriczee
yielded to the Kings council of state.
of State at Brussels, who received them, and made an agreement with them,
whereupon the town was yielded to the Kings obedience, the soldiers departing
with arms and baggage, but no colors flying, nor drums sounding, nor matches
lighted, until they Adolph of Hemstede, viceadmirall of An^werp (taken prisoner
two years before) should be delivered without ransom. It was decreed that
Sanchio d' Auila should retire from thence with his Spaniards, in whose place
Collonell Mondragon should enter with his regiment of Wallons. This victory of
Ziriczee (like unto that of Harlem and the battle of Mocken) caused a mutiny
among the Spaniards. The soldiars which had continued all the winter before the
town* ^d end^red great miseries, seeing themselves in a poor wretched Island,
where there was nothing to be gotten, so as taking an occasion upon the
arrerages of A mutin^e am^ng the spa^ards.
their pay, they gathered together about 1500. men, and in despite of their
Colonels Peter Ernest of Mansfieldt, who went to parle with them in a village
four leagues from Brussels, but they would do nothing without mon^* he told
them that there was no money in the Kings cofers, but they should be paid the
first that came out of Spain: these words did incense them more then before,
(...).
without any resistance. Soon after they went and besieged the castle of
Lydekerke a strong place in Brabant the which was yielded them by the Lord of
the place although there were some of the Earl of Roeux regiment in it, and a
great number of peasants: Ieronimo de Roda chief of the council of troubles,
(who had succeeded in the place of John de Vergas retired with the Duke of
Alua) went thither to pacify them: but it was well known that what Arschot
and Mans^dt did, was to draw themselves out of the danger of the fury of the
people of Brusselles, who were much moved, and the said Ieronimo de Roda to
go and join with the mutines, as he did in Alost, where he was well welcome,
and acknowledged for their head. The States of the Duchy of Brabant,
considering these proceedings, and the excess of the Spaniards, made their
complaints unto the general estates of the Netherlands, entreating them to
provide for the avoiding of further inconveniences, but it seemed that in steed
of punishing them, the council of State did The mutine^ proscrib^d.
State had caused them to be proscribed and given leave to all men to kill
them, or otherwise to entreat them in any hostile manner. Then was the time
fit to chase away the mutinous Spaniards. In a manner all the towns of Brabant
and Flanders, yea of Arthois and Henault took arms, every one beginning to
cast his eye upon this Ieronimo All the contry in arm^s to chase away the
spaniards.
de Roda a Spanish priest, and other counselors and Noblemen Spaniolized. And
as they were not very sure of their persons, so could they in no sort trust
them: and the rather for that they see the Marquis of Haurec and others newly
come from Spain, were Sanchio d' Auila, that Ieronimo de Roda who went and
came from Alost to Brusselles, and other Spanish Caualiers, should retire from
Brussels and go to Antwerpe, and that some other Noblemen of the country
should go to Brussels. In the mean time whilst that the States gathered
soldiers together, the Colonels did all they could to provide money to pay
their mutined soldiers in Alost, fearing some greater inconvenience: the money
being ready, they sought to pacify them, but they were then bitterly incensed
and discontented, partly for that they had bin declared rebels and enemies to
the country, and partly for that they understood of the great preparation that
was made against him: so as the Colonels were forced The Kings council of
state seized on, and why.
members, they appointed the siegnior of Heze, governor of the town of
Brussels, and the siegnior of Gliues great ba^liffe of Brabant, with the
assistance of the Bourgesses, to seize upon the council of state, the which
was done the 4. of September. The chief of them and those that were most
Spaniolized, and suspected unto them of the country, were the Earls of
Mansfieldt and Barlamont, Christopher d'Assonuille a councellor, Berti, and
Scharemberg, all which were carried to prison. The duke of The Duke of Arschot
made chief^ of the council of State.
Arschot was chosen chief by provision, until the first convocation of the
general Estates, the which should be held at Berghen upon Soom, where he
should be allowed and confirmed by a general consent. There were letters
written to the other Provinces and towns, in the behalf of them of Brabant,
to draw them into their society, with their justification for the taking of
the said Noblemen, and a declaration of the love and affection they bare unto
their country as follows.

My masters, it is notorious to all the world, how the Spaniards (borne in
poverty, Letters from the States of Brabant to the provinces and towns (...)
parti^ular.
and come out of a poor country) observing the riches and wealth of these
Netherlands, their pernicious desseigne at the first alteration which happened
in these Netherlands 1576.
Machiuells precepts, put many of the chief and ancient Nobility to death,
building here and there Cittadels, to reduce the people into slavery; besides
the excessive and insupportable impositions and executions, as of the 30. and
10. penny of all merchandise: advancing the skum of his lewd instruments, to
offices of greatest honor: entertayning a multitude of traitors and spies among
the people to observe their actions and words ^and against the liberties,
freedoms and preuiledges of the country, hindering and forbidding the
connocation to the enemies of the country, until that the King may be fully
informed of the estate 1576.


At this time there was a great discontent betwixt the English and the
Zelanders, who could not endure to see that the Merchants of the Netherlands
under the K. of Spaines A discontent b^wixt the English and the zelanders.
obedience, should traffic into Spain in English ships, under the name of
Englishmens goods, although they did belong to them of Antwerpe, Tournay,
Lille, Valencie^es and other towns. Of which ships the Zeelanders took some,
the which by the iudg^ of the Admiralty were adiuged good prize. The complaints
hereof being come Philip of Villiers, Minister of the French Church was sent by
the merchants of the low countries remaining in England, to the Prince of
Orange: whilst that these matters were in question and that the English ships
of war made their conuoies unto Dunkerke, the English took five or six
Zelanders ships, the which they spoiled, keeping the captains prisoners. These
alterations and discontents did much please the Spaniards, who hoped to Barkley
an Englishman, with so good instructions, as the Queen was well satisfied,
whose pleasure was that al quarells should be ended, and the ships and
prisoners delivered, to the loss of the English merchants who had bin the
motives. After the seazing of the lords of the council of State, some noblemen
of authority (whereof the Earl of Lalain governor of Henault was one of the
chief) sent in the name of the States of Brabant, to beseech Frantis of
Vallois Duke of The duke of Aniou sent for into the low countries.
Aniou and Alanson, the French kings only brother, to embrace their quarrel
against the Spaniards, and to receive them into his protection. For his better
satisfaction he came in post with fifteen or sixteen horse to Mons in
Henault, (having past by Lens in Henault, where he was known by some private
persons, and saluted by the Lord of Capres, A league against the m^tines.
with the mutines. The country of Henault at the persuasion of the Earl of
Lalain* the Earl of Reneberg and the Baron of Fresin join first, by reason of
their proximity and neighborhood: Flanders, Arthois, Lille, Douay, Orchies,
Tournay, Tournesis and other Provinces followed them (except Luxembourg and
Namur, whereof Mansfeldt and Barlamont, that were prisoners, were governors) and
they make a league and perpetual Granuelle, whether it were to play the good
fellow, or that he durst not oppose himself against the States) hearing that
some Italiens of these mutines were entered into his government* he sent to all
the towns to put themselves Gren^t brother to the signior of Werp and my
self, went out of Bethune with about fifteen hundred men, to encounter them,
and to join with them of Arras, Hesdin Air, Saint Omer and other towns, so
as in all we might have made five thousand men. But the only brute hereof made
the Italiens retire toward Cambresis, and from thence into Henaut, from whence
the Earl of Lalain did in like sort chase them.

The Kings council was much troubled and perplexed at this mutiny, the which
turned into a general alteration (which they term Alborotto) and they feared
some greater inconvenience, if the French should chance to deal in it:
wherefore they send some special persons among them to require the mutined
Spaniards, to rest satisfied Don Fernando of Toledo caused those men which he
had in Holland to come into Brabant: and so did Don Alonso de Vergas, general
of the horse: who retired themselves with their men into the castle of
Antwerp, as into a place of safe retreat. Sanchio d' Auila castellan of the
said castle, sent for the Spanish The Castle of Antwerp a retreat for the
chief of the ^utines.
Merchants that were in the town, entreating them to furnish (upon his word
and promise to be paid at a certain day,) as much v^ctualls and munition of
war as he should demand, the which they did, so as the castle was well
supplied of all things to endure a long seege. Iulien Romero did the like in
the town of Liere, and captain Montis^oqua at Mastricht.

The States on the other side were not negligent to leauy men every where,
doing what they could to keep the Spanish forces, as well mutiners as others,
from joining together, or to have intelligence one with an other, suffering
nothing to pass to those towns and places which they held. There were then
betwixt Louvain and Tillemont five companies of these mutined Spaniards,
Italiens and Bourguignons, lodged in the Village of Wessenaken. The States sent
the signior of Glimes to dislodge them from thence, having with him the
garrisons of Brussells and of Louvaine, with some men at arms, being in all
about three thousand men; with whom there joined some Burgers of Brussells and
some scholars of Louvaine, some to the fight, others to get some spoil, so as
it seemed that he that would not go did not love his country. The Spaniards
being Alonso de Vergas being joined with them with his horse, lay in ambush in
a little wood near unto this village, commanding the foot to go forth and
skirmish with the statesmen when they should see them approach, the which they
did and were sharply charged by the statesmen, so as the Spaniards retyring in
good order, still skyrmishing unto the ambush, being hotly pursued, the The
St^tes men def^ated at (...) ^ken by the mut^s.
horsemen breaking forth charged these foo^e-men that pursued (for their bands
of Ordinance were not yet advanced* who breaking their ranks were put to rout
and all defeated, so as few escaped: the which happened in the end of
September.

The last of the same month, commandment being given to all the towns of the
Netherlands that were confederated togi^her against the mutined Spaniards, to
arm, Barlamont. And to assure the passage (...) ^t the (...) of (...) won
(...) the (...)* (...) the (...) o^ (...).
from Macklin to Antwerp, they ceazed upon the Village of Walhen, where they
made a strong fort sufficient to defend the bridge. Iulien Romero being at
L^ere* came with his Spaniards to seize upon this bridge, he gave an alarm of
the Francis of Nidouchel signior of Ysberghe Lieutenant Colonel with three or
four captains and Lieutenants, and a great number of was burnt, lost at the
time above eight hundred men. Presently after the Spanish 1576.
(...) d^ Vergas, and of don Fernando of Toledo marched toward Maestri^, to
keep the States from passing any men over the river The States thinking to
assure themselves of Maes^cht are prevented by the Spaniards.
of Meuse, the which did much import them: which they could not at the first
effect for the Germains that were w^thin the town (being united with the
Bourgers) had thrust ou^ the Spaniards and kept (...) prisoner:
not-with-standing that Captain Marti^d Ayala ^d done his b^st ^deuor to get
him out of their hands: don Alon^ coming before the town of Marst^t, a
Spanish soldiar came to ad^ertise him of the State of the town, and that upon
one (...) the ports there remained yet some Spaniards who had good means to
give them entr^ce* Don Alonzo hearing this, caused a good number of foot to
pass the river in boats^ ^yne with the rest on the other The Cittadell of
Cambray su^prized ^or the States.
for the Spaniards, the States sent the Seignior of Inchy of the house of
Ge^re, brother to the Baron of Fresin, to seek some means to surprise it, the
which he did i^ ^he beginning of October, with the help of Captain Anthony of
Gouy Lieutenant of the said Cittadell, and of some soldiars at their devotion,
so as a port being wo^, and the (...) cut in pieces, the Seignior of Liques was
taken prisoner, and ^nchy made him^fe Master of the p^ace, and was appointed
governor thereof by the States, where he continued unto his death, in the year
1583. The confederate States seeing that all the Spaniards The States seek ^o
assu^ them-se^s of Antwerp.
they resolved to make themselves strong in Antwerp, and to di^de the Castle
from the Town: for the effecting whereof, they drew the garrisons out of
Brusselles, Macklin and Louvain, the which they gave in charge to Cont Phillip
of Egmont (who was after wards slain in France at the Battle of Yuery) with
his own regiment, consisting of old and new companies of Wallons, and his
company of men at arms, with whom there joined the Seigniors of Heze and
Berselle, br^theren with their regiments, the Marquis of Haure^ with 500. light
horse with the Seignor of Bieure and some other Commanders with their troops.
All these troops having good correspondency with Frederic Perrenot Seignior of
Champaigny and the Earl of Ouersteine Colonel of the Germains that were in
the new town of Antwerp, arrived late and very covertly before the town the
third of November, remaining there until that the Seignior of Champaigny
Governor of Antwerp, and the Earl of Ouerstein came to speak with them, where
they resolved that the next day they should enter, and should have quarter^
(...) in^o de R^ (...) o^ the (...) mu^s.
appointed them, the which was don by the break of day. The president ^eronimo
de Roda chief of all the Spanish mutins, and others, being in the Cittadell,
concluded with Sanchio d' Auila, and others of the council of Spain, to send
for all their forces with speed and to draw them into the Cittadell: and in the
mean time they began to batter the town furiously in ruin, and the streets
which did open upon the plain, to keep the They (...) A^ (...) s^ ag^nst the
(...).
But the mist was that day so great, as they could not discern one an other
being near, so as the Spaniards could not do any great harm^ but to the topps
of their houses.

In the meane-time the townes-men make Barricadoes, and retrench^ all the
passages of the plain, and made them so strong, as it seemed impossible to
force them. Ortis sallied forth of the cittadell with some Harguebuziers, to
discover their defenses, and found the Townsmen so weary of working, as he not
only forced their Barricado, but also cut a corpse de guard in pieces: at this
time he might have wone the town if he had been well seconded with men:
having slain about fifty men, and burnt a Mill and some houses that might
annoy them, he retired into the Castle, from whence the sky being clear,
they shot continually against the Barricadoes, the which notwithstanding did
not hinder the work, sometimes carrying away the head of one or the arm or
leg of another: yea the women labored with such courage, as they respected
not the great Ordinance, to the mercy whereof they did expose themselves
willingly and without fear.

The twelfth of October the same year dyed that virtuous Prince Maximilian,
the second of that name Emperor, being very desirous to retain the conference
of peace, The death of the ^p rout (...).
which had been begun in the town of Breda, the which he would gladly have
seen take effect in his life time. He was a wise, prudent and discreet prince,
fearing GOD, a great lover of peace and an enemy of discord, free from
ambition and desire of greatness: he was well seen in languages, and in the
holy Scripture. He could not endure that war should be made for religion, and
was wont to say: That it was a deadly sin, to seek to force men's
consciences, the which belongs to God only. He was not dissolute in
apparel, lived soberly, and never continued above an hour at table: if he
chanced to be somewhat more, it was to discourse of natural Philosophy,
wherein he was much Charles the fifth, a Princess endued with singular virtues,
by whom he had sixteen children, whereof six dyed before him; the other ten
suruiued him, that is, Rodolphus (at this day Emperor) Ernest, Mathias,
Maximilian, Albert, Wenceslas, Elizabeth married to the French King, and Mary
to the King of Spain, the names of the other two are unknown to me: he
governed the Empire about twelve years: and at the same time dyed the famous
Prince The death of (...) ^alatin.
Frederic Elector Palatin of Rhine, so as Germany had an unspeakable loss by
the death of these two Princes.

The fourth of November the mutined Spaniards that were in Alost, upon the
commandment that was given them, marched all night, and entered the Castle of
Antwerpe: the next day morning to the number of sixteen hundred men, all old
trained soldiers. At the same instant did also arrive those of Liere and
Mastricht, being glad to be all so fitly come. On the other side, the
inhabitants, and Noblemen that were within the town for the States, were much
amazed to hear that they were all so suddenly joined together. Thither also
came the regiment of Colonel Polwiller a German, having been in garrison at
Maestricht and at Die, being about three thousand Sanchio d'Auila entreated
them to refresh and rest themselves a little: but they were so inflamed against
the town, as they would not stay, but pass on in their exployt. Issuing forth
at the great port, upon the plain, they put themselves into battle, having
boys with them carrying bottles of Straw and firebrarnds, to set fire where
they should command The s^ke of Antwerpe by the Spaniards.
them: and so marching furiously like Lions, at one instant they set upon the
Barricadoes, that were made at the entries of five streets, the which
(although they were strong and well manned) they forced, killing all they
incountred, putting the Wallons (who were yet but new soldiers, and amazed at
their furious charges and cries) to rout, without any great resistance, scarce
daring to show themselves in the trenches, by reason unto the Spaniards; who
seeing that they could not force them, nor draw them from The towne-house burnt.
Ouersteins Regiment and others; which made some resistance, but it prevailed
not, for the f^rie of the victorious Spaniards of the one side, and the
amazement among the soldiars and Burg^rs, of the other side was so great, as
every one sought to save himself: Champaigni, the Marquess of Haure^ and the
Markgraue, being slipped out of the Town, went unto the Prince of Oranges
ships near unto Austreweele, and caused 'em to transport them into Holland.
The Earl of Ouerstein thinking to save himself on the other side of the
river, leaping to a boat fell into the water, where by the weight of his arms
he was drowned.

The Seignior of Bieure being in a boat to pass the river, so many entered
into it The Ea^le of Ouerstein and the Seignior of Bieure drowned.
as not able to bear so weighty a burden, it sunk, where he (and most of the
company) The ^arle of (...) and some other^ p^soners.
the Seigniors of Capres and Gogines were taken in Saint Michaells Abbaie. All
the Wallon soldiars they could find out, being hidden in sellers, garrets or
on the tops of houses, (although it were five or six days after their
victory) were miserably slain Cornellis van Einden, did much harm to the new
Town, showing themselves no less cruel then the Spaniard: yea seeing the
Spaniards have some rich Burgers, and not able to take them away, they ^ue the
poor men, to the end the Spaniards might have no more benefit by them then
their-selues. Among the which there was a rich and famous merchant of Jewels,
called Gilles Sm^ssart an ancient man, having compounded for ten thousand
Florins ransom, was run through behind with a pike by a German, and so
slain; a cruellty that was more then barbarous. In all this Spanish fury,
there died as well of soldiars, as of Inhabitants, above The number of them
that died in this f^ry of either side.
eight thousand persons, some have said ten thousand, that were slain and
drowned in the haven and chanells. Of the Spaniards were slain about two
hundred, besides them Don Manuell Cabesa de vacca, Joan de Robles, Cousin to
the Lord of Billy: Domiam De Morables and others were slain there. Carell
Fucher was sore hurt and trodden under their ^eete that fled. Behold how this
flourishing city, one of the richest and of the greatest traffic in Europe
(by a just judgment and dyuine punishment, for their excess and dissolutions)
received the greatest scourge that ever fell upon town, whereas many of the
richest marcha^ts were made poor, and the very beggars o^ the Spaniards were
inricht in an instant: but some did not long enjoy their great wealth, for
there were simple soldiars which lost ten thousand Crowns in a day at dice,
upon the Bursse which was their playing place. Other A Spaniard deceived.
away with it and came to Flessingue. The riches that was taken there was so
great, as some have affirmed, that there was 1576.
Ortis made choice of a booty, which no man else dreampt of, which was the
prison, where he set at liberty for great ransomes, all the prisoners that
were in it, as well for civil and criminal causes, as them of the religion,
among the which there was some ministers and many Anabaptists; whereby he
gathered a great treasure. The City of Antwerpe being thus miserably
subjected under the enemies yoke, the Spaniards fearing that the States (to
cut of the passage of the river toward Gant,) should build a Forte at Burcht,
before the which all the ships must pass that went to Gant, Tenremonde,
Macklin, and Brusselles: made have to prevent them, and to build one there,
which they A rort built at Burcht by the Spaniards.
Francisco Valdes, with 400. Spaniards.

DON JOHN OF AUSTRIA BAStard son to the Emperor Charles the fifth Governor of
the Netherlands for the King of Spain.
JOANNES AVSTRI. CAR. V. F. PHIL. RE. CAT. NOM^ APVD BELGAS GVB. ET CAPIT.
GENERA.


Although I issued from an unlawful bed,
Yet was I not the less esteemed, but greatly honored.
For when the Emperor dying, did acknowledge me,
To be his natural son, the King did hold me for to be.
His bastard brother and did such affection bear
To me, that to most great affairs he did me still prefer.
The Turk I feared not, but did him overthrow,
And forced the Granadian Moors obedience to show.
My mind aspiring unto high conceits was bent:
And made me practice many things to further my intent.
But being hither sent chief Governor to be,
Death crossed al my purposes, and made an end of me.
DON John of Austria bastard brother to the King of Spain, sent to 1576.
November 1576. the very day that the Spaniards practiced their fury in
Antwerp, by murdering, burning and spoiling of the City, sparing no age sex
nor quality. Being there he writ his letters to the Spaniards in Antwerp, and
to the general Estates assembled at Brussells, seeming in his letters to the
States to be somewhat discontented, for the insolences that had been
committed in the Netherlands, promising to take due punishment, so as they
would show due obedience unto the King, and maintain the Romish Catholic
relligion: whereas on the other side if they continued obstinate he was not
only provided, but resolved as well for war as peace, according to the
instructions

The council of Estate merueyled much at the first that he came not
personally to Brussells, but they were much amazed at the contents of his
letter, which Don John gives the Sta^es cause to suspect him.
seemed to threaten them, who thought to have executed their charge wisely and
carefully, showing himself therein not as their Governor but as their
adversary: which jealousy of theirs increased the more for that he would not
come among them, but upon hostages, desiring also to have their troops under
his private command, or a great part of them for his security as if they were
his enemies. This seemed very strange unto the general Estates and the whole
Country, and bred ill blood in them, and the rather, for that they discovered
that the mutinous and rebellious

The general Estates being likewise assembled at Brussells, consisting of the
deputies of the spirituallty, the nobility, towns and members of the
Provinces, under the lawful subjection of their natural Lord, after
declaration made touching their preuiledges, Don John to be very strange, and
the rather for that they understood out of Spain, that the oppressions and
insolent behavior of the Spanish souldiars were rather applauded then
disallowed, and that in steed of exemplarie punishment, there were more rewards
and honors appointed to be given unto their captains and Commanders: and
they found by certain letters, that Don John had charge to follow such
instructions as Ieronimo Rhoda had left in Antwerp with a Spanish Merchant
called Ieronimo Lopez, and that Rhoda had the managing of all the Netherland
causes in Spain.

The effect of Don John's instructions were, that he should use all the fair
means

A letter written by the Prince of Orange 1576
To the General estates of the Netherlands assembled at Brussells the last of
November. 1576.
MY masters, you have before seen by my letters, what in my opinion (under
your correction) I thought fit to be treated of with Don John of Austria. And
although it may seem unto you, that what I do so often re-iterate, proceeds
from some private passion, or to entertain this Don John. I will not conceal
the fear I have of your yielding to the desseines of the Spaniards our sworn
enemies, being most assured that those which have always labored to hinder
this holy assembly of the general Estates, will do their best to circumuent
you and atteyne to their pretended end: As at this present these covetous and
ambitious ministers, who desire an absolute and tirannicall government, only
to enrich themselves and to oppress such as they hate and malign,
discovering your intention or doubting of it, have sought all means to avoid
it, finding no better expedient then by the sudden coming of Don John of
Austria, that by his presence the said general Estates might be suppressed and
made fruitless. Having John to take some Noblemen and others of the Country to
be of his Council, who notwith-standing shall serve but as a shadow to his
actions, for that all his resolutions should be first concluded with some of
his fauorits, as has been always used, and lately by the Duches of Parma
with the Cardinal Armenteros and some other private persons. And as you may
judge by his instructions and demands, being duly examined, his intent is to
embrace the sovereign government and to suppress both you and your authority.
I could not for the zeal I made choice and put their lives into your hands,
upon the confidence they have that 1576.
Don John, unless the Spaniards and other strangers depart out of the
country, and that you give him plainly to understand (whereof I hold it
necessary that the effect do follow) that your intent is to fortify your
selves, and to provide all expedient means to oppose your selves to the former
government. And that you will not in any sort suffer him to have any of those
troops that are under your command, for that were to give him a knife wherewith
to cut your own throats, and the very means to make a disjunction of all the
men of war of these countries. The which I beseech you not to interpret to any
private passion of anno. 1226. and 1320. confirmed afterward by duke John.
anno. 1322. and by Venceslaus and the duchess Joan his wife. anno. 1372. and
1373. with many others well known unto you. And as in my judgment all men
ought to be careful for the preservation of their preuiledges, if we will not
degenerate from the love and magnanimity of our ancestors, so in my opinion we
ought not (without a perpetual note of infamy and reproach) to stray any thing
from the said preuiledges in any treaty whatsoever. Wherefore to avoid any
long parlees and negotiations (which would be our ruin) on the one side you
are to send him our greeuances which are but too many, and well known to all
the world; and on the other with any forces, have always given their oath unto
the estates, before they received 1575.
John of Austria, then to have any feeling of the violence done unto your
countrymen in that good town of Maestricht, and in that some times so mighty
and flowrishing town of Antwerp, (the which is at this day the most desolate
of Christ dome) and that by men who will be esteemed equal subjects in these
parts, as well as those that are naturally borne in the contry, as some have
unadvisedly put them in that rank at the treaty of Breda, saying that the King
would not have those good men taken for strangers, but for natural borne. And
what an example shall this be for other towns or what may they expect falling
into the Spaniards hands or under the Spanish government? but to feel in time
the like crueky. John through necessity were forced to yield to the sending
away the said Spaniards, you must provide that besides the entertayning of the
preuiledges, th^se conditions may be annexed. That the estates shall provide
him a council, as well for affai^rs of State as for the treasure. That they
shall be placed by their advise and council. 1576.


Thus in my opinion you must treat, for doing otherwise, it is to be feared
that thinking to give contentment to Don John, and by that means settle the
country in quiet, you will deceive your selves, and fall into greater division
then before, for you may assure your selves there are many that will never give
credit to the Kings words, nor Don John's, if they see the authority of the
States thus subjected and brought to nothing, in whose Judgment and wisdom
they have put their trust. My Masters although I have written unto you
here-to-fore concerning this subject, yet finding it a matter of such
consequence, and to concern you so much, I thought it necessary to write unto
you again and more amply, the which I beseech you to take in good part, as
proceeding from one who will expose all hismeanes, yea unto the last drop of
his blood, for the safety

WILLIAM of Nassau.

DVring these alterations of the Spaniards and the sack and massaker of
Antwerp, the Brabant and other Provinces seek all^ance from Holland Zeeland
and the Prince of Orang^.
Peeter Ernest Earl of Mansfeldt was Governor, nor Namur where Barlamont
commanded) to cut of the course of the Spanish tirany, which they practiced
daily and openly in these towns which they held: resolved to make themselves
strong both by sea and land, and to make a good peace and general v^ion with
the particular Estates of Holland and Zeeland and their Associats, together
with the Prince of Orange Governor of the said countries. To which end the
Seignior of Haussy brother to the Earl of Bossu (who had been prisoner at
Horn) was sent to Flessingue to

To all those that these prese^ letters shall see or hear, greeting. As the
countries in these parts, hau^ these last nine or ten year fallen into great
miseries and cala^ities, by civil wars, and the proud and rigorous command
and government, outrages, robberies, spoils, and other disorders and
Insoleneids of the Spaniards, and their adherents. their vt^er ruin: And that
the inhabitants of all these Netherlands, being united in Orange, with the
States Damp Iean vander Linden, Abot of Saint Geertru^de at Lovnaine, Damp
Guislani Abot of Saint Peter at Gand, Damp Matheeu Moul^rt Abot of Saint
Guislain, Elect Bishop of Arras. John de Mol Seignior of Ortingen. Francis of
Hallewin Seignior of Sweueghen, Governor of Oudenard, and commissioner for the
renewing of the Laws of Flanders, Charles of Gaure Seignior of Fresin al
knights. Master Elbert Leonin, Doctor of the Laws and professor in the
university of Lovuaine: Peter of Bieure Councellor to the King our Lord in his
Council of Flanders, and the Seignior Quentin Du Pere first Alder^an of Mons
in Henault, with John of Pennants also, Councellor and Master of Accoumpts to
his Majesty in Brabant, Phillip of Marnix Seignior of Saint Aldegond, Arnhold
Van Dorp Seignior of Tamise, William Van Zuylen, Van Nyuelt Seignior of
Heeratsberghe Squiers: Adrian Vander Mylen Doctor of the Laws, and Councellor
to his Excellency, and in the Provincial Council of Holland. Cornellis of
Coinc, a Licent^ of the Laws and Councellor to his Excellency* ^le Buys an
Aduocat of Holland: Peter (...) Bayliffe of Flessingue, Anthony Vande Zyck^lo a
Councellor of Zeeland, and Andrew of Ionghe, Bourgmaister of Middelbourg, in
the behalf of the said Prince, Estates of Holland Zeeland and their Associats,
according to their authority and commission inserted unto the end hereof:
making and treating betwixt the said parties and countries,

First, that all offenses, injuries, wrongs and domages, happened by reason of
the troub^ les, betwixt the Inhabitants of the Provinces comprehended in this
present Treaty, in what place or manner soever, shall be pardoned, forgotten,
and reputed as not done, so as there shall never any mention be made, nor any
one troubled nor molested by reason thereof. And the said states of Brabant,
Flanders, Henault, etc. together with the said Prince, and the States of
Holland, Zeeland and their Associates, do promise hereafter to entertain
faithfully and without dissimulation, a peace and union, and to cause it to be
entertained firmly and inviolably by the said Countries: And so to

Moreover it is agreed that presently after the retreat of the Spaniards and
their adherents, Charles the 5. when as he made a cession and transport of
these Netherla^ds into the hands of the King our Lord: to settle an order for
the affairs of the country in general, and in particular as well 1576.


That hereafter the inhabitants and subjects of either side, of what country,
estate, quality or condition so ever, may safely and freely, hante, frequent,
pass and repasse,

But touching the Towns and places comprehended in the Commission which he

Moreover it is concluded that the said Prince and a^ll other Noblemen, Knights
and gentlemen, private persons and subjects of what estate, quality or
condition soever, together with their widows, douagers, children and heirs of
either side, shall be restored to their good name, fame and honor, and may also
enter into the possessions of all their Seigneuries, goods, prerogatives,
actions and debts, not being sold nor a^ienated, shall be revoked, void and of
no effect. And all proceedings, writings and acts which 1576.


It is also understood that the Countess Palatin, sometimes widow to the Lord
of Brederode, shall be comprehended herein, and enjoy the present benifit, for
as much as does concern Vianen and other goods whereunto she or hers may
pretend any title or right. In like sort the Earl of Buren shall be also
comprehended, so far forth John in the year 1576. last past, shall remain
to the benifit of those that have intrest therein, not-with-standing that the
receiuor of the confiscations has receued any thing, whereof in this case
restitution shall be made. But if any years of the said farms, rents or other
reuenews, were by title of confiscation seized, and received by his Majesty,
every one shall be for so many years freed and acquitted of all real charges
assigned upon his goods, the which by reason of the troubles past he could not
enjoy, ratable for the time that he has been hindered by the above named
occasion.

And for Ghattels and moveable goods which have been sold, consumed or
otherwise alenated of either side, no man shall have any restitution or
recovery. And as for immouable Inter viuos, vell causa mortis, made by private
persons, whereby the true heirs by reason of the said troubles, or of
relligion, are excluded of the said general estates, shall as soon as
possibly they can, seek to equal the said 1576.


Besides this advice the prince procured means for the states to leuy certain
soldiers The States prepar^ their army and send into France and England for
aid.
in Germany, They likewise assembled there army about Wauere in Brabant, under
the Earl of Lalain, the Vicont of Gaunt, and Monsier la Motte Governor of
Graueline, before they sent into France, where they were promised all aid and
assistance. d' Aubigny into England to certify the Queen of the estate of the
country and of there extremity, who for that cause sent Master Smith into
Spain to desire the King to retire all the Spaniardes out of the Netherlands,
and in December after, they sent the Lord of Sweueghen again unto the Queen
to desire her to send them some money, for that they knew Don John's proceeding,
and the planting of Spanish garrisons to be suspected by her: where having
audience upon the 13, of December, he let her understand (according to his
charge,) how cruelly the Spaniards there enemies, were incensed against the
Netherlands, for that in the year 1559. the king had bin desired and required
by the estates to free them of the Spanish soldiers, which The Lord of
Sweueghens o^on to the Queen of England.
to the great burden of the same, had for certain years remained there in
garrison, for and to use other secret means to abuse them, whereof her Majesty
could bear witness Sylla, Synna, and Marius in Rome did) he suffered them to
use all the tirrany they could devise against the towns of the Netherlands, as
to Mechelen, Naerden, Loys de Requesens great Commander of Castille a man of
the same humor, who having for a while played the fox brought likewises all the
privileges of the country in question, whereby the mutinous soldiers, after
there victory at Moukerheyde, without any great cause, were suffered in his
presence, to force the towns as they did at Antwerp, and compel them to pay
them their entertainements: whereas the Barron de Champigni, had good means to
have hindered them from the same: by which means the said soldiers, took
occasion, and imboldened them selves to think, that it was permitted them with
the aid of the neighbors garrisons to overrule ransake and spoil the towns
where they lay in garrison, which had likewise happened in the town of old
Naerden, where he was governor, if God had not John de Austria, as then
nominated by the King to be sent governor into the Netherlands, to cause the
said country to be better coun^d of him, as the King^ letters specified and
contained. In the mean time, after the winning of Ziricxzee, the Spanish
soldiers beginning again to mutine, took in Herentales, and after that Alost,
living therein at discretion as every man saw. The Lords of the counsel of
estates perceauing quia noscit plebs ieiuna timere, declared the mutinous
soldiers in Alost and there adherents to be rebelis, and meaning to punish them
according to their deserts, had determined to raise certain tropes, and 1576.


So as the estates could do no less, then by authority of the council of
state then ruling to take arms for their defense and securities, as it is
permitted both by godly, natural, and human laws, and so made peace with
the Prince of Orange, and the estates of Holland and Zeland, determining after
the driving out of the strangers, to have a Don John could come thither.
saying: that her Majesty might thereby well understand, what had past in the
Netherlands, and what reasons moved the general estates, by order from the
Lords of the council of estate then governing, and representing the person of
the King their sovereign Lord, to have their refuge and recourse unto arms.
And for that cause desired her Majesty to consider, if that they were therein
to be blamed, when as they neither sought alteration of religion, nor change
of Prince (but only desired to serve the king) Tunc tua res agitur, paries cum
proximus ardet.
These reasons graciously heard by the Queen of England, she presently made
answer 1576
The Queen of England an^ to the Stat^ Ambassa^.
and that she had twice or thrice sent unto him, to desire him to consider the
nature and condition of the Netherlands, and to remember how obedient the
inhabitants thereof had been to their natural Princes, which at all times had
governed them so fortunately, and that it was fitter for him to follow the
same course, then to use the extremity, which is always accompanied with great
injustice, and force, and can not long subsist as being a most certain and an
assured ruin of all common welthes, and that if he thought it good, that she
should be a mediator between them both, she would gladly do her best to end
and pacify all quarrels, with condition that they should observe such
religion, as the King would have them to follow, to gether with

And when the Lord of Sweuenghen, made further request unto her for money she
made answer that she would do it, and that she would shortly resolve upon
the same. After that, entering into some other speeches with him, she seemed to
have some dislike of the Prince of Orange, and of the Frenchmen, saying that
she understood Lazarus Zwend^ (a man of great experience and one well known
in the Netherlands) and the like old soldiers of that nation. She said further
it was not long since she had sent one of her Gentlemen into Spain, to show
the King plainly that if he would not retire the Spaniards out of the
Netherlands, she would help to drive them out.

The Earl of Lecester, secretary Walsingham, and others, who thought it
convenient to send Captain Horsley unto the States, to understand their full
intents and meanings, and whether their pretense were to maintain their old
religion, and the authority of their Prince, the driving out of all foreign
soldiers and to be governed by the natural borne subjects of the land, and to
live according to their ancient right, and priueleges, and being thereof
assured, that then the said Captain Horsley should presently ride unto Don
John of Austria, to desire him, that he would Horsley went into the
Netherlands, and there effected his message: mean* time the Barron of
Sweuenghen dealt further with the council of England, which 1576
Boniuet, the French Ambassador in Brussels, and of the duke of Aniou the Kings
brother, who as then had secret intelligence with the King his brother, and the
King of Spain, and such like speeches: after further conference and dealing
between them, the Baron de Sweuenghen procceeded so far, with the Queen and
her counsel, that she caused the value of forty thousand Angels, in bullion or
vnminted silver to be delivered unto him, and his Commissioners, John Mattens
and John Narrot, in part of payment of a hundred thousand pound starling, and
upon the thirty of December sent a gentleman called Master Wineybank, Wilson,
her Ambassador in Brussels, that he might receive the states obligations for
the same, which was done accordingly, where likewise, the towns of Brussels,
Gant, Bruges, Dunkerck, Nieuport, and Middleburg in Zeland gave there several
obligations: It was then also agreed, and concluded, that the states of the
Netherlands should make no peace, nor agreement with the King, without they
included the Queen of England, and her Kingdoms therein, and that the
treaties and entercourses, touching the trade of merchandise should be
maintained and kept; that all Rebels that were gone out of England, should
leave the Netherlands, and that all Englishmen, should be free at sea, as they
were before the civil wars. This was that which was done with the Queen of
England, in regard that

The countries of Brabant and Flanders, having by the taking of Antwerp lost
the navigations of the sea, by the River of Escaut; they cut the dikes upon
Flanders side A passage free to the sea without passing before Antwerp.
above Antwerp near unto Burcht, and beneath right against Austreweel, that
the water of the river and of the sea by the rising of the tides, might enter
into the country which lies betwixt both, being a low and marish ground, as
it did abundantly: so as they of Brusselles, of Macklin, Tenremonde and other
places, without being in danger of them of Antwerp, nor of the fort at the
head of Flanders, right against the

Whilst they were busied about the treaty of Pacification, the general
Estates had their army camped before the castle of Gant, and round about it,
as well within the town as abroad, whereas the Earl of Roeux commanded in
chief, as Governor The castle of Gant besi^ged.
of Flanders, being assisted both with souldiars and munition, which the
States of Holland and Zeeland did lend them upon promise of restitution. In the
beginning the castle was but weakly and slackly battered, they also gave a
^aladoe, Arschot, and the Marquis of Haurec being come unto the camp, and the
castle being battered in breach, and an assault ready to be given, the
Spaniards within it (being about a hundred and fifty) demanded to parle. The
signior of La Guard* Colonel of the Princes French went thither, but at the
first they could not agree, upon the leaving of their arms. In the end
Valentin de Pardien signior of La Motte, governor of Graueling, promised to
cause them to be paid for their The castle of Gant yielded.
arms, whereupon they yielded the place the eleauenth of November, to have
their

The Germans in the mean time began to mutine in Valenciennes, and to make
secret practices with the Spaniards that were in the castle, for the preventing
whereof, the general Estates sent George of Lalain, Earl of Reneberg, Baron
of Ville Governor of Henault, in the absence of the Earl of Lalain thither,
who (although he had but eight companies of Wallons of his Regiment) managed
this business so discreetly, The Castle yielded.
which was kept by a hundred and forty Wallons, whom he forced to yield, and
to leave the place by composition.

The Wallons that were in Frisland, and especially at Groninghen, had some
feeling of this pacification of Gant: so as they would declare themselves for
the general Estates united, to whom they gave an oath by the means which
follows. The States The state of Groningue at that ^me.
had sent Francis Martini-stella of Brussells into Friseland and the country
of Groningen, with charge and ample commission to reduce the said countries
under their obeence, Gaspar of Robles, Seignior of Billy a Gentleman of
Portugal, having married the Lady of Germigni in Arthois, being governor of
the said countries, knowing that he was come to Groninghen, and doubting of his
practices, he caused him to be presently taken prisoner, whom he examined and
tortured cruelly upon the Rack, whereunto he himself put his hand, besides
the torturer, to force a confession from his own mouth, to what end he was
come; whereof having some conceit, and that the Spaniards intent was to
dismember the united Provinces, and the better to hinder the States from
reducing them into one body, that they had sent every one back to his garrison
(after this exploit of Antwerp) to Alost, Liere and Mastricht, meaning to do
no less in his government, he called the Captains unto Fernando Lopez,
Campi, Moncheaux, and others, with their chief officers, requiring an oath of
obedience of them for three months, in all things that he should command
them, during the which he promised them to write unto the King of Spain, and
to know if it were with his Majesty's good liking, that the Provinces of the
Netherlands had united themselves unto the Prince of Orange: and that as soon
as he should be advertised, he would not fail to do as the rest: but his
intent was in the mean time to make himself master of Groningen, and of all
Friseland.

The three and twentieth of November he required the like oath of Captain
Lossi, that he might have the more at his devotion, but he made some
difficulty, saying, That he would first confer with his Sergeants and
Officers. Billy hearing this answer, That nine years past they had taken an
oath unto the King, the which they would maintain until that his Majesty had
dispenst with them. And as the said Governor put a Pen into one of the
Sergeants hands to sign the said oath, he cast it into the fire, saying, That
he would rather dye, the which the other Sergiant and the Corporalls did also
confirm. Billy being discontented at this answer, said unto them: Go your
ways, I will consider what I have to do: the others answered; It must be
then patience perforce. The Sergiants and Corporalls being gone from him, they
assembled their companions and other Officers of the company, every corporal
calling his squadron, giving them to understand what the governor had
propounded, They would rather dye then take a new oath, which they hearing from
the company, they went unto the Officers of Captain Villers (who had then the
guard) to whom they showed what had past, and what was the resolution of their
men, desiring to know their minds: They answered; That they were content to
live and dye with them: whereupon they resolved to seize upon their
Collonell, and to prevent him, assuring themselves, that for this refusal
which they had made, he would seek to spoil them, when they should be
separated after the changing of the guard. And therefore they agreed among
themselves, that not any one Robles Seignior of Billi seeks to spoil them
that refuse the (...)
should discharge his piece entering into guard, without the express
commandment

The Governor thinking to prevent them, caused the Artillery to be charged,
and planted in a street, where the soldiers were wont to pass entering into
guard, commanding Captain Fern^ndo Lopez to have his men ready in Arms, and
as soon 1577
Lossi; then to charge them.

But one of Villers Sargiants having discovered this practice, gave notice
thereof to a Sargiant of Lossis company, before they went to guard, who took
an other street, and came before the Governors lodging, being their
Collonell, wherethey were usually accustomed to give a volley of shot, the
which they did not at this time. The Sargiant Mayor being there present,
commanded them to shoot of their pieces, but they answred him again, they
would not until they had money given them to buy poulder and match. This
Sargiant Mayor being to presumtuous (not considering what time it was)
threatened to strike some, whereupon they began to Lossi seeing this, striking
upon his breast, cried out unto his men, courage, make an end, it is time.
Villers company coming out of guard joined with them, encouraging one an
other, and saying, that they would live and die together, until they were
assured of their Collonell. Fernando Lopez being careful of that which the
Governor had given him in charge, seeing that the guard past not by the
accustomed street, hearing the noise, he went to horse to see what was to be
done, and to pacify this mutine if it were possible. But thinking to approach
he was so entertained with shot, as flying hastily back he lost his hat, which
he durst not stay to take up. Being come into the street of Ebinge where his
men were in arms, he thought to lead them to succor the Governor, but coming
Yolly and Villers in battle: They cried unto the^ that they should not shoot,
and that they would be of their party. Fernando Lopez seeing this, saved
himself, speedily in a Bakers house: his soldiars tore their Ensign in
pieces, and joined with them of Lossi and Villers, giving their faith one to an
other, and promising to die together, and then they marched to the Governors
lodging, the drums sounding an Alarm, and making a great noise. The Governor
being much perplexed came unto the gate with his hat in his hand (for it was
now time to speak them fair, considering the disseine which he had had)
entreating them to be quiet, and if it were money which they demanded, that
they should be satisfied within three The Seignior of (...) taken prisoner by
his own men.
days, with many other goodly words and promises; whereunto they answered,
that they Rhinsbrouck son in law to the Governor, who they also took
prisoner, although he spoke them fair and excused his father in law, leading
him by him.

This done being a general mutiny, they also took these Captains, Lossi,
Villers, The Captains are taken prisoners by a general mutine.
Moncheaux, and Campi with their coullors: the Burgers of Groninghen were in
great fear of the like disaster as happened at Maistricht and Antwerpe. But
seeing the soldiars draw toward the place of Balance, which is upon the
market place, where there was a Pully to give the strapadoe, which they pulled
down and burnt, crying God save the Prince of Orange, God save the Sates, the
Inhabitants grew more assured. From thence the soldiars went to the Provost
general, and drew forth Francis Martin-Stella, deputed by the States, whom
the Governor (as we have said) detained prisoner, having with his own hands
wounded him in prison, being in Irons. Having set him at liberty, they brought
him to the Comptroulers house, to refresh him self a little, then they
conducted him to the market place, into the midst of the Assembly of soldiars,
whereas they did all swear unto him in the name and as Deputy for the general
The soldiars of (...) swear unto the States.
Estates, to remain faithful unto them unto the death. Then they sent him
back, and caused him to be conducted by some of these souldiars, being
accompanied by some Deputies of the Town unto Brusselles, to inform the
States of all, and to Fiasco, but finding him not there, they ran unto the
convent of Franciscan Friars, where they heard he had hidden himself, but
they sought all places yet could not find him: for he being disguised in a
Friars weed, having his head and 1577
This man is of our Order but not of our Convent: The Gouernnor of Zutphen
taken prisoner.
which words they understood not till in the end pointing at him with his
finger, he said: Ipsus est, ten^te eum. It is he, lay hold of him: Then was
he apprehended, and in the same Monkish habit led to the Market place, in
great derision of all the world.

The next day they made proclamation by the sound of the drum, that if any
one had concealed and hidden Captain Fernando Lopez, the Grand Provost and the
Sargiant Mayor, that he should come and reveal them upon pain of loss of
body and goods, and their houses to be burnt. The Provost was found in the
Curates lodging, hidden in the tonnell of the chimney. The Sargiant Mayor was
known, being disguised Fernando Lopez whom the soldiars led crying, Behold
the Hangman of Groninghen. They were all three led to the Convent of Iacobins,
to keep the other Captains company; Doctor Wendorp was also taken prisoner,
not-with-standing all his protestations.

On the Monday following the soldiars of Dain arrived; bringing with them
Captain Sterck and their Ancient prisoners, and they joined with them of
Groninghen, taking the like oath unto the States. And the same day Meysken
Lieutenant of Groninghen was kept prisoner in his house with a Guard of fifty
men. On the tuesday came the garrison of Delfziel with Captain Bernemi Court,
a Gentleman of Bethune, Seignior Fouquieres and his Ancient, both which were
put in good guard: After that the troubles ceased, until they did vnder-stand
what the States would determine, upon the report which Martin Stella was gone
to make. So as in the end all matters were well ordered, the States sending the
Earl of Renenbergh thither, to govern in the place of Colonel Robles:
wherein he discharged himself at this time (for afterward The Earl of
Rheneberghe ^ouernor (...) the place of Robles.
he turned his coat, as we shall see) so wisely, as he drew the Town and
all the Country of Freezland to be at the States devotion, and the Castle of
Groninghen which was then much advanced, and defencible toward the Town, by
the Earls commandment, at the suite of the Burgers, was wholly ruined and
pulled down.

The States seeing themselves engaged in war of all sides against the
Spaniard^, who were proclaimed enemies to the country, fearing some disunion
among them* by Don John should enter into the Country, to make a general union
among themselves, as well of Prelates, Noblemen and Towns, as of others of the
seauenteene Provinces, which was allowed by the Lords of the Council of State
committed by the King, for the government general of the said countries.
Whereof the Original remains in the Custody of the States of Brabant: of
which Union the Tenor follows.

We who have signed these presents: Prelates, men of the Church, Noblemen, A
general Union of the State.
Gentlemen, Magistrates of the King, Towns, Castells and others, making and
representing the States of the seauenteene Provinces, being presently
assembled in this Philip our Sovereign Lord and natural Prince, we give all
men to understand both present and to come, that seeing our common country
afflicted, by a more then barbarous and tyranous oppression of Spaniards, we
have been moved, thrust forward, and forced to unite and join our selves
together, and with arms, council, men, and money, assist one an other against
the said Spaniards and their adherents, being declared rebels to his Majesty
and our enemies. And that this Union and conjunction has been since confirmed
by the pacification last made, and all by the authority and consent of the
Council of State, committed by his affairs of the said Union procured and
effected with all sincerity, fidelity and dillygence 1577.


For these considerations and reasons, and that nothing may be treacherously
done, to the prejudice and hurt of our common country and just defense, or
that omitted by negligence, which shall be necessary for our just and lawful
defense, We have by virtue of our power and commission respectively, and
otherwise for us and our successors, promised and do promise by the faith of
Christians, of honest men and true countrymen, to keep and entertain
inuiolably for ever, the said Union and Association, so as not any one of us
may break or fall from it, by dissimulation,

And in case that any Province, Estate, Country, Town, Castle or house, were
besieged, assaulted, invaded or oppressed in any sort what-soeuer: yea if any of
us or any others, having endeavored himself for his country and the just
defense thereof, against the Spaniards, or for other causes depending thereon,
as well in general as in particular, should be sought after, imprisoned,
ransomed, molested or disquieted in his person and goods, honor and Estates,
or otherwise, we promise to give him assistance by all the said means, yea
and to procure the liberty of them that shall be imprisoned, either by force
or otherways. upon pain to be degraded of their Nobility, name, Arms and
honor, and to be held perjured, disloyal, and enemies to our

And for the strengthening of this our holy union of association, we have
signed these presents the tenth of January, one thousand, five hundred,
seauentie and seven. Underneath were the signatures of the Deputies of every
Province, Prelates, Noblemen, and Commissioners for towns, and underneath them
was written the agreation of the council of State, as follows. The Deputies
of the general Estates here underwritten, having required them of the
Council of State committed by his Majesty for the government of the
Netherlands, to consent unto, and allow, of that which is contained in the
union above written. The Council in regard of the said

By the commandment of the Lords of the Council of State: Signed; Berrij.

IN the mean time the Spaniardes being by means of the town of Mastricht
1577.
The Spaniards charged and defeated by Colonel Balfour.
and other places beyond the river of Meuse, were incountred the same month
near unto Iupille, half a League from Liege, by Balfour a Scottish Colonel,
who charged them so furiously, as many of their souldiars were slain upon the
place, and the rest of them that escaped were all put to flight. Whilst that the
States made war of all sides against the Spaniards, those of Antwerp, Alost
and there aboutes in the Provinces of Flanders and Brabant, had a desseigne to
beseege Brussells, but hearing that Don John of Austria the King of Spaines
Bastard brother, was come to Luxembourg to be Governor and Lieuetenant
General for the Kings Majesty in the

Don John having stayed some time in Luxembourg, the General Estates sent the
Noble Lords of Rassinghem and Villeruall, the Bourgraue of Gaunt, Meetkerke and
other deputies to treat with Don John, so as after many voyages, at the last
he came Treaty betwixt Don John and the States a^ Ma^che in Famine.
to March in Famine the fifteen of December where they agreed upon a general
truce and surcesance of arms for fifteen days, in the mean time he sent
Octauio Gonsaga and his Secretary Escouedo to Antwerp, Mastricht and Liere, to
deal about the sending away of the Spaniards, as he said: and on the twenty
and one of December the estates sent their deputies to Namur, thinking that Don
John would have come Don John's demands of the Estates.
of the Spaniards, saying, that it stood not with his honor to disarme
himself, and to put himself into their hands that were armed, and therefore
he desired that the Estates should in like sort resolve to have their
souldiars disarmed, and all strange souldiars amongst them to depart out of the
country as well the Spaniards as any others.

Moreover he desired to know with what security the Spaniards should depart,
and whether by water or by land. And for that the matter in controversy with
the Estates of Holland and Zeelande and the Noble Prince of Orange was to be
decided by the general Assembly of the States, he desired to know when and
where that assembly should be kept and held, and what pledges and security
they would apoint for his person. By which demands the estates found that his
meaning was not to let the Spaniards depart out of the Prouines and country,
before the question for Relligion and other controversies with the Hollanders
and Zeelanders were ended: whereupon they resolved to follow and persist in
their demands, that the Spaniards should presently depart out of the
Netherlands, and upon the last day of December for his full satisfaction, they
sent unto him by their deputies

A third signed and sealed by the Deanes and faculty of divinity in Louvaine,
of the six and twenty of December 1576. A forth attestation of the doctros and
professors of both laws in the same University, the same day and year, and
a fifte from diverse Prelates directed unto the Pope, containing the state of
relligion in the Netherlands, dated the eight of November last past, between
the general estates of the one part, and the Prince of Orange with the Estates
of Holland and Zeeland on the govern the Netherlands, bearing date the 20. of
December 1576. signed Bartii. The 15^7.
The (...) of (...) to Don John upon ^he 17. of Ianu^ rye.
of Haurec, the Bourgraue of Gant, the Baron of Liedekerke, and Adolph van
Meetkerke deputies for the States, offered to meet him at the towns of Lovuen
or Mecklen, to determine and conclude upon that which was agreed upon at
Luxemburg, between him, the counsel of Estate for his Majesty and the
deputies of the general Estates. And for the assurance of his person, besides
the security offered by the general Estates, he should choose a Commander and a
guard of Netherlands such as were in the States service, which Commander with
his soldiars, should take their oaths unto him, to keep and defend his person,
therewith to content him, and that further they were content, to deliver him 4.
Hostages to be taken out of the Estates or their deputies, that should yield
themselves Don John's answer there upon unto them.
peace were full concluded, whereunto upon the same day, Don John made answer,
that in regard of the great love he bare unto them, and the desire he had to
the welfare and peace of the land he would choose the Lord of Hierges for the
captain of his guard, with a regiment of 3000. souldiars, that then were under
his command, as well for the defense and preservation of his person, as of the
place, which the would choose to be one of the two, which they had offered unto
him, and for Hostages he would have the Marquis of Haurec, the Burgraue of
Gant, Emanuel of Lalain Baron of Montigny and the Abot of Saint Gertrude, which
should remain in the castle of the Bishop of Liege, and there be kept, as he
said they promised him, and so he would be

Whereunto the States made answer, that all the Provinces in the Netherlands,
had promised and vowed each to other, and signed it with their hands, not to
abandon one The states resolute ^nsw re to Don John.
the other, but to make war, until that the Spaniards were gone out of the
country, promising neither to change Prince, nor religion, whereunto they of
Holland and Zeeland likewise had signed, still holding their religion, till it
were otherwise ordered by the general estates. As also, that they had not
granted him to choose his Hostages, for that those which he had named they could
not spare, but they would nominate others not of the same quality, and yet men
sufficient enough, and also touching the Lord of Hierges,

This union aforesaid made by the States, being showed unto Don John, he
partly discovered the politic dealing of the Estates of the land, together
with the readiness and affection of the countries adjoining to aid them, in
regard of the uprightness of their demandes, and that there were many men
amongst them, that would not be moved nor persuaded by all his fair, goodly,
smothe, flattering and dissembling speeches, wherein he planted a great part
of the foundation of his proceedings, according to the general opinion that
the unexperienced people of Spain and Italy have, of the small courage,
understanding, simpleness and bad agreement of the Netherlands, (as the duke
of Alua said, that he would smother and drown the Hollanders in their butter
and milk) he was moved to yield (by the Ambassadors of Rodolphus to that end
purposely sent into the Netherlands, together with the Ambassadors of the duke
of Cleave, and the Bishop of Liege), but most of all by reason that he
perceived the States to have many soldiers, and a great army in the field at
Waure in Brabant, and for that the Spanish soldiers, were in a manner
enclosed, and might easily be brought into want of all necessaries: and on the
other^ 1577
Guise, and the holy league, wherein he was crossed, Don John a^pired to be
King of ^ngland and Scotland.
for that the States found it not requisite, that the Spaniards should go out
of the country by sea, whereupon it seemed that he left off his purpose
touching England, till a more convenient time, or else till the Queen were
dead: which the King understanding, it being likewise made known unto him by
the Pope himself, became very iealious, and after that sent nothing but
strange and limmitted instructions unto Escouedo into Spain, for an other
commission, and more money, the King by the means and council of his
Secretary Anthonio Perez, caused him to be secretly murdered, being thought
to be the only man that moved Don John unto such high aspiring conceits: so
as it was verily believed, that in the next year after, Don John was secretly
brought unto his death; as hereafter we shall show following in the History.

The reason that moved the states generally to make peace, was that thereby
they might be rid of the foreign soldiers out of the Netherlands, whereunto,
those that The reason that incited the states to harken to the peace.
thought to have the government of the land much moved them, alleging, that
of force they must cause the Spaniards to leave the country, although the
priueledges and Champigni was likewise the chiefest cause, that promise and
contract was made, to punish the Spanish and Dutch soldiers for their
insolences, thereby to make the better account and reckoning with the
Duchess, which otherwise would still find matter of complaint and
coffeehouse: whereupon both parties being thus minded, by means and
solicitation of the Emperors Ambassadors, and other Princes, upon the twelfth
of February, in the year of our Lord 1577. they being at March in famine,
made, concluded, and confirmed this contract, which upon the seventeenth of
the same month was proclaimed and published in Brussells

PHILLIP by the grace of God, King of Castile, Leon, Arragon, Navarre, Naples,
Sicilia, Maiorque, Sardenia, and of the Islands of India, and the firm land
lying The cont^ta of the perpetual decree of peace, made between Don John and
the states of the Netherlands.
in the Ocean seas, Archeduke of Austria, Duke of Burgondie, Lorraine, Brabant,
Limbourgh, Luxenburgh, Gelder, and Myllan, Earl of Hasbourgh, Flanders,
Artois, and Burgondie, Palsgraue of Henault, Holland, Zeeland, Namure, and
Sutphen: Prince of Swauen, Marquis of the Holy Empire, Baron of Friseland,
Salines, Mechelin, of the town and territories of Vtrecht, Ouerissell, and
Groaning, and

For that since July last past, to out no small disliking, and great grief,
there has many times happened great division, alteration, and trouble in our
Netherlands, by reason of the insolent behauiours, of our Spanish and
outlandish soldiars (from the John of Austria, Knight of the most noble and
worthy order of the Goulden fleece, who since his being there in our said
Netherlands, having dealt, spoken and conferred, first in our town of
Luxenbourg, with our loving, faithful, trusty servants and friends, the right
reverent father in God, Mathias, Lord Abot of Saint Gildin, elected bishop of
Arras, Charles Phillip of Croy Marquis of Haurec. etc. our Nephew and one of
the Gentlemen of our Charles de Haunart Barron of liddelkercke burgraue of our
town of Brussels, and Adolfe van Meetkerke, counseler and receiver of our
territory of Vrien, in our Earldom of Flanders, committies and deputies for
the general Estates of our said Netherlands, and since that, in our town of
March, and after that in the town of Hoyd in the land of Liege by intercession
and Mediation in the said town of Hoyd of the lords hereafter named, and
ambassadors messengers, and committies of our right high and worthy
well-bee-loued brother Rodulphe, the second of that name, chosen Emperor of
Rome, etc. specially appointed, ordained, and sent, by the said Emperors
Majesty to further the said reconcilation, agreement, and accord, namely, our
loving and good friend Gerrard van Grueesbeeke Bishop of Liege, duke of
Bullion, Marquis Phillip de Alde, Barron van Wieeborgh president, and Andreas
Galle Doctor of the laws, counselor to the said Emperors Majesty: Warner Lord
of Glimmich Drosser of the Land of Iuliers, and John Louerman licentiate in the
laws, both counselors to the high and mighty Prince our wel-be-loued uncle
William Duke of Iulliers and Cleues, etc. Prince likewise of the holy Empire,
as Messengers for the said Duke; also Ambassadors for the Emperors majesty to
effect that which in the said Dukes absence should be agreed upon, with our
well beloved and faithful friends of our counsel of estate, by us appointed
to govern the said Netherlands, and to be of our secret counsel there, and the
before said Lord Abbot of Saint Gilden elected Bishop of Arras, Bucho Ayta,
Archdeacon Frederick Perenot, Barron of Rouse Lord of Champigny governor of
our town of Antwerp, John de Saint Omer, Lord of Moreberke, governor of our
town and Castle of Arien: Francis van Halewin, Lord of Sweueghen chief
baley, and Captain of our town and Castle of Oudewater Knights, and the before
named Adolph van Meetkerke committies and Deputies of the aforesaid States, and
lastly in our town of Brussels, where to continue, and fully to conclude and
agree upon the said treaty and accord with those of our aforesaid council of
estate, and the aforesaid States, meet and assembled to gether with the
aforesaid Lords ambassadors of the empire, and the substitutes of the said Duke
of Iulliers and our loving and trusty servant Don Octauio Gonsaga, Knight one
of our council, appointed and committed thereunto, by our aforesaid John of
Austria, and of our aforesaid counsel of estate, in conformity, and according
to the contents of the treaty propounded between us of the one part, and the
aforesaid estates, on the other part, have for us and our successors, ordained
and decreed ratefied and by these presents ordain decree and ratify in manner
of a perpetual edict, never to be recalled, the points and articles hereafter
following. Frst, that all offenses, injuries, misdeeds, wrongs, generally: all
manner of crimes and actions, don, happened and committed, by reason and
occasion of there shall never be any repetition, molestation, trouble,
question, nor search made 1577.


And for that the Bishops, Abbots, Prelates, and Spiritual persons, of our
said Netherlands, as also the Divines and Doctors of the Laws of our
university of Lovuaine, by their several attestations, have witnessed and
testified that according to the estate of the affairs of our said Netherlands,
(being there present) the treaty of Peace, made and agreed upon in our Town
of Gaunt, bearing date the eight of November last past, between the aforesaid
Estates of the one part, and our cousin William van Nassau, knight of our order
of the golden Fleece, Prince of Orange, and the Estates of our Earldomes of
Holland and Zeeland, with their Associats on the other part, contained nothing
therein, that might or could be repugnant to our holy

Item we agree, ordain and appoint, that all and every one of our soldiars,
Spaniards, high Duches, Italiens, Burguignons, and other foreign soldiars, both
horsemen

And touching the determinate time of the departure of our said soldiars, we
appoint agree, and consent, that all the Spaniards, Italiens, and Burguignons
must and shall depart (within twenty days after warning given them by out
aforesaid good brother) out of our Castle and Town of Antwerp, and out of
other the Towns and Castells and Holds of our said Netherlands which they now
hold, and keep in

And touching the time of the departure of the aforesaid high-Duch soldiars,
they shall and must depart out of our said Netherlands presently after that the
Estates and all and every reasonable educations made out of their paies, as it
shall be found 1577


And that all our said souldiars, Spaniards, High-duches, Italians,
Burguignons, and all others, must and shall, at their departures out of our
said castles and towns, leave all the victuals, ordinance, and munition of
war being therein behind them, in our said castles and towns, which said
towns and castles with the victuals, ordinance, and ^unition, we will, by
the advice of our said council of estate, appoint to be delivered into the
hands of such persons, as are natural borne subjects of our said Netherlands,
and as the preuileges of the said Netherlands import, and such as at this time
are acceptable unto them. And touching the oppressions extortions, and forcible
compossitions, which by any of our soldiers, whosoever they be, have been
done Much promi sed but no* thing performed.
or the countries adioying, and will do right and justice therein, whether it
be in our Netherlands, or in our kingdom of Spain, or any other place, where
we shall think it meet and convenient.

We ordain, decree, and appoint, that all and every one of the prisoners,
which are Philip William van Nassau Earl of Buren into our Netherlands, we
will take order^, that the said Earl, shall be freely sent again into the
said Netherlands, as soon, and presently after that the general Estates shall
have assembled; and the aforesaid Prince of Orange, for his part shall have
truly and effectually performed that, which by them at the said assembly shall
be ordained and appointed for him to do. Item we ordain, decree, and appoint,
that the question, contention, and doubt, touching the restablishing and
placing of certain Lords, and Officers, in their governments,

Item the said Estates likewise have promised to leave, break of renownce and
shall and do promise to leave, break of, and renounce, all and every League
and confederations, which they for their protection and defense, have made
heretofore, with any foreign Prince or Potentate, since the alterations and
troubles aforesaid.

The said estates likewise, and in like manner, have promised, and by these
presents 1577.
do promise, to discharge and send out of our said Netherlands, all and every
one of

Item, whereas the said estates, in witness of their true intent, as also of
the sincere and good affection which they bear unto us, and our service, have
liberally agreed, and offered unto us the sum of six hundred thousand
pounds, of forty Flemish groates the pound, they do by these presents
promise, to pay, and deliver the one half thereof in ready money, unto the
hands of the aforesaid Lords Ambassadors, and messengers of the Empire; and the
Deputies or Committies of the aforesaid Duke of Iuilliers,

And further the said estates have promised, to take on them the charge to
satisfy and content our high dutch soldiers of their paies, as much as after
account and reckoning made with them (both what they can demand, and what is
reasonably to be deducted out of the same,) shall be found to be due unto
them: wherein we and our said brother, will aid and assist them, and by our
authorities, credits, and countenances procure, those that have the said
accounts, reckonings and registers in their hands, to deliver the same, as also
with the said high-dutches, to induce and procure them to be contented with
that, which shall by account be found due unto them. As likewise, the said
Lords, Ambassadors, and Messengers of the Empire, and the deputies for the Duke
of Iuilliers and Cleave, have freely of their own good wills, promised to
procure the

Item, the estates have promised, and by these presents do promise, after the
departure of the Spaniards, Italians and Burguignons out of our Netherlands, to
receive and accept our said good brother (upon showing, presenting, and
delivering unto them, our Letters of Commission, to him to that end given, and
upon his accustomed and usual oath, in that case taken, with the observation
of the other solemnities,

Item, we ordain and appoint, that our successors, and our aforesaid good
brother, and every one of the Governors, that by (...) our successors, shall
be appointed to govern our said Netherlands, generally and perticularly at
their joyful entries, as also all and every one of our presidents,
counselors, officers, and Justices, before their Lastly we are content to
allow ratefie and approve, all and every condition, assignation 1577.


And to the end that all and every one of the aforesaid points, and articles,
may be truly, really, and uprightly, holden, observed, fullfilled, effected
and kept, and that the whole contents of our said contract, may continue, and
remain firm, permanent, and inviolably for ever, we have caused our seal to
be anexed hereunto, and to be signed, Cornelis Wellemans, clarke of the
aforesaid estates of Brabant, and likewise, at the desire and request, both of
us and our good brother, as of the estates the said Lords ambassadors,
messengers of the empire, and deputies of the Duke of Iuilliers and Cleues, as
intercessors, and mediators, of the said reconciliation, accord, and Union,
contained in our said contract, have signed the same, and of their good wills
and special favors, have as far as in them lies by the said committies,
from the John, and underneath by ordinance and commission from his Highness F^le
v^ssuer, And on the other side was written, given in our town of Brussels, the
17. of February 1577. in the 23. year of our reign of Spain and Cicilia, and
of Naples the 25. and under that was written, by ordinance from my Lords of the
counsel of estate of our souera^ge Lord the King, appointed by his Majesty
from hence-forwards to govern the Netherlands, and signed D^ppe, and under
that was written, by especial and express command of my Lords the general
Wellemans, and some what lower Gerrard bishop of Liege, Phillippus Semor
Barron of Winnenbergh, Andreas Gail, Doctor Wernhertro, Gumioh, and John
Lauwerman, and somewhat lower was written published in Brussels the 17. of
February 1577. in presence of my Lords of the counsel of estate, committed by
the King to govern the Netherlands, and of the Lord bishop and Prince of
Luycke, and other Lords Ambassadors and messengers of the Emperors Majesty and
of the Lords the general estates of the Netherlands aforesaid, by me the
secretary of the town of Brussels; under written A^rssens.

This accord made by Don John in from of a perpetual Edict, was in the end
proclaimed at Brusselles the 17. and at Antwerp the 27. of February 1577. to
the incredible The Castle or Vtrecht yielded to the States.
Bossu, and the said Castle was after-wards razed by ^he Bourguers as it is at
this present. This accord made in form of a perpetual Edict, was in the
behalf of A perpetual (...) to the P^nce and States of Holland.
the General estates, by the Seignior of Will^ and Master Paul Buys Advocate
of the Country of Holland accompanying the Ba^on of Wynenberg President of the
Emperors council, We^r La^dt Drossart of the Duchi^ of Iui^ers, and John
Lauwerman Councellor to the Du^ of Cleues, sent to the Prince of Orange and
W^llerval: that the states of Holland and Zel^. etc, together with the Prince
could not sufficiently commend the good zeal of the general Estates, to
discharge and 1577.
The answer of the states of Holland and Zeeland, to the general estates.
to peace and concord: resting assured, that the said states would seek and
labor nothing more, then to free the people from so many calamities which they
had suffered and past, to the maintenance of their privileges, ancient rights
and freedoms: and to redress and replant a good order and rule, as well in
matters of Justice, as of policy, the which have languished during these
miserable wars: and especially to entertain and put in execution the
pacification of Gand. But the said Prince and States, having well balanced and
considered (as it was a matter of great weight and consideration) Touching the
free convocation of the general estates.
of this perpetual Edict: they find that the good desire and great zeal
which the general Estates bear unto it, shall not be therein satisfied. For
first of all it seems,

The breach of which privileges appears plainly by the unjust detention of
the The Earl of Buren detained still notwithstanding the accord.
Earl of Buren: who (as it is notorious to all the world) having been taken
and carried away out of the country against all right and reason: now that the
question is to deliver all prisoners of either side, they make no show to have
any intent to set him at liberty. The which notwithstanding (if they will
entertain the privileges) they Parma, which have been the cause of so great
effusion of blood: against the which Don John hi^ accord (...) suspect to the
states of Holland, etc.
Articles, the said Prince and the States of Holland and Zeeland did protest,
and made Don Joan had been received for Governor, they declared plainly that
this accord pleased them not, and that for their parts they would seek by all
means to maintain the pacification of Gand, and to pursue the Spaniards, that
the world might know they demanded but an end of the wars, and the
preservation of their privileges. The general Estates hearing this answer,
sent the like declaration unto them, and that their intent was to chase away
all strangers, as well Spaniards, Italians, Bourguignons, as Germans at the
time limmitted by the accord, and not to

Here-vpon Don John sought for money to pay the Spaniards, that he might send
them The Spaniards leave the Cast^ of A^werp.
out of the Netherlands, and first of all out of the Castle of Antwerp, for
otherwise according to the contract he could not be admitted to the
government: who having received their pay, the Duke of Arschot was appointed by
the States to receive the Castle, and to put in a garrison of Wallons after the
departure of the Spaniards. The twenty of March, the said Duke, accompanied
by the Emperors Deputies, and by Escouedo Secretary to Don John, entered into
the Castle to receive it. Sanchio d' A^la who was Captain of the Castle,
pined with grief and anger, who being loath to see this change, retired
himself, giving charge to Martin del Hayo his Lieutenant, to deliver Escouedo
received an oath of the Duke in the Kings name, to keep it faithfully for his
Majesty's service. This done, and the great gates being set open, the Spaniards
went forth, being laden with the spoils of the sack of Antwerpe, and marched
toward Maestricht, where their rendez-vous was, to void the country, and 1577
Prisoners delivered of either side.
Floion, Capres and Glimes. And of the Spaniards side were released the
Collonell Robles Seignior of Billi, Mondragons wife, the Governor of Zutphen,
Captain Tollenor and others. The Duke of Arschot Governor of the castle, made
his son the Prince of Cymay his Lieutenant. Although the Castle of Antwerpe
were freed from a garrison of Spaniards, Italians, and Bourguignons; yet was
not the City well assured: for the Kings mercinary Germans, companions to
the Spaniards in the sack of the town, remained with their Colonels Foucker
and Fruntsberg in the new Town, attending their pay, the which Don John seemed
to delay for some further intent, the which put

The first of May the same year after that the King of Spain had ratified the
perpetual The king of Spain ratified the perpetual Edict.
Edict, and the Accord made by Don John, by his letters pattents of the 7. of
April before, the said Don John came from Louvaine to Brussels, where he was
received almost with a royal pomp, by the States of the country, the
Magistrates of Towns, and by all the people, with acclamations and signs of
great joy: and the fourth of the same month he solemnly took the oath of
Governor, Lieutenant, and Captain General for the King of Spain, under the
conditions of the Accord and above named Edict, the which he did promise and
swear to observe and keep inuiolably. Whereupon The great hope they had of
Don John.
the said Don John, be relieved and restored to their ancient estate,
accompanied with all happiness and prosperity, which hope was publicly
testified by all demonstrations of joy, feasts, and kind usage, all men
showing as much respect unto him as if he had been natural Prince of the
country: every one expecting that by his means (the Strangers oppressors of
the country being retired) the governments should be put into their hands
that were natural borne, well affected to the good and public quiet,

But the greater this hope, joy and contentment was to all in general, the
greater was The great conceit they had of Don John not durable.
expectation. For after the departure of the Spaniards, instead of putting to
his hand for the accomplishing of the rest of the points which remained of the
pacification of Gand, and of his accord to root out all occasions of jealousy
and distrust; they see Don John by little and little fill his Court with
strangers, enemies to the country and the public quiet, most part Spaniards
and Italians, or so affected and simbolizing with their humors, as besides the
apparent wrong which he did unto himself, and to his faith and promise, by
the which he had bound himself not to use them, he made his will and
intention manifest, which was to reduce the said countries (already too much
oppressed) under the yoke of them, whom he himself had made show and Don John
puts from him them of the country, and is served with strangers.
Italy, he caused a good number of Spaniards and Italians to enter into the
country; by whom he was ever chiefly served, recoyling and putting from him
as much as he could, those of the country, unless it were some few that
were Spaniolized, or of the like humor: or such as were altogether suspected to
them 1577.
Baptista Taxis to be Steward of his house, and others of vile and base
condition (having served as spies to the Duke of Alua) to chief offices; yea
into his council, although in the beginning he made show that he would only
employ them of the country, and put off strangers: yet by the effects they
found the contrary: for in all occurrents of importants, he only used the
council of the Lord of Gonsague, and of his Secretary Escouedo, doing nothing
Don John admits none to council but them that are Spaniolized.
of importance without their advise, contrary to the Edict and Accord, Article
ten. And when he made show to call any of the country to council, he made
choice of such as were of the Spanish faction, or suspected to them that loved
their country, finding themselves grieved, for that they had been suspended
from their Those that are suspect unto the state are favored by Don John.
aided both with their council and persons, to sack and burn the Town. And
more-ouer he has always employed and been served by them that were suspect
unto the States, for that they held themselves wronged: as the Earls of
Meghen Assonuille, Taxis and others. Whereby there could no other conjecture
be made, but that he pretended to entertain the seeds of hatred and
factions among the Noblemen: and in the end when occasion should serve, bandie
one against another, and by that means be revenged of them all, as the
effects in the end did show. If happily at any time he called the rest, it was
but for an outward show, not to give them occasion of complaint in the
beginning, and the better to cover his desseignes.

After the publication of the perpetual Edict, Don John sent his Deputies to
Gheertrudenberghe to treat with the Prince of Orange, and the Deputies of
Holland and Zeeland; of which conference, and of their speeches of either side,
I have set down a true narration.
THe Duke of Arschot, the Lord of Hierges, Monsieur de Villerual,
Grobbendoncque Metkerke, and Doctor Elbertus Leoninus, assisted by A (...) at
Gheertrudenbergh (...) May 1577.
Doctor Gail, Ambassador deputed for his Imperial Majesty, being assembled on
the one part: and the Prince of Orange, with the siegniors of Saint Aldegonde,
Nyuelt, Vander Mylen, Conynck and Mertkercken began the speech, and after some
demonstration of the sincerity and faithful diligence which Don John of
Austria had used since he was received for Governor in performing of the
promises made by him, and the good which he had done unto the country, in
causing the Spaniards to retire, and that he was still ready to pursue and
bring to a good end what had been so well begun, to restore this country to
her ancient beauty, peace, and happiness, from the which they were fallen
through the government of his Predecessors, and the insolency of Strangers:
Desiring to govern after an other manner by the council and advise of them of
the country, as shall be thought finished all things and reduced the country
to a better estate, that they for their parts 1577.


It were necessary before that his heighnesse proceed any further in that which
he has begun, to remedy these things. And for this effect as the
pacification, made at March in Famine betwixt his heighnesse and the general
Estates of the country was

And besides his Highness would wish that according to that which had been
concluded at the pacification of Gand, and that which his Highness has also
ratefied and promised for his part, they will procure that the general
assembly of the estates may be held as soon as may be, as it is contained in
the said pacification, and that to that end they will consider of the means
whereby they may make them assemble and of the time and other circumstances
thereto required. The Prince having heard this speech, after that he had
retired a little into the Anext chamber, with the deputies of the estates of
Holland and Zeeland, being returned, he answered. Thus Elbertus Leoninus
spoke, and said that to avoid prolixitie of writing, the which did breed but
confusion, they thought it necessary not to put any thing in writing, and
therefore that by way of conference they would answer to the points propounded,
and endeavor to come unto that defired union and concord, propounding also on
their parts the points that might seem to breed any scruple, difficulty or
distrust, that by an amiable conference they might understand one an other, and
if it were possible procure concord and union, which is so Treaty of the
pacification of Gand, which they labor by all means to make fruitless 1577.


There-vppon the Doctor replied that they would not make any difficulty
therein. But that first by an amiable conference they would give them to
understand the points wherewith they held themselves grieved, to the end that
seeking their content, Don John and his Majesty: what hope can we have that
what-soeuer shallbe promised hereafter willbe maintained and kept. Wherein is
it, (said the Seignior of Grobbendoncq that you complain, that the
pacification is not entertained? The question was of Breda and of his Son,
but the first day of the garrison of Breda.

But said the rest, suppose the pacification be accomplished, for all cannot
be done at one instant: Don John has begun well, he must have time to finish
the rest, and matters that are doubtful must be debated, that it may be made
apparent whereunto he is bound. For touching the point of Vtrecht, it is no
wonder if he Aldegond, and concluded by his Excellency, that they should first
fulfill the articles of the said pacification, and that then the Estates
being assembled, they would propound of either side the other points serving
for their greater assurance. There-vppon, Doctor Leoninus propounded, that it
was to be considered that the general Assembly of the Estates was not
without danger; for the great number of them that did assist, and the diversity
of humors,

Whereupon his Excellency answered, that there was a great difference betwixt
the Estates of this country and the Estates of France, seeing that the people
and the whole body here were of one will and mind, and not divided into
partiallities and factions of houses, as in France. And seeing that in the
pacification of Gand, they had agreed But said the Seignior of Grobbendoncque
what assurance will you give unto us to entertain 1577.


By this means said the others, after that you have all which you demand, and
that you have fortified your selves by this means more then ever, you may make
war against us. War? answered the Prince, what fear you? we are but a
handful of men, but a worm against the King of Spain, and you are 15.
Provinces against two; what cause have you to fear? Whereupon the Seignior of
Meetkerke said, we have seen Aldegond replied, we never have nor could make
war against you but defensive: And if we make a defensive war, we must
first be offended. For we will never go to assail the other Provinces. I said
one of them, we know that a defensive war is never made but it is withal
offensive, alleging there-vppon the taking of Geertrudenbergh. Vosberghen then
answered touching Geertrudenbergh, that it was of his Excellencies government,
a member of Holland and belonging to his Excellency, and that it was not taken
by force, but by policy and for want of good guard.

Then said the Prince, the pacification of Gand prouides for this: You or your
Deputies

At these words the Seignior of Grobbendoncq said, to speak the truth, we
have a good confidence in you that you will not make war against us, but we
see on the other side that you seek to disperce your religion over all, and
are not contented to maintain it among your selves, but seek by all means to
plant it in our Provinces: What assurance then shall we have when we have
granted all that you demand, that you will not alter any thing concerning
religion against the pacification of Gand? The assurance which we can give
(said the Prince) is, that we will really accomplish the pacification, wherein
we have promised for our parts not to give any scandal nor Don John, nor
ours. Here is no question of believing or nor believing (answered the Prince)
let Don John and you accomplish the treaty of pacification, and then we will
believe you, but you gave 1577.
Leoninus propounded points wherein you have not accomplished the pacification.
Vander Mylen replied, we have therein satisfied you touching the principal,
and as for the rest, we are ready to give satisfaction: although there be
not any thing wherein we have first broken: for that whereof they accused us,
we have done it by example, which those of Gant have given us by a sentence
pronounced, so as if there be any violation it comes from you and not from us.

But said the signior of Grobbendoncq the chief point of the pacification
contains that you submit the question touching the exercise of your relligion
to the general Estates, what assurance shall we have that when you are
satisfied in that which you demand, that you will accomplish this point? what
occasion have we given you said the Prince to distrust, seeing that for our
parts we have fulfilled the pacification. Seeing then we were once agreed,
you should rest satisfied. But do you promise said Grobbendoncq to submit your
selves unto all that the general Estates shall decree, as well in this as in
all other points, as you are bound by the pacification. I know not said the
Prince, for you have already broken and violated the pacification, having made
an accord with Don John without our consentes, and Grobbendoncq you would not
allow of the decision of the Estates. I say not so replied the Prince; for it
may be such a one as we would accept it, and to the contrary. But we would
there propound and debate our reasons to understand how far we were bound to
submit our selves, seeing we are not so absolute as we were at the first
submission made at Gant. But you shall be restored said Grobbendoncque you
cannot replied the Prince, for you have quite broken the pacification.

Then said Meetkerke, we do nothing; if you will hold the pacification to be
quite broken. It is not we said the Prince that have broken it, but you, and
yet we refuse not to submit our selves, so as we may deliver our reasons, and
without prejudice Don John to maintain the Catholic and Romish relligion in
all places, and caused all men swear to maintain it, so as we can hope for
nothing of the judgment of the Estates but to be condemned. You would not
then said the signior of Grobbendoncq submit and humble your selves to the
Estates touching the exercise of relligion? No truly answered the Prince; for
to tell you plainly we see you intend to root us out, and we will not be
rooted out. Ho said the Duke of Arschot and the Barron of Hierges, there is no
man that has any such intent or meaning: yes truly answered the Prince: we
submitted our selves unto you with a good intent, hoping that you would judge
for the good of the whole country; without any other respect, as was fit, but
you yielding to Don John's will

Thereupon Leoninus said, what was promised in the union of the Estates was
never to that intent, neither did they ever dream of it, but they went to guard
themselves more safely, and keep them from disbanding. But said the Prince
they were leagued together by virtue of the pacification of Gant, the which
does bind them as strictly as the new union. Whereupon Aldegonde added, that
it was an unjust thing, that the treaty of Gant which had been so sollemnly
made, and which they had promised sign it and yield to it. And that thereupon
they must either yield themselves suspect 1577
Don John to the assembly of the general Estates, they must satisfy, or else
remain perjured, notwithstanding their act or declaration. Thereupon doctor
Gaill said in Latin, that he which had made the law, might also break it,
and therefore the Estates who had made this union, might interpret or abolish
what they thought good. Aldegonde answered also in Latin, that there was great
difference betwixt a law and an oath, for he that has taken the oath cannot
dispense with it, seeing that he has made it

Finally after they had much contended about this point D. Leoninus said, that
leaving this dispute they must come to some accord, requiring that they would
deliver up the points, and that they would moderate them, as they had promised
to do. The others answered that they were ready, and delivered them at that
instant: requiring also that they should deliver their points in writing, as
well those which they had now propounded, as those which the signior of Schetz
and Leoninus had propounded before, the which was granted, and so they parted.
Only the signior of Grobbendoncq and Leoninus remained still, and had
conference touching those matters

The Proposition of the Duke of Arschot Baron of Hierges, and other Deputies of
Don John of Austria, made at Geertrudenbergh, to the Prince of Orange and the
Estates of Holland and Zeeland, the two and twenty of May. 1577.
MY Masters the Prince of Orange and the Estates of Holland and Zeeland, you
have heard, how that his Highness according to his promise, has caused all
the Spanish, Italien and Bourguignon souldiars to depart out of the country of
this side, and that at the request of the general Estates his Highness has
the fourth of this month accepted the government general of these countries,
given him in charge by his Majesty, and has taken a sollemne oath, such as the
Estates have required,

That his Majesty has ratefied, allowed and confirmed the said treaty made
by his Highness with the Estates, for the which his Majesty has given GOD
thanks, and is well pleased with all them that have employed themselves in the
making of the said pacification and accord. Nothing now remaining but to cause
the people to enjoy the fruits and effect of the said peace, freeing them
from their forepassed toils, miseries and calamities, wherein this poor
country has been plonged by civil and intestine wars, in restoring the
good and natural love, union, concord and intelligence which was wont to be
among these subjects and Provinces, under the obedience Adrian Gaill the
Emperors Ambassador; to the Prince of Orange and the Estates of Holland and
Zeeland, to consider with them of the effect and end of the said pacification,
and of such reciprocal assurances as shall be thought necessary. And to
declare unto the said Prince, 1577.


In like sort seeing a peace is made and proclaimed, it is necessary that
generally all acts should cease which tend to hostility, and may give any
occasion of distrust, as the entertayning of souldiars, the fortification of
towns and places, practices and allyances, leagues and confederations, even
with strangers, casting of new Ordinance, the which ought to remain in the
same Estate until the resolution of the general Estates. And for that and
other things specefied in the pacification, to give order for the full
accomplishment of a desired peace and the public tranquillity, it is fit to
advise speedily when the said general Estates shall assemble. All which
points

The answer of the Prince of Orange and the Deputies of the Estates of Holland
Proposition.
MY Lords, upon the Proposition which it has pleased you to make on his
Highness behalf, that to take away all jealousy and distrust which seemed to
hinder the sincerity of the peace, we should propound assurances, which we
think convenient for the effecting thereof. The Prince of Orange and the
deputies of the Estates of Holland and Zeeland, have made answer, that it were
a superfluous thing to demand new assurances, seeing that the conditions
promised by the pacification were

First that the advice and answer which the Prince of Orange and the Estates
of de Villerual dated the nineteenth day of February in the year of our Lord
1577. contains many Articles, by which it appeeres that the pacification made
at March in Famine was not conformable to all the Articles of the pacification
of Gant, for which cause the said Prince and Estates have not allowed 1577.


Whereupon they have by an act given and dated the first of March, declared
their intention to have always been to maintain effectually the pacification
made at Gand, and to seek to redress all that they should find done or
attempted to the contrary, or against the preuiledges, rights, liberties and
customs of the Netherlands, as well in general as in particular, and they
promised to cause the like resolution to be signed by the Governors of
Provinces, commanders and colonels, as being bound Item the goods have not
been neither are yet restored to the Prince of Orange, as well in these parts,
as in Bourgongne and Luxembourg. Neither is the Earl of Buren his son
delivered, which does not only impugn the said pacification, but also the
preuiledges and liberties of the country, and the conditions of the said advice
and answer. Item the Prince has not his government yet restored unto him, as
he had it by commission from his Majesty, seeing that neither the country and
town of Vtrecht, nor the towns of Tholen, Heusden and others, are not yet
united to their ancient governments, as they were in former times, where in my
Lords of the council of State have showed themselves John lately (sense the
said advice and answer, where it had been expressly mentioned) subjected the
assembly of the States as well general as particular, unto the good pleasure
John, the which should remain free, according to the ancient rights,
preuiledges and liberties of the Country, in those Provinces and places that
have preuiledges.

Item those of the religion are not admitted in any places and towns of other
provinces, to remain there according to the pacification of Gand as may be
verified by many examples, if they will take informations. And yet
not-with-standing all this and that the promises and obligations contained in
the said pacification of Gand, and sense, in that which the estates have
promised to the Prince and to the estates of Holland and Zeeland be not
accomplished, yet they have received the said Don John for Governor and
Captain general, without the advice of the said Prince and estates of Holland
John with his train of Italiens and Spaniards, the which is even against the
Edict of pacification made by Don John at March in famine. Also we see that
contrary to the said pacification of Gand, many strangers, Italiens, Spaniards
and others, which have showed themselves partial and Spaniolized, have great
credit with Don John, as the Seignior Octauio Gonzaga, Fernand Nunno, the
Secretary Escouedo, the Seignior of Gaste, who has been employed into
England, to break the Union of England and these Countries, with John Baptista
Taxis and many others, haunting daily John, although they have done very bad
offices against the good of the Country, and as the common brute is, Don John
has some secret council with the above named and others of the like humor.

Finally it seems that by virtue of the clauses contained in the league and
union 1577.


Made at Geertrudenbergh the four and twenty of May. 1577.
AFter that Don John had bin received into Brussells with all his train upon a
hope grounded upon his promises, that in time he would dismiss them, and that
after he had settled an order in his house, he would not be served but by
them of the country. Notwithstanding, when as he found that (for so much as
his followers were greatly suspected, to the Bourgers of Brussells, and to all
the Estates in general who had often entreated him to discharge them) he
could not well execute that Don John takes occasion to go to Macklin.
that were of the Spanish faction to enter and frequent his Court, and all that
had declared themselves enemies to their country and favorers of the mutinies,
sedytions, spoilings and outrages of the said Spaniards, having open
conversation and familiarity with them, holding counsels of the State and
affairs of the said countries with them, as the effects conformable to the
letters written to the Germans Colonels have since made manifest: for at
that time instead of treating in the States name of their paiement, and retreat
out of the country, as he was bound by the said Noncio and the Emperors
ambassadors, he practiced with the said Germans to bandie them against the
States, and to do that which he since effected: as it appeeres by his letter
written to the Baron of Frundtsbergh and to Charles Foucker their Colonels the
16. of July in these words.

Worthy Gentlemen, I think you remember well what I treated with you at
Macklin, Don John's letters to the German Colonels.
and the order which I gave you concerning that which it behooves you to do
for his Majesty's service. And although I assure my self that you will not
fail therein, but will put it in execution (according unto the virtue and
wisdom you have Our Lord keep you etc.

And moreover for a more ample declaration of the great desire he had of the
execution of his desseignes plotted there, he added with his own hand.

You know my Masters what I have given you in charge at Macklin, and that in
the execution thereof you shall discharge the duty and service which you owe
unto his Majesty assuring moreover by the same means your lives and
entertainments: 1577
bound with the rest to do that service to his Majesty, seeing it is he that
must pay you, and ^in his name am to take the charge. And to the private
Captains he did write with his own hand underneath the letter written in high
Duch, in these terms. My friends I refer my self to that which your
Colonels shall deliver you more at large. Believe them, and continue as you
ought in his Majesty's service which is the King, whom you serve, and who must
satisfy and pay you, and the like will I do unto you, if GOD permit, as your
General, friend and fellow soldier.

The same month of Iulie sending Jerome Curiell with letters of credit unto the
Colonels, he writ also with his own hand these words in substance. I send
Jerome Curiel again unto you, to declare unto you more particularly what he
has in charge, and seeing the chance is cast, and cannot be recalled again,
it is necessary to proceed, and that which does most import, is expedition,
and great diligence in the execution of that which has been agreed upon and
concluded. Whereby it did plainly appear that instead of treating with the
Germans for the States, as Don John practices from the beginning against the
States.
he had promised by the said accord, he treated and practiced against them
And instead of reconciling them one with an other: he did incense them more,
persuading the Colonels that the States would defraude them of their
entertainment, and take away their lives. And whereas he was bound to cause
them to depart out of all the Towns and places of strength in the country,
he took

Whilst that he remained in Macklin he caused one of the Religion to be
executed by the sword. And whereas it was held strange, and that they murmured
thereat. He answered (wherein the Bishop of Arras did second him) that he
did not therein go against the pacification of Gant, which was not to be
understood A beginning of ^ster int^rpretation of the pacification of Gant.
but for those of the Religion which had been absent, and not for them which
had remained in the country, as this did. This was a goodly beginning of the
interpretation of the said pacification, but there were afterward some that
were Don John having on the other side by them of Flanders compounded with the
three companies of Colonel Polwill^r being in Denremonde. And upon the
petition presented by them of Flanders obtained authority to give a pasport to
every soldier to retire into Germany, as appeeres by an Appostille of his
own hand as follows. His highness having heard and understood the report of
this petition, Don John's (...) ^bling.
declares that they may address themselves for the pasports therein required
to the general Estates, whom his highness does authorize to give them, as
he does also authorize the signior of Ryhouen to make the private pasports.
And as for Commissioners for the conduct of the said three companies out of the
country, his highness commandes the Audiencier or Secretary to make pattents
concerning the same John, and under neath Berty.

Notwithstanding presently after he writ and commanded those soldiars to
continue still in the same town, obeying their Colonel Polwiller, with whom
they were in dissension, and without any correspondencie, as it appeered unto
the Estates by the letters which the said soldiars had sent unto them. Finally
instead of pacefying all troubles, and maintayning the peace and quiet of the
country, as he had promised, making the said accord, and had always so
pretended: presently after that he had so sollemnly signed and sworn it, he
plotted new enterprises with his Secretary Escouedo, and in the end put all in
combustion, procuring war, which he had always affected, Escouedo incen^th
Don John.
side that for the good and firm union of the States among themselves and on
the other side for the good reception they had made him, and continued daily
withal sincerity and loialty: And that, in regard of two points, whereof in
the beginning he would have charged the Estates, that is the Catholic and
Romish faith, and the obedience due unto 1577.
the King, they carried themselves so faithfully and without any reproach as he
had Don John seeks a quarrel against the States.
Don John seeks to make war be twixt the States and the Prince of Orange.
points, without any observation of the order which had been concluded in the
said

At the same time he writ to the Emperor and to all the Princes Electors of
Germany, and he sent also to the Queen of England, to incense them against the
said Prince, as if he had violated and broken the peace: and all without the
priuity of the States or Don John writs into Germany and England against the
Prince.
summoning the Prince to answer to those actions, or to satisfy that which
he had promised. Having moreover expressly forbidden the ambassador which he
had sent unto the Queen, not to make any mention unto her Majesty, nor entreat
her to assist the States with money wherewith they might presently have
discharged the Germains Don John showing openly in all his actions, the desire
he had to break the pacification of Gant, in attempting war against the
Prince and them of Holland: the which from the beginning being at Luxembourg
and at March in Famine, he made show to affect greatly according to the
letters written from Spain to Rhoda, almost at the very instant of his
arrival, and the instructions that were given him at his departure from
Spain, the which took this point for a chief foundation, that he must with
The war of Holland and zeeland the chie^e foundation of Do^ Io^n.
the aid of the general States make war against the Prince and them of
Holland and Zeeland, that (they being ruined) he might with more facility
vanquish all the rest, as it appeeres by the said letter.

But seeing that the States would not enter rashly into war against Holland
and Zeland: but resolving to hold the pacification, would refer the decision
of all controversies to a lawful conference, and moreover to attend a general
convocation of the States, as it had been agreed by the pacification of Gant,
he took occasion thereby to hold them as disobedient and rebels to the King,
treating with the Germany Colonels as we have showed by his letters, of the
means how he might be revenged of the States, practicing under hand to draw
away their forces, and to dispose of them at his pleasure, wherefore finding
the town of Macklin not very commodious for the effecting thereof, being
situated in the midest of the country, he advised to retire himself Don John
seeks to retire into some fronter (...).
into some fronter town of strength, thinking first to put himself into Mons,
under And as the States during these practices were advertised that they levied
many soldiars 1577.
against the forces which Duke John Casimire should prepare to succor the
Prince of Conde and the Protestants of France; Don John being advertised hereof
by letters from the said States, seemed always could and careless, saying
that he had not received any news thereof, as appeared by his letters of the
twenty of July, written to the States to that purpose: not-with-standing that
they had received diverse aduertisements from France that the said Leuy which
was made upon the frontiers, was to enter into the Netherlands, and to help to
exploit that which time has sense discovered.

And in the mean time upon the same petext to go and meet with the Queen Don
John thinking to assure himself of Antwerp loses it.
concluded betwixt them at Macklin, using in those of the twenty five of July
these any advise of what you have done in the execution of that which you had
in charge. And for that I shall be much perplexed until I hear from you, I
pray you advertise me presently. He had provided that collonell Cornellis van
Eynden should enter into the town of Antwerp with four companies, and
expressly after the Seignior of Hierges, and one of his Brethren with their,
regiments every one at his time appointed, as appeers by his letter of the
twenty six of July, where he writes thus. Hierges and Floien.
One of the two is gone yesterday to assemble his troops to cause them to march
where they are appointed, and the eldest shall part this day and shall come to
the place appointed: so as it is fit you should proceed, whereof I pray you,
resting assured that I am very well satisfied to understand that they proceed
in that which has been resolved, and entreat you to advertise me what shall
pass there: for touching matters here, there shall be nothing wanting of that
which has been concluded. And in that of the twenty seven of the month, he
writ to Collonell Foucker in these terms. The said Earls Brother shall come
Floion and Hierges.
suddenly when it shall be time. In that of the thirty he says, hold good
correspondencie with the second brother, for if need be I will send you the
elder, in the mean time stand carefully upon your gards, and advertise me
often of your news. Don John knowing well that the Prince of Chimay, a young
Nobleman, unacquainted with The Prince of Chimay sent for^y Don Thon out of
the castle of Antwerp.
affaiers was in it, and that he had commandment as Lieutenant to the Duke of
Arschot his father, not to abandon it, he writ unto him that upon sight of the
letter, he should come to Macklin, and accompany him to Namur, assuring
himself that in the mean time the Seignior of Treslon would discharge his
duty for the keeping of the place, and that at his coming to Macklin he would
talk with him of that whereof he had written the day before. The Prince of
Chimay went, and being come to Don John, he never spoke word unto him touching
any thing. And demanding his leave Don John had laid his plot long before, as
it appeared by a letter written with his own hand to Colonel Foucker of the
seven and twenty of July. By your letter 1577.
Treslon, I gather that when he writ unto me, they of the castle had not yet
received the dispatch which I had given you for them at Macklin, whereat I
marvel much, seeing that you know I do so much affect it; give it him
presently, if you have not already done it, and be careful to execute that
effectually which has been treated, without expecting our friend, for he
shall come time enough.

This pollecy to settle the signior of Treslon in the castle of Antwerp, in the
place The signior of Treslon in the castle of Anrwerp for Don John.
of the Prince of Chimay, was to the end that he should hold it at his
devotion against the States, and that by mutual intelligence he might bring
in the Germans and other souldiars, and by the same means assure himself
also of the town. And by his letter of the eight and twenty of July to
Colonel Foucker he writes. This day Treslon is so resolute to assist you in
all necessities. The which being so, I have great hope, that Champagnies
attempts, as you write unto me (for the signior of Champagny feared least the
troops of Colonel Cornellis van Eynden which marched already, should enter
there) shall not prevail. Yet you must keep good guard, and be Vigilant, that
at the same time there enter no men on the other side for the Prince of Orange.
In the mean time Don John sought by all means to win the Signior of
Philomey, Son to the Signior of Willerual, who had a company in the said
castle, writing unto him to that end the six and twenty of Iulie in these
words. Most dear and well beloved, you shall understand by Mounsier de Hierges
and by my Don John his letters to the signior of Pnylomey.
Cornellis van Eynden should enter into the new town, if perchance the signior
of Hierges had not been with you nor sent unto you before the said entry
(notwithstanding that we have written it to Mounsier Treslon) we would also
make it known unto you by these presents, which Charles Foucker shall deliver
unto you,

Upon these intelligences Don John thought that this desseigne upon Antwerp
(the which as we have said had been plotted before at Macklin) could not
fail him, and held himself very assured thereof; thinking also to have the
towns and country Don John seeks meane^ to incense the States.
open from Bourgongne and Italy, he also managed his business in such sort,
as knowing very well that the States would not satisfy the signior of Hierges
desire, touching the Government of Charlemont which the signior of Mericourt
would resign unto him; to incense the States, seeking some cause of quarrel
against them, he promised it unto Hierges, and gave unto him the government of
Charlemont, contrary to the intent of the said States, and contrary to all
that which had been decreed, by the accord of pacification, and the perpetual
Edict.

Thinking that he had made his proiects so surely as all should succeed to his
defire tas well for that he held himself assured (as he thought) of the
town and castle Mario Cordoni) thinking also that the States treasure was all
exhausted: for that they had dismissed their forces, that were entertained by the
private 1577
forces they had to expel the said Germans, he resolved to proceed. And
notwithstanding that two days before he had sent the signior of Grobbendoncq
unto the States, to let them understand that he desired to come to Brussells,
so as all things might be well ordered touching certain Articles, presented on
his behalf, wherein he had been formerly satisfied (under color of going a
hunting, whereas the chief Noblemen followed him being before the castle of
Namur, and seeming to have a desire to visit it, and to view the country
about, he commanded the duke of ^hn (...) upon the castle of Namur.
Arschot to follow him. Being entered into the castle he said, that for the
safety of his own person and the dukes, together with his train, he had
thought it fit to put himself into that place: entering into it, they found at
the port the Earl of Megen Floion and Hautepenne brethren, Sons to
Barlaimont, with pistolles in their hands: and presently Don John took a
pistol, which he drew out of the case, and showing his arms, said, that it
was the first day of his government, and then he presently placed his gards,
the which happened the four and twenty of July.

Being thus seized of the castle, he assembled the council, to whom he made
a declaration of the long and the exceeding great patience, which he had had
against so Don John complains os the States.
many and such intolerable indignities which he had suffered by the States of
the country, and that he was resolved not to bear them any longer: but to
govern, and to be Don John couers his desseignes with an imaginary conspiracy.
as the proofs did witness) unto a conspiracy newely found out: seeing

At the same time, he sent the Lord of Rassengem with the coppie of these two
letters to the States at Brussells, with certain Articles, the which he would
have effected before he returned to Brussells, tending in effect to disarme
the Lord of Heze (who had been made Governor of the town by the States before
his coming) and all the Bourgers with all, that he might by that stratageme
the better surprise the town, as he had done Namur, and the castle.

And although the States had great cause to distrust all these courses of Don
John and to stand upon their guard, who had so plainly discovered his
intention, and in The States show no discontent but entreated Don John.
Charlemont might caus^, promising him at his return and presence in the said
town of Brussells, fidelity and assurance against all men. And to do
exemplarie justice upon all them that should be found culpable and faulty of
so wicked a conspiracy. Wherefore they entreated him that as well the accused
us the accusers might be named unto them, to make a judicial information, and
to do 1577.


But notwithstanding all this, and that the states had often since besought Don
John that they might know them that were accused to be guilty of this
conspiracy, and the names of them that had accused them: insisting still that
he would be pleased to free himself of this distrust of them, and by his
return to Brussells prevent all alterations that were grown by reason of his
retreat: promising to be severe reuengers of all those that would attempt
against him or his. More-ouer they had consented

Yet notwithstanding all this, they could not obtain any thing of him; but
instead Don John begins to discover himself
of seeking to dispatch the Germans out of the country, which he had so
often promised and sworn, he discovered and made open declaration of the
intelligence he had with them, the which he had until then kept secret;
neither could he contain himself to say unto the Abbot of Marolles, that he
held himself assured of the Van Ernden, to march toward Antwerpe, and to
join with them that were there before: Giving order unto the Seignior of
Treslon (according unto that which had been long before concluded) to bring
them in, and to join with them: showing therein all hostility, and a resolute
intention to oppress the country again by these strangers, more then it had
been before: So as the Merchants of Antwerpe, as well those of the country as
strangers, began to prepare to retire themselves, and A great fear and
^lteration in Antwerpe.
to abandon the Town, and to leave it in a miserable desolation; yea some were
seen to leap out at windows to save themselves, casting infinite packes of
Merchandise Don John, according to so many promises and oaths so solemnly made
and swore, would rather remedy these inconveniences by reason and Justice,
then by the violence of Arms: had it not been that the same day that they
made their complaints of this commandment given to the Seignior of Treslon,
and of the desseigne of the said Cornellis van Eindein, which was the eight and
twenty of July, letters were brought unto them, that Don John and the Secretary
Escouedo had in the months of March and April last past, written unto the
Don John and Escouedo write into Spain.
Antonio Perez, the which having been intercepted in Gasconie, were sent into
Holland to the Prince of Orange, who sent them to the states to consider of
their affairs.

Among these letters that were intercepted, there were three from Don John, two
unto the King, and one unto Antonio Perez, all of the seventh of April. In
the first after that he had much complained of the want of pay for his
Soldiers, and persuaded the King to keep his credit, not-with-standing a
certain proclamation made upon the change of money which he received from the
Merchants, which was greatly to the prejudice of the said Merchants. He said,
that as for that which touches the reduction and tranquillity of these
countries, I cannot assure your Majesty of any she can that he should not
accept what has been capitulated, and to that end offers 1577


The greatest part of the country is at his devotion, some for love they bear
him, and others for that they have been deceived by these men, and herein
almost all the people are contained. Such as desire to enjoy your Majesty's
grace and pardon (which is the smallest number) they think that in accepting
it, they do all they ought, besides they are so faint hearted, as they will
make no demonstration worthy the noting. And if they would employ themselves,
there will be a great confusion and division among them all, as soon as the
Spaniards shall be gone, some to have me admitted to the government, and
other to hinder it. And for that (as I say) the first will have small courage,
if the other oppose against me, those will altogether faint, and not any

In the same letter there was written underneath. The Earl of Mansfeldt told
me, that he has sent certain instructions unto your Majesty, upon the
which he does not yet know if there has been taken any resolution: wherein
he thinks that his

After the date, and subscription, there was written by Don Ihon himself. I
beseech your Majesty as far as your service does require, to accomplish this
as soon as may be; seeing this body has no other remedy, but to cut off
that which is putrified, the which must now be done with that provision. For
the which I do again beseech you, for if it fail, nothing can stand firm:
and in the mean time we have great need to pray, that God will aid the
present state. In the second letter unto the King, written the same day, he
says. By this which I presently write, and by the other your Majesty may see
what has past and does pass, and in what estate the affairs be, that does
assure you, that if this wound may be cured by patience, it shall be helped,
if by too much forcing of my condition I fall not sick, or that the natural
inclination of Don John did write unto the Secretary Antonio Perez, dated the
seventh of April, he says. I have and will sacrifice my self for his
Majesty's pleasure, whilst that I shall see that i^ doing it, Extract of a
letter written to Antonio Perez
it shall not be directly against his service. Wherefore I say, that so long
as there shall be any danger, or that any thing shall require my presence, I
will not make any use of the leave which I have demanded, although it be
granted me. But that b^ng done, and after that I have ended things wherein I
may do any service, it is no reason it should be refused me. For being then
to obs^e the old government (...) and that them the man of whom they had
conceived such jealousy, and that he shall send them 1577.


In that which John Escouedo Secretary to Don John did write unto the King of
the 27. of March. After that he had complained of the small credit he had
among the merchants by reason of the decree, whereof Don John complains in
like sort; having inueighed greatly against the States and Noblemen of the
country, and against the Prince of Orange and the Hollanders, he says, my
Leege, the affairs standing upon these terms, and those here being unwilling
to admit Don John unto the government until that the Spaniards be quite out of
the country (who might serve for some remedy) your Majesty will consider what
pain and care this may and will breed, and if it had Escouedo said the states
have not performed what they ought, that is, a hundred and fifty thousand
crowns, neither do they assist in any thing, although that I have been
expressly at Brusselles to present it unto them and to the Council of state
whom it did import to aid me. Whereupon I made them along discourse, but they
love your Majesty so coldly, as no reasons can make them to hinder themselves:
neither do I see any one man that will show them the way, wherefore it does the
more import to recover credit among the merchants, and that your Majesty be
careful thereof. By the third letter written by Escouedo unto the King bearing
the same date, he says. My Leege, I will tell your Majesty, that I see neither
Escouedo^ propheti^.
seeing that I am come so far as to speak it, your Majesty may believe it, and
prevent it in time, being assured that this disease will not be cured by any
mild remedies, but by fire and blood, and therefore you must provide for it.
And in that of the 8. of the same month, he writs unto the King: for my part I
know not what to say more, but that suspicion increases daily, by the bad
proceeding of these men, and your Majesty may believe for certain, that at the
least they will have liberty of conscience. By that of the ninth whereas he
took it ill that the duke of Arschot had past out of Brabant into Flanders in
the Prince of Oranges ships, being accompanied with the Vicont of Gant and the
Lord Don John (for I lay all private respects aside) but for that I have long
since said that your Majesty had no other remedy, the time had showed it and
will show it daily more and more. By all which letters, and others to the
Empress, inueighing much against the Netherlands, Don John and his Secretary
Escouedo, sought nothing but to incense the King of These letters intercepted,
discover Don John's inte^on.
Spain and the Emperor against the said countries: by the which Don John's
intention did manifestly appear, that all his promises, and the rewards which
he had given till then were but counterfeit, to abuse the Nobility and the
people, that he might surprise 1577.
them of Holland and Zeeland, were only practices to divide them, and so with
the forces and means of the one party, to set upon the other, and afterward
to take revenge of them all together, and to root them out by fire and sword.
Then began the states The states begin to distrust Don John.
to look more carefully to their affairs, and with great reason to distrust
Don John, all whose practices and actions they found conformable to the said
letters, and to his desseignes long before proiected, and then plainly
discovered by the contents thereof: for looking round about them, they see the
Germans, (who had taken from them all hope of their retreat) held the chief
Towns and Keys of Brabant, at the devotion and service of Don John, with a
manifest declaration of their bad affection to the

Whereupon the States commanded the Lord of Champaigni to go and lodge with
his Regiment upon the passages, whereas the companies of Cornellis van Einden
should-passe, and come to Antwerpe, to join with the Colonels Foucker and
Frunsborgh, Foucker found some difficulties upon the coming of Cornellis van
Einden, Don John did write Don John w^tes to Collonell Foucker.
unto him the last of July, in these terms. I will write unto the Regiment of
Champagni, that they shall dislodge from thence, but God knows what they will
do: I write unto the Magistrates, that they shall be quiet and rest assured,
seeing I will not consent that any wrong shall be done them. And for this
reason I am resolved, that the troops of Cornellis van Einden shall not enter
into the Town, as I did advertise you Treslon to have money to relieve his
men, whereby he might prevent the perrill and danger that you present unto me.

In the mean time he still entertained the States with the hope of peace,
pretending that what he did was only for his assurance. He then began to
propound unto them hard and unreasonable conditions, and so directly contrary
to all the precedent contracts of pacification, as if they had been already
subjected unto him. Wherefore they resolved to stand upon their guard, and to
prevent the danger that hung over their heads. And as during these proceedings
the Seignior of Treslon, having declared himself of the Germans faction
(whom he should draw into the Town) Don John, a new oath to the Captains
and Soldiers of the Castle of Antwerpe, directly contrary to that which they
had sworn unto the States: and that the said Captains had been sufficiently
warned by the letters mentioned, which had been intercepted: the Seignior of
Treslon made himself to be suspected and odious to all the garrison of the
Castle, except his own company, the which did so amaze and trouble him, as
not knowing how to repair this error, he writ unto Don John in these terms.

This word shall serve to advertise your Highness, that our Soldiers here are
mutined, A letter from the Seignior of Treslon to Don John.
and that I expect howerly when they should seize on me. It is not in my power
to put a man into this place: for making the least show thereof, it'is most
certain Escouedo: and also for that your Highness has commanded them to
suffer the four companies of Van Einden to enter into the Town, the which
does alter 1577.
Monsieur Champaignies regiment does always coast the four companies of
Einden. The Germans are partly the cause of this alteration, for that seeing
they had good correspondencie with me, they have given it out that they had
taken an oath with us: and that being joined with us, they would make the
Townes-men pay the minstrell, with other brauing speeches. My passage is cut
off, so as I cannot have any great correspondencie with them, etc. Written the
first of August, and post dated. Your Highness

According to the Seignior of Treslons doubt, the States did so well manage
this business, as Ponthus of Noyele Seignior of Bours (whose Father had been
sometimes Governor of Bethune and Hesdin) Captain of a company in the said
Castle of Antwerpe, having at this time more respect unto the bond of his
faith once given unto the States, and to the good of his country, then to any
alluring persuasions and promises of rewa^de that were made unto him, refusing
to take the oath propounded by the Seignior of Treslon, he joined with most of
the Captains which held the Treslon and his men: there were some Tresl^n taken
prisoner, and the Cast^l yielded to the States.
pieces shot off, wherewith some were hurt. Treslon seeing this, and knowing
that he was too weak, retired into his lodging, where-as the said Seignior of
Bours went and took him by the bosom: and having chased away all them of his
faction, he delivered him with the Castle in the States hands, who sent their
Deputies to give order for all things.

The four German companies of Foucker and Frunsbergh, hearing the rumor that
was in the Castle, put themselves into arms, and at night came to the place
of Meerbrugge, but doubting their strength, they retired about midnight to the
new Town (which is the strongest part of Antwerpe, by reason of the channels
that do enuiron it) Foucker to Berghen upon Zoome, and Frunsberg to Breda. On
the other side, the Lord of The Germains put to flight and defeated.
Champaigni Governor of Antwerpe, went with his Regiment to encounter the
companies of Cornellis van Einden, the which he defeated, and kept them from
joining with them of Breda. Don John being much troubled with this unfortunate
cross, writ to Collonell Foucker the eight of August, complaining of this
misfortune, yet he rejoiced that the Collonell had escaped out of Antwerpe with
his life: commanding him to remain in Berghen until he had seen further
order; and after the date of the said letter, he Frunsbergh. But Collonell
Fouckers men having received this great disgrace at Antwerpe, did mutiny
against him, and the tenth of September following took him prisoner, and
delivered him to the States, with the Town of Berghen.

The States being freed of all fear of the Town and Castle of Antwerpe,
seeing the Germans thus dispersed, they assured themselves of Liere, two
leagues from Liere assumed for the state.
Antwerpe: doing that which any man of spirit and resolution that has his
life, honor, wife, children, goods, and country in any recommendation is
bound to do, for the preservation and liberty thereof, discharging
themselves faithfully in Don John had conceived against them, was not newly
grown upon any occasion which they might have given him, but had taken root
from his first arrival, and reception to the government, as appears 1577
to bud out, and to show the fruits by all effects of hostility, GOD by his
grace did so favor the States, as to discover the first original by the
interception of the said letters. Whereby they did find that there was small
hope of any redress, and less reason to suffer themselves to be any longer
abused, with good words, and fair promises.

John of Bourgongne a Knight, Siegnior of Fromont, being after the death of the
Lord of Barlaimont, appointed Governor of the country of Namur by the States,
a The governor of Namur, forsakes Don John.
Gentleman of great age, wise and virtuous, having let Don John understand his
error, and that those countries were not to be so governed, nor abused, as he
thought to do: and seeing that all his reasons and admonitions prevailed not;
and fearing on Don John, and came into Brabant to join with the States. The
Duke of Arschot, and the Marquis of Haurec brethren, by whom Don John thought
to be assisted and supported, waying well all his practices and desseignes,
and what might in the end happen unto them, and that no persuasions nor
admonitions might prevail to divert him, they made some difficulty to enter
any more in council with him. Don John fearing to loose them, and to be
abandoned, set watches over them, and held them as it were prisoners: yet
not-withstanding his good guard, having caused their horses to be lead out of
the Town of Don John had made.

Thus were the States forced against their wills to enter into a new war
against Don John: who mad with rage for such unfortunate success of all his
desseignes, did nothing but practice by what means he might be revenged;
continuing his accustomed dissembling. And to justify his actions, after that
he had made his complaint by letters, which he had written to the States, he
insisted upon two points: Don John seeks to justify himself.
which were the maintenance of the Catholic and Romish religion, and the
obedience due unto the King. Saving that he pretented no other thing: and that
having received satisfact on therein, he would above all things seek the good
and quiet of Two causes of Don John's r^treate to Namur.
this attempt upon the Castle of Antwerpe should fail, whereof he was freed
being in the Castle of Namur. The other was to have always a back-doore open,
having the country of Luxembourg at his devotion, to draw as many strangers
into the Netherlands, as he pleased. He did also complain much of the
retreat of the Duke Diverse places yielded to the states.
at that time the Lord of Champaigni had the charge, with the which he went to
besiege the castle of Wouwe being held by certain Germans of Collonell
Fouckers Steenberghen the ninth of that month, and the Town and Island of
Ter-tolen in Zeeland the nine-teenth.

The Queen of England hearing that the King of Spain did conceive sinisterly
of her Wilks into Spain to give hi^ satisfaction, and advice withal, for the
pacefying of the Netherlands, as you may see by this letter.

A declaration sent to the King of Spain, containing a justification of her
Majesty's proceedings with the Estates of the Netherlands By Master Thomas
Wilkes.
THe Queens Majesty being given to understand of diverse faulse and very
scandalous reports given out touching her actions and Sept. 5. 1577.
proceedings with the Estates of the Netherlands, tending as it

And first touching her proceeding with the Estates, she doubts not but that
if the King shall examine his own knowledge, and call to mind how often, sense
the first breaking out of this civil dissension in those countries, her
Majesty has moved, as well by sundry ministers sent unto himself, as unto
his under governors there, fore-warning both him and them of the inconveniences
which were then happened, and aduising him to take some speedy course for
prevention: He cannot with his honor but confess, that her Majesty has
therein discharged the duty of a faithful friend and good allie: of * Place
this between Folio 646. and 647.
the government kept from danger of alienation. 1577.


And if herein for her Majesty's full justification, neither these friendly
offices, nor the word and faith of a Prince may suffice, yet her own actions
may serve to clear her in the sight of all the world, and will sufficiently
show, that she has ever sought to continue those Countries under the King of
Spaines obedience, and has not at any time intended to impatronize herself of
any part thereof (a matter perhapes which some Princes having like advantages
offered by some one part or other of his subjects, would not have resused (and
therefore might think her self very unkindly dealt withal, in case so rare an
example should be so hardly or rather unfriendly interpreted: And as her
Majesty has not left any good office undone toward the King and his Ministers
tending to pacification,

And herein if besides many perswations used by messengers sent of purpose to
advise Don John and them, as to keep them from casting themselves desperately
into the hands of any other Prince: it did manyfestly appear that the
pacification had not been so soon made and they for want thereof should have
been forced for their defense to have put some part of those countries into
the hands of such as would not have been easily removed, without the expense
of many Millions and the loss of many thousand men's lives.

Her Majesty is the more willing to make mention of the true cause of this
suport, for that she is advertised, that notwithstanding her true and sincere
intent in that Don John and published in a book lately set out by the Estates
in their justification; by the which her Majesty is charged to have incorraged
the Prince of Orange not to hold the pacification, and with-all did for his
better incorragement, offer him any assistance she could yield (a matter most
slanderous and untrue) for that her Majesty being given to understand by the
vicont of Gant, sent unto her from Don John, how he found himself grieved
with the Prince of Orange, for that (as he affirmed) the Prince did Don John's
accusation unto him, as also to advise him (and that most effectual) duly to
observe the said paciflcation, using some threats unto him in case he should
seek to infring ir: In whom she could find no disposition to any alteration,
but that he was most desirous to hold every point of the said pacification
inuiolably, as the only means to end those long civil wars.

The like advice she did also give unto the Estates, receiving no less
contentment of the pacification (being ratefied first by Don John, and
afterward by the King) then they to whom the benifit thereof did most
properly belong. Her Majesty's maintained to be both just and honorable,
whatsoever has been falsely and 1577.


Notwithstanding all these discouragements, her Majesty thinking it honorable
for her, and meet for the place she holds, being the most ancient Allye,
which the Kings Progenitors (as Dukes of Bourgongne) have, to continue still
her former course in giving friendly advice unto the King: cannot but proceed
to the second point above mentioned, which is, to yield her advice what course
in her opinion is to be taken

First it is very apparent that the pacefication is broken, and as great
hostility intended on either side as may be, whereof she is heartily sorry.
The end (if it continue) will either be the ruin and desolation of the
country, or the loss or allyenation thereof from the Kings obedience. For the
preventing whereof, her Majesty thinks that there cannot be a more
expedient remedy, then that it would please him to receive his subjects into
his grace and favor, that he would suffer them to enjoy their ancient
liberties and freedoms; command that the pacifiation might be duly observed;
and that he would appoint such a Governor of his own blood, as might be
pleasing unto himself and grateful unto them, whereby they might willingly
Don John and them, can never take effect, so long as Don John shall continue
Governor: For it seems they have put on a resolution, that rather then they
will endure the rigorous dealings which they expect during his government,
they will put themselves under the protection of any other Prince. They charge
him with the breach of the pacification, and he on the other side offers to
iustisie himself, and lays the blame of this breach upon them. Her Majesty
having heard the allegations of the Ministers sent hither both from Don John
and the Estates, means not to

To reconcile them she finds it impossible, and therefore to prevent all
further troubles that are otherwise like to ensue, the only remedy will be
to make choice of some other allied to him in blood, to command under him in
that government. By which temperate course the troubles may soon be
pacefied, the great effusion of blood avoided, and those Provinces continued
under his obedience, which other-wise are like to be allyenated and distracted
from him. If he shall like this advice, she sees no dispotition in the
people to ch^nge their

And whereas for the contentment of the Estates, and the pacefying of these
troubles she wishes Don John's reuocation, so considering how evil affected
he has showed himself toward her, as well by letters intercepted, as by
other secret practices which were very dangerous to the good and quiet of her
Estate, (as the bearer can more amply inform him of diverse particularities in
that behalf) she cannot (for the good amity which she wishes might
continue between the King and her Majesty) but press the King more earnestly
thereunto: expecting no continuance of

This her advice tending to no other end but to maintain those countries under
her obedience, and the continuance of good amity between them, she hops
the 577.
King will accept as friendly thereof, as it is by her sincerely meant. And in
the mean time until his mind were known in that behalf, her Majesty
hearing the great forces prepared by Don John, with the assistance of the
French already marching toward him, will force her ancient friends the Estates
of the Netherlands to one of these two extremities, either to be overcome by
foreign soldiars, and so subjected to foreign servitude, or else constrained
(for the preventing thereof) to give themselves over to some other Prince,
both which must needs be prejudicial and dangerous to the King for the
present, perilous to her Majesty after, and an utter ruin to those
countries.

Her Highness therefore for the Kings good, and to prevent her own danger
(upon

Which proceedings of hers, if the King shall not be induced to like of,
Whereby her Majesty shall discover that his intention is by force of arms to
alter and dissolve the ancient form of government, and by taking away their
ancient Laws and liberties to make it a land of conquest, and to people it
with garrisons of men of war: And that the end and scope of his disseignes
should tend to that which is discovered by Escouedos letters, wherein he
writes that the enterprise of England is of more facility then that of the
Islands, whereby her Majesty shall find the disposition of so bad a neighbor,
to her and her royal Estate: then her Majesty's resolution is to employ all
the power she shall be able to make, for the defense of her neigbours, and
preservation of her own Estate.

As on the other side, if he shall incline to their reasonable demands, in
giving them such a Governor as they shall better like of then of Don John, and
they notwithstanding shall continue in their disobedience against him, and make
other Innouations contrary to their protestations and promises made unto her;
she will then turn her forces against them, and in assistance of the King,
yield him the best aid she can, to bring Don John and the Estates for a
surceance of arms, which if he shall refuse to yield unto, and the Estates
shall be willing, for that she does plainly see that it does much concern the
Kings honor and the good of his country, she will not cease to proceed with
the like offers, toward them as she has begun, thereby only to defend them
from foreign tyranny to keep them in the Kings obedience, from allyening
themselves to any other Potentates, and to defend herself and her dominions
from the dangers which thereby she sees manifestly will ensue.

The thirtith of the said month as Captain Matthew Wibisma, had made a levy
of 1577.
new soldiers, and more then were necessary to supply his company with an
intent to Wibo van Gontom, would command over the old soldiers that were in
the Castle of the said Town, so as they were in arms one against another. The
Bourguers A tumult in Leeuwarden where upon the c^le is yielded to the states.
fearing that under color of this tumult, they would force the town and
spoil it, came and besieged the Castle, the which was yielded unto them the
second of September, upon promise that the town should pay the garrison. The
Citizens having received the Castle by this composition, put a garrison into
it of the inhabitants until the coming of the Earl of Rheneberg, Governor of
the country of Friseland.

Don John seeing the great forces of the States approach near unto Namur,
being commanded by the Earl of Lalain General of the Army, Robert of Melun
Vicont of of Gant General of the horse: the signior of Goignies Marshall of
the camp; La Motte-par-dieu Master of the Ordinance and others: and the small
numbers he had with him, making a show again as if he would treat with the
States (whilst that he sent for all his forces out of Bourgongne and Italy)
he required to have some Commissioners, sent unto him to treat with them.
Whereupon there were deputed Matthew Moukart Abbot of Saint Guislain, the
signiors of Willerual, Grobbendoncq and others, who after some conferences
tending all to delays, they returned without any fruit.

The Inhabitants of Antwerp; being still in fear by reason of their castle,
so long as the war was thus wavering, fearing they should be at sometime
again surprised (terming it a den of thieves: an Invention of men full of
cruelty: a neast of Tyranie, a receptacle of all filthy villainy, abomination
and wickedness) obtained The castle of Antwerp demanteled.
leave of the States to demantle it toward the town. The which the Bourguers
began the eight and twenty of August, with such spleen, as there was
neither great nor small, wives, children, gentlewomen and Burgers, and all in
general but would pull down a piece of it, men, women and servants, going
thither with their Enseignes displayed, having many Victuallers upon the
plain before the castle, so as it seemed a camp. And although the Masons
work were great, strong, and thick, yet were they not long in beating it
down on that side. Many castl^ ruined in the Netherlands.
eastles of Gant, Vtrecht, Valenciennes, Bethune, Lisle, Air and others: and
the City of Arras was laid open toward the town. The Tournesiens were in
like sort very importunate to have theirs demantled: but the Seneshal of
Henault (who was afterward Prince of Espinoy) would not yield unto it, saying
that if the said castle were ruined being a town situated in the maine land,
and that the enemy should come to beseege it, and become master thereof, they
should be forced to build it again at their own cost and charges: the which
had so happened, for four years after, the duke of Parma beseeged and took
it by composition, as we shall see.

The states seeing the Landtskneghts of Cont Ouerstein (who was drowned at the
Massaker of Antwerp) grown resolute to hold Boislelduke, a fair great town
lying in Brabant: they sent the Earl of Hohenloo, with an army to beseege it,
so as they were forced to yield the place by composition the one and twenty day
of September. The said States had the ninth day of same month published their
Iustifications for their taking of arms against Don John the which was printed
at Antwerp by William Siluius the Kings Printer, whereof the title was, Abreefe
discourse of the just causes and The states print their iustifications against
Dom John.
reasons which have constrained the general Estates of the Netherlands to
provide for their defense against Don John of Austria. In the end of which
iustifications they did add the letters that were intercepted, being written
in Spanish and translated

But as the States (who sought nothing more then to free themselves from the
Spanish Don John's attempts, who prepared 1577.
all the means he could to make sharp and violent war against them; and
had great need to seek succors from all parts: first they sent to many
Princes and Potentates of Germany, to make their excuse, and justify the
taking of arms The States seek: succors from all parts.
to take from them all sinister Impressions, which Don John might give them by
his letters, as he had done unto the Empress. Then they sent unto the French
King; to his mother, and to his brother, who made them many goodly and large
promises. But as they desired to rely and depend chiefly upon the Queen of
England, they sent the Marquis of Haurec unto her, who was graciously received
by her Majesty the two and twenty of September: with whom hoe treated

Then the States writ unto the Prince of Orange, being in Holland, (who was
The Prince of Orange comes to Antwerp.
wonderfully grieved and discontented at the Actions and strange carriage of
Don John) entreating him to come and assist them with his person, Council and
means. The which the Prince would not refuse, to show the duty whereunto he
thought him self bound to the common cause. Coming unto Antwerp (where he
had not been in ten years before) on the eighteenth day of September, he was
received and entertained with great joy and contentment of all the people. The
Abbots of Villers and Marolles with the Barons of Fresin and Capres were sent
thither from the states to welcome him, and to conduct him to Brussels,
whether he came the three and twenty day.

The seventh of October the Landtskneghts of Colonel Fransberg (who after his
flight from Antwerp, had led them to Breda) seeing themselves beseeged by the
Breda yielded and Colonel Frunsberg p^oner.
the town of Breda, and their Colonel also into the states hands: as those of
Berghen upon Zoom had done before by Colonel Foucker. Thus these two German
Colonels degenerating from the integrity and just dealing of their Nation,
thinking to surprise and deceive the states, fell into the pit themselves the
which they had prepared for others. The Prince of Orange being at Brussells,
assisting daily in the Council of the general Estates, was at the request of
the particular Estates The Prince made Rouard of Brabant.
of the Duchy of Brabant, entreated to accept (as being one of the chief
Noblemen and of the greatest power in all the Duchy) the place of Rouard or
Governor of Brabant, the which he did, but not without protestation and some
excuses. And so he was most honorably received and acknowledged the two and
twenty of Philip of Comines says, apt to sue for peace, when they can do no
more) went and seized on him in his lodging, and carried him prisoner to the
Princes court, (or rather to the Castle) to the great grief and 1577.
A tumult at Groninghen and some prelates and others taken prisoners.
to determine of certain old controversies which the said town had with the
Ommelandts, were seized on by the Bourguers, of their own private authority,
and committed ^ose prisoners, to the number of 24. In whose favor, to end
these quarrels, and to free them from their unjust detention, there were sent
in the behalf of the general estates, and of the council of State, the
Seignor of Saint Aldegonde, and Doctor Sille Orator of Antwerp, but they could
not prevail any thing with the people: yet some of

The eleventh of November there appeared a great comete which continued in a
manner all the winter: 3. or 4. Months after the which followed the rout of
the States Army at Gemblours. The chief Noblemen of the Netherlands, thinking
to (...) the Kings heart, in calling in an other Prince of the blood in the
place of Don John, that had not been bred up after the Spanish manner, to be
Governor general in his countries, and that might agree better with their
humors, they sent the Seignior of Mal^tede a gentleman of Flanders unto the
Archduke Mathias of Austria son to the Emperor Maximilian and Brother to the
Emperor Rodolphe, entreating him to come into Ferdinand Zymeran grome of his
chamber, and with Christopher van Calierich, and so arrived at Antwerp the
twenty one of November. And before that the said Archduke was received for
Governor, on the seventh of December the general estates did decl^re by a
public Proclamation, Don John and all his adherents to be enemies to the King
and Don John proclaimed enemy to the Netherlands.
all his Netherlands.

Don John seeing matters managed in this sort was much perplexed, not knowing
Don John being retired to Luxembourg sends to the Emperor.
to acquaint him with the Estate of his affairs and to complain of the
Archduke Mathias who against the liking of the King his uncle, had united
himself to the Estates of the Nertherlands. Entreating him neither to give,
nor to suffer to be given unto the said Archduke, any succors nor favor,
neither from his imperial Majesty nor from Ferdinand, and to other Princes and
electors of the Empire that they should not suffer any forces to go out of
Germany, to neither party: and that as soon as might be, they should send
Ambassadors in the behalf of the Emperor and the Empire, to find some means
to reconcile them, if it were possible. 1577


Don John meaning to fortify himself all he could, gave charge to the Earl
of Barlaimont (who before the death of his Father was but Barron of Hierges) to
^euie a regiment of Lorraines; ohe in the County of Manderscheyt; one in the
Duchy of Luxembourg, and one of high Bourguignous attending the Spaniards
return, which Don John fortefied with troops.
went out of Antwerpe and other Towns of the Netherlands, with good store of
money. Many Noblemen went in like sort to join with him, and among others
Charles Earl of Mansfieldt, eldest son to Cont Peter Ernest. Governor of
Luxembourg, who before had commanded in France in the Kings service over a
Regiment of French, the which he also brought with him: with all these troops
which came unto him, Don John began to make his army in the County of
Luxembourg.

The Earl of Lalain general of the States Army lying about Namur, sent one
thousand Hargubuziers, and some few horse, to discover the said Town. The
garrison Bouines taken by the states.
sallied out upon them, where they skirmished for a time. There is a small
Town upon the river of Meuze, called Bouines, half a league from Dynant, very
commodious to stop the victuals and munition going to Namur; and to Don John's
Camp: The Earl of Lalain found means to seize upon this Town, as also upon
the Castle of Despontin, the which he took by force, killing all that he
found armed. This done, passing the river to the other bank, he intrencht
himself, meaning to cut off the passage to Don John's men.

The States had at that instant three Camps: one did besiege the Town of
Amsterdam Herman van Hellins thinking to surprise it for the States, was
slain, and his men chased out of the Town. They had an other Army in the
country of Oueryssel, where-as the Farle of Reneberg commanded, who took the
Towns of Zwol and Campen: and the third was before Ruremonde and Weert, in the
which the Earl of Hohenloo was General, but to small effect. Don John seeing
no means to succor Amsterdam, feared much that Ruremonde should be forced to
yield. Wherefore he commanded the Germans that came out of Antwerpe, being
in the country of Luxembourg, to Champaignis m^n defeated by the Germans.
march thither with all speed: the which they did as covertly and as speedily
as Champaignie (who some-time before had defeated them near unto Antwerpe)
they put them to route, and returned them their exchange but with more
cruelty, for they stripped the poor soldiers which they had taken prisoners
naked, because they would not bloody their shirts, and then they murdered
them like beasts, in cold blood: whereof some escaped thus naked, and among
others N. of Fiennes Seignior of Vermeille, brother to the Lord of Esquerdes,
one of the Captains of the said Regiment; who for that he was an active man,
and could run well and leap over large ditches, saved him self thus naked:
we did see him return to Antwerpe with old rags, in a very pitiful
estate.

These Germans having defeated and overcome this troop, thought to enter
into Ruremonde; but Collonell Polwiller Governor of the Town, made them
answer, that he had no need of men to eat and drink that little which he
had remaining, but he had more need of victuals and munition. Wherefore he
willed them to return, and to tell Don John, that he should rest well assured
of the Town, and that he should only seek to succor it with some
victuals, considering that Polwiller re^th succors which Don John sends him.
this Town being seated upon the river of Meuze, was of too great importance
to suffer it to be lost, the which hindered the traffic of the Hollanders by
water, into the country of Liege, and some part of Germany. Don John had then
received some Bourguignons and Italians, wherefore having heard these news
Polwiller, he commanded the Earl of Barlaimont and Collonell Mondragon, to
go and victual Ruremonde with all the speed they could, before it should be
forced to yield.

For the effecting whereof they gathered together some 4000. men, both of foot
and 1577.
horse, and marched directly to the States Camp, the which consisted but of
two and Don John sends to succor Ruremonde.
Barlaimont and Mondragon, the States Army was forced to retire, and the
Towns of A base retreat of the States camp from Ruremonde,
Ruremonde and Weert sufficiently victualed of all things necessary. This being
done, after they had a little refresht their soldiers, they retired into the
country of Luxembourg, from whence they came.

MATHIAS ARCHDVKE OF 1578.
Austria Governor general of the Netherlands.
MATTHIAS D. G. ARCHIDVX AVSTRIAE DVX BVRG^ COMES TIROL GVBERNAT. GENER.
BELGICAE,


My Gransire and my father, two great Emperors were,
And living yet my brother does the Emperial scepter bear:
To honor me the more, the states elected me,
Of the united Provinces their governor to be.
The which (though young of years) I did the^ not refuse,
Although the King supposed I did him much abuse,
And for that cause disliked of my government,
The states likewise, perceiving that no great aduanceme^t:
Did rise to the^ by me, thank't me for my goodwill
And at my going from the^ with gifts my purse did fill.
THe 18. day of January in the year, 1578. the Arch duke Mathias 1578.
The Archduke Mathias received for Governor,
having takeh the aceustomedioth he was acknowleded for Governor g^nerall for
the King of Spain of all the Netherlands; upon certain conditions set down
in diverse articles, the which we omit for brevity sake, and for that they were
to small) effect and the little good and service he did in his government, who
having sworn them at his reception, the Prince of Orange (whom the Archduke
called his father) was not-with-standing all his excuses chosen for his
Lieutenant, not without the Jealousy of the choese Noblemen of the country, and
namely

The same month arrived the Seignior of Selles Captain of the King of Spaines
guard, Brother to the Lord of Noircarmes, who was sent by the King, to make
answer The Seignior of Selles sent by the King unto the state^
to the States letters, of the twenty four of August, and the eight of
September by the which they besought him that Don John might be called home,
and an other governor. sent in his place. He had very ample letters of credit,
signed by the King at Madril the twenty of december the which he did impart
unto the States: whereunto answer was made, and this answer was carried by him
unto Don John, who made a reply inform of Vassear, the which he sent back by
Selles, and with it a letter which he did write unto the States the fifteen
of february this year 1578. whereunto the said States made answer by their
letters the last of the month. But all these conferences, writings, answers
and replies of either side, brought forth no fruit, Don John refusing to be
tied to the pacification of Gant, which he had sworn, and the King approving
his actions, and meaning to maintain him in his government. And so Don John
made all the preparation he could for war, and having ordered all things in
Luxembourg, he came to March in Famine, from thence to Hoye in the country of
Liege five Leagues above Namur, from whence he went unto his castle of Namur.
Being at Luxemburg, succors came to him from all parts, as to the Rendezuous,
whether arrived Alexander Farneze Prince of Parina, son to Duke Octauio and
to Marguerite bastard to the Charles the fifth, in former time Gouernesse of the
Netherlands bringing with him the Spaniards and Italiens of Lombardie: whether
also was come before Charles Don John frames the body of an army.
Earl of Mansfeld with his French troops: the Germains and Bourguignons were
there also: so as in a short time Don John gathered together an army of
sixteen thousand foot, and about two thousand horse, Italiens, Spaniards,
French, Germans heigh Bourguignons and Lorrains: seeing himself thus
fortefied, he published in print, the causes and reasons which moved him to
take arms against the States: which were, to maintain in the Netherlands
generally the Catholic and Romish Relligion, and the obedience of the King of
Spain, inserting many goodly promises to the Provinces, towns, nobles,
Borroughes, villages and men of war, Don John.

At the same time Pope Gregory the thirteen sent a Bull from Rome of the 8. of
January, by the which he gave remission of all sins for ever, and life
eternal unto all those that after they had been confessed and received the
Sacrament should go to war, in the service of Don John, against the Prince
of Orange, and them of Holland and Zeeland, Jealousy among the Nobllity sor the
Leutenancy of the Archduke Mathias.
and al others whom he termed Heretics. But these soldiars would have bin
better pleased with his ducats, then with his pardons. We have said before
how that the Prince of Orange had often refused the Lieutenancy of the
Archduke Mathias, Lumay Earl of March (who had a great spleen against the
Prince) by reason of his 1577.
away, leaving his regiment there. The Earl of Lalain general of the Army
(who expected to have the place of Lieutenant) followed him: then the Vicont of
Gant (afterward Marquis of Rouban) would go to see his wife at Beuvrage near
unto Valenciennes: the Earls of Bossu and Egmont, and other Noblemen, came to
Brussels, to the marriage of the Lord of Bersselle with the Marquess of
Berghen, daughter to the Lord of Merode Valentin de Pardieu Seignior of La
Motte, Governor of Grauelinghe, and at that time Master of the Ordinance,
fained an excuse to run to Brussels. To conclude, every man left the camp
one after another, the which wandered up and down, from place to place. First
they brought it from about Namur to Gemblours, Martins, and back again to
Gemblours, to bring it into Brabant. At that time there were no other
Commanders in the whole Army, but the Siegnior of Goignies Marshall of the
Camp, the Baron of Montigni Brother to the Earl of Lalain (afterward Marquis
of Renty) at that time Jealousy makes the Noblemen to abandon the army.
young and unexperienced in those affairs, the Seigniors of Bailloeul and
Heure brethren, old Knights. And to prove that this jealousy was the cause
of their abandoning the Army, I can truly say, (for that I did observe it,
being then a follower to the Vicont of Gant) that after the Prince of Orange
had taken the oath, as Lieutenant general to the Archduke; and that the news
thereof was come unto the Camp: they held but once any council of war,
beginning the next day to

As they took occasion to draw it from Saint Martins and Templours to
Gemblours. Don John the better to discover it, and to see it march, presented
himself with his troop upon a little hill, that he might view it at his
pleasure, having no thought nor intent to fight with them. But seeing their
disorder, and that the fore-ward was advanced above a league before the
reere-ward, marching not in an enemies country, but as it were to take a
re-view or muster: He was advised to charge them, giving furiously upon the
battle, whose horsemen brake the foot of their reere-ward, so as of the The
defeat of the states Army near unto Gemblours.
battle and the reere-ward there was a quick dispatch, most of the fore-ward
saving Balfour a Scottishman, who was hurt there, and yet saved himself, and
so did the Lord of Montigny, after that he had done as much as possible might
be: the Siegnior of Goignies was taken prisoner, and from that time fell to
serve the Spaniard. Those old Knights of Bailloeul and Heure (who in all things
dealt plainly) having saved themselves in Gemblours, were soon after made
prisoners by the taking of the Town.

Don John pursuing the course of his victory, the country wavering, as if all
had Louuain, Arschot, Tillemon, Die, Lewe and Sichem yield to Don John.
been lost, seized upon the Town of Louvain; the Magistrates going forth to
meet him, presented him the Keys; then of Arschot, Tillemont, Die, Lewe,
and the little Charles of Mansfieldt before Bovuines, whereas the Seignior of
Estourmel commanded, who having endured some Canon shot, seeing no show of
succors, and the Town being unfit to be held, he yielded it by
composition. And although the loss was not so great in this defeat of
Gemblours, as the Spaniards bragged (the States having gathered their men
together with all the speed that might be) yet it did draw away, and cool
the courage of many of their party: and those that in their hearts were
affected and bore good will to the Spaniards, began to show themselves openly,
and to retire to Don John.

The Duke of Aniou being advertised of this defeat, sent the Seignior of
Fougeres, The Duke of Aniou offers succors to the states.
a Gentleman of his Chamber, and one of his Secretaries to the States, to
condole with them, and to offer to aid them both with his person and means,
which being accepted by them, he sent the Earl of Rochepot, and the Seignior
Despruneaux in embassage to Antwerp, with whom the Earl of Lalain the Barron
of Freesin and the signior 1578.
Mathias and the other Noblemen, leaving the town of Brussells retired to
Antwerp: the Prince of Orange remaining there still for some days with the
Earl of Bossu, to provide for the safety of the town and to fortefie the
weakest places, the which they did, making a half Moon within the town
toward the high part. The town of Saint Guissain, which is but two leagues
from Mons in Henault, being after the defeat of Gemblours ready to fall into
Don John's power, by the practice of Matthew Moulbart Abbot of the same place,
and elect Bishop Saint Guislain assured for the states.


The town of Amsterdam having still obstinatly defended the Spanish sactions
receiving great promises and encouragements from Don John, the Prince of
Orange, as governor, and the States of Holland, sought all means to force them
to yield, by stopping up of their passages, and otherwise, seeing that all
their reasonable offers, made unto them in the beginning of anno 1577. would by
no means persuade them. The greatest difficulties consisting here in were that
they would not suffer, their fellow Burgers,

This passing in this sort, the Prince and the States by advice from the
general estates, practicing many ways to surprise them, but none taking
effect, at the last Colonel Hellingh, and captain Ruychauer, a Burger of the
same town, made a certain enterprise upon them of Amsterdam, thinking to take
the town, and to that end upon the 13. of November Hellingh (that was speaking
with the Burgers, to persuade them to lay down their arms) being shot, the
Burgers with their six companies of soldiers began to take corrage, and taking
arms, drew the Hollanders back, and as God would have it, a barrel of their
poulder falling on fire in the gate, the Hollanders were so abasht, as they
were beaten out again with great loss of their men, and amongst them,
captain Ruychauer being taken prisoner, was slain by one of his old enemies,
a man that in the precedent Amsterdam yields to the states.
wars had done much good service. But although this enterprise fell out badly
secret enterprises, and for that Don John had still many friends within the
town which 1578
the benefit of their trade and traficke in the town which as then began to
increase, and to live in unity and conformity with the rest of the towns and
terretories of Holland: caused the Romish Catholic magistrates, and the Friars
to go out of the town, and all munkes and Priests: pulling down the Images
in the Churches, permitting nothing but the reformed religion to be used
therein, which during the wars, was most beneficial for their town, and
conformable to the manner of the rest of the towns in Holland, although the
States of Vtrecht, Harlem, and other reconciled towns maintained the Romish
religion long time after, together with the reformed religion, but for that
they found and perceived many secret enterprises, to be devised by the
spirituality, Don John's affairs, and much furtherance to the states. The
Spaniards having under the command of Charles of Mansfeldt beseeged the town
of Villeuoorde, whereas the signior of Glimes commanded with some companies of
Wallons seeing (after he had lien before it but two days) that he should get
nothing but blows, he retired, and from thence went to beseege Niuelle in
Brabant, where the signior of Villers commanded for the States, with five
companies of foot, and some few horse: refusing to yield at the first summons,
he battred it furiously with eight Cannons, so as having made a sufficient
breach, the Wallon souldiars (whom they had made believe that Don John did not
much Niuelle yielded to Don John.
with their men. Thus was Niuelle yielded up to Don John the 15. of February:
from thence the army went before Bins two leagues from Mons, the which yielded

After the taking of Niuelle and Bins, Don John went to the little towns of
Soignies, Roeux, Beaumont, Walcourt and Maubenge in the country of Henault;
some having small garrisons, others none at all, as not deserving to hazard any
men in them, all Many small towns in Henault yielded to Don John.
which yielded to his obedience without any resistance. Then he went to Chimay,
the which having endured a battery of six Cannons, and an assault, yielded by
composition. This done Don John did generally proclaim the commission which
he had from the King of Spain, touching his government with a general
pardon, declaring that all persons which remained in any town, castle or fort,
that were enemies unto him, might remain free in their houses, following their
traffic and trades. And that all such as during these new troubles, had
followed the States, and carried arms Charles the fifth: upon this pardon many
returned, but in the beginning they were but of the baser sort.

In the mean time Colonel Steward returning from Dansyck with his Regiment of
Scotishmen, where he had been employed for that town against the King of
Poland, was entertained by the general Estates. The two and twenty day of
March Ingrames Aclum president of their great Council, and the Counselors
Julius Counselors displaced in Frisland upon suspicion.
de Roma, Peter Fritsmo, Focco Romaerts, Anthony Leuali and others: in whose
place were chosen Francis Eysingna, Focco Realda, John Van Staueren and others
who were known to be zealous and well affected to their country. The first
Bishop that ever 1578.
Cuneras Petri, and some others, were sent for unto the Castle, where they were
detained prisoners, and some private men had their houses for prisons. And as
many murmured that their Magistrates were not very faithful unto their
country: the Officers of Justice and others were changed in most part of the A
change of Magistrate (...) the Netherlands.
Towns in the Netherlands: and among others John of Saint Florise, Seignior of
Steenbeke, Governor of Bapaumes, was also made Governor of Lille, Douay and
Orchies, in the place of Maximilian Vilai Siegnior of Rasenghem, who was
prisoner at Gant.

The seventh of April certain companies of Wallons being in garrison at
Masstricht, mutining for their pay, seized upon the Seignior of Heze their
Collonell; and Governor of the Town, and of all the Captains, Ancients, and
Officers of his Regiment, Nicholas of Palmier Seignior of Melroy being sent
thither with their pay, first he contented and A mutiny at Maestrick pacified
and punished.
pacified the soldiers, then he caused them that were restrained of their
liberty to be delivered, and in the end being master of the conspirators,
he hanged some, and drowned others, and putting in another garrison, he
assured the town for the States.

The two and twentieth of the same month there was published in Antwerp a new
decree touching the entertainment of the Pacification of Gant, to have it
sworn by all the inhabitants and such as were resident in the countries that
were under the union, A decree made by the states to entertain the
pacification of Gant.
of what estate, quality, or condition soever they were, as well spiritual as
temporal; holding all them for enemies that should refuse to take the said
oath. All men Friars burnt ^or Sodomie at Gant and Bruges.
offered to force them in their couent^: but the Seignior of Stralen Bourg
master of the town arriving, made them to desist. Whereupon two indiscreet
soldiers bent their Harguebuses against him, with matches in the cocks, but
the trouble being pacified they were apprehended, and their heads cut off.

About the same time were burnt in Gant, by a sentence given by the court of
Flanders, four Friars, one Augustine, and some whipped, being convicted of
Sodomie, the like was done at Bruges to three Friars, and two were whipped for
the like crimes. They confessed that long before an Italian Friar had infected
them with this sin. There was then another Friar in Bruges, but not
altogether so wicked, called Cornellis Adriansen, What Cornellis a Franci^an
Friar of Bruges was.


This gallant had erected a little order of a particular religion, consisting
chiefelie in humility and correction, among fair young wives; and Virgins,
poor simple this manner, making them believe that Innocence must be seen
naked, and that they 1578,
friar, was in the end descouered, by two of his devout women who would not
submit themselves to this friars tail nor strippe themselves in that sort.
And by the report which they made, he was publicly found infamous, and was
skorned of all the world. Afterward the descouery of his impostures, and all
his doing, the profession of his order and his discipline, were also set forth
in print.

This year upon the seventh of May, there was a great and solemn assembly of
the Princes of the Empire holden at Worms in Germany, whereunto the Archduke
Mathias, Saint Aldegonds oration made at the assembly o^ the Princes of the
Empire holden at Worms in the year 1578.
and the general estates sent an honorable embassage, where the Seignior of
Saint Aldegond, made an eloquent oration, before all the Princes of Germany,
and the Don John had used there, and withal what danger the Empire was to
expect thereby: touching the Duke of Alua he showed perticularly that in a
banquet made before his departure, he had boasted (and did glory therein,) that
within the time of his government, in the Netherlands (being about six years)
he had caused 18600 men to be put to death by the common minister of Justice
called the hang man, besides an innumerable number, that were consumed and
murdered by the vprores, tumults mutinies and cruelty of the soldiars, in many
places of the same, not accounting them that were killed in the wars, showing
further that by the Rhoda, and Don John of Austria, and by the mutinous
Spaniards, proclaimed to be both the Kings and the countries enemies, that had
twice ransaked and spoiled the towns of Mastrciht and Antwerp, and yet not
once punished, he showed likewise how the Spaniards, meant to make the
Netherlands the seat of the wars, and what danger the Empire, and the
Provinces adjacent were thereby to expect: putting them in remembrance, of the
enterprises that the duke of Alua and others had, to incorporate and take the
towns of the Empire, as Collen, Mounster, Emden, and others, whereby the fire
burning in the Netherlands, would soon kindle in Germany. That they sought to
conquer the Kingdom of England, under pretense

He desired them to remember the Turks victories, and the civil discords of
the Christians, and that the Spaniards were as well accustomed to the wars as
the Turks, seeking the same praise and glory by making great conquests, having
as great, yea greater causes or contrariety of religion then the Turks to
further them, both in the Netherlands and in Germany, generally esteeming the
Germans, as the Turks esteem the Christians, whereof they were to be
advised that the King of Spain not long since had made a contract of peace and
a league with the Turk, and had agreed Charles the fifts time were subject
unto the laws of the Empire, and that namely by the trans-action made in the
year of our 1578.
Don John to depart out of the same, and forbidall men to give him any aid or
assistance, Ericke Duke of Brunswicke, Poluiller and other Dutch Commanders and
captains, upon pain of the loss of all their goods: even this was the sum
of his oration, which for that it was in Latin, I set it down in shorter
terms for beuities sake, against the which there was an appoligie made and
put in print at Luxemburg, written by one Cornelis Calidius Christpolitanus.

The Duke of Aniou having caused some troops to march, they entered upon the
frontiers of Henault, which was wonderfully oppressed by the Spaniard: Colonel
Combelles, with the consent of the whole Estates marched with his men into the
A small defeat of the Spaniards by the French.
country, and lodged in a village called Balemont, from whence the Spaniards
thinking Don John after the reduction of Niuelle, sent part of his army before
Philip-Ville (so called by King Philips name, father to the King of Spain that
now is, who caused it to be built in the year of our Lord 1554.) being
seated upon the frontiers of France, the which having been very long
beseeged, battred and assaulted, was in the end for want of victuals and
munition, forced to yield by composition the one and twenty day of May: and
amongst other Articles it was agreed upon, that the captains and companies
that would remain in the Kings service, should be well entertained, and have
three months pay, the rest might retire freely where they pleased. Of five
companies that were in the town, three Don John, the other two returned to
serve the States. The signior of Florenne Governor of the town continued there
still. This being done Don John returned to Namur, dividing his army into
two, whereof the one part was given to the Prince of Parma, to go in the
country of Lembourg, and the other to Octauio Gonzague, to march toward
Arthois.

The Prince of Parma four days after his departure from Philip-ville, marched
with his warlike troops toward the town of Lembourg, which he thought to
The Spaniards beseege L^mbourg.
carry upon his first approach. And although the Town it self be not very
strong, yet is it defended by a good castle, built upon a hillocke not to be
scaled, very hard to be battred, and almost impregnable. To approach unto
Lembourg, he

There was in it in garrison two squadrons of the States souldiars, being
about the number of some fifty men, one of the chief Officers a Liegois
borne, said unto the other that was his companion, that it was needful before
they suffered themselves to be beseeged, to go and furnish themselves within
the town of all things necessary for their provision, as well for victuals,
as for munition of war. And therefore one of them should go with a good
conuoie, giving the choice unto

This other Corporal having taken the charge upon him to go and fetch
munition 1578
The Castle of Heude trea cher^usly delivered to the Prince of Parma.
fell suddenly upon the other three, and having slain one of them, he said
unto the other two that what he did was for the Kings service: whereupon they
remained quiet, and the castle was delivered up to the Prince of Parma, who
gave him a very good reward.

The Prince having this castle at his commandment sent presently to sommon the
town of Lembourg, the which refused to yield, for some few days before it
had been victualled by the States. Whereupon it was battred with nine pieces,
and although he prevailed little, yet a dissension being grown in the town,
betwixt the Burgers (who would not hold out, and refuzed to fight) and the
souldiars of the garrison, Don John had sent under the command of Octauio
Gonzague marched directly toward Mons, thinking to cut of their victuals, and
to reduce it to that extremity as they should be forced to yield: but he
prevailed Octauio Gonzague preuailes (...) ^le in Henault.
nothing, but only ruined the poor champian country thereabouts. Those of
the town were day lie in skyrmishe with them, and among others captain
Mornault with his company of horse, never suffered them to be at rest. The
nineteenth of June there died in Antwerp that virtuous and long afflicted
Princess, Sabina Palatina widow Amoral of Egmont, and a little before the
signior Lancelot Barliamont, Earl of The death of the Countess of Egmont.
Meghen, in the right of the Lady Marie of Brimeau his wife, without any
children: which Lady was afterward married to Philip of Croy Prince of
Chymai, Son to the duke of Arschot being then but young.

At the same time a certain councellor of the great council at Macklin went
unto Don John, whom he gave to understand that he had many partakers in the
said town, who desired nothing more then to see it reduced under his
obedience: and that if it pleased him to take the pain to come or send
thither, they would make him master thereof without any difficulty. Don John
sent him back unto the town to manage this business, and to draw others to
his devotion. But this practice being Octauio Gonzague came before the town
of Macklin to execute this enterprise, but he was entertained with good musket
shot. Seeing himself discovered, he sent letters unto the Magistrates, to
persuade them to yield to Don John, but in steed of an answer they sent forth
certain shot by a false port, who charged his horse, from a covert place,
where they could not be forced, making them retire with loss of men and horse.

The Duke of Aniou the better to effect his desseigne, and give the succors
which The duke of Aniou comes to succor the states.
he had promised to the States, came in person with his troops into the
country of Henault, and arrived at Mons the twelfth day of Iulie, being
accompanied with Polwiller, which before the pacification of Gant, had been in
garrison at Campen and at Deuenter in the country of Oueryssel, having been
sommoned by the States, and refused to depart, still dissembling, till after
the breach of the accord, and the taking of the castle of Namur: made open
demonstration that they would keep the said towns for Don John: which the
States perceiving, they sent the Earl of Rheneberg Governor of Friseland
thither with an army of a thousand men who first beseeged Campen, situated
upon the Veluve toward the Zuyderzee, which having refused to yield being
sommoned, he battred it very furiously from either side of the River of
Yssel, making a sufficient breach for an either side should be set at liberty
without ransom, and that they should be safely conducted 1578.
Casimire, who was coming to aid the Estates, from thence the Earl went to
beseege Deuenter five leagues from Campen, the which was also yielded, after
four months seege, upon honest conditions.

The castle of Haurec in the which there was a Spanish garrison, being
beseeged by the duke of Anious troops, and battered, yielded unto him: the
Spaniard came Pont was lodged in the village of Becourt at a rich laborers
house called John Millet, who had two fair young daughters: this captain fell
in love with the eldest called Mary, being about sixteen years old: all the
whole household sought to serve and entreat him well, to avoid the insolences
which such people do usually show unto poor pesants. This captain being one
day at dinner with the father, mother and daughters, he demanded of the
father his daughter Marie in An unworthy and cruel ^act of captain Pont and
well revenged.
keep her as his strumpet) refused him flatly. The captain incensed at this
refusal, swearing and cursing, chased the father, the mother and the whole
family out of the house, keeping only this poor Virgin, whom he ravished,
and caused three or four of his souldiars to do the like. Which done, he
went to the table, and set this poor maiden by him, mocking still at her with
very filthy and dissolute speeches. She who spoke nothing, studying how she
might be revenged with her own hand, whatsoever should become of her,
desiring rather to die then to live any longer with such reproach and infamy:
observed a Corporal that came Lucrece deserved, Mary (...) more worthy of
commendation then Lucrece.
Tarquin; this maid deserves much more, who before her death could take
revenge of her more then barbarous rauisher: Almighty GOD meaning thereby to
punish the excess of these French souldiars, to make others learn more
wisdom and temperatenesse.

The Archduke Mathias Governor, and the general Estates having raised a great
and mighty army, under the conduct and command of the Earl of Bossu (a
brave, valiant and hardy Knight) and the signior of La Noue, (a valiant and
worthy French Gentleman) they planted their campenere unto Remenant in
Brabant, a league from Don John resolved to charge them before they were all
come together, he being very strong and having new men come out of Italy,
could make Don John resolves to charge the states at Remenant.
about thirty thousand soldiers, amongst the which were five or six thousand
horsemen, all or the most part, old expert soldiers, and choice men, his
Lieutenant General was the Prince of Parma, Octauio Gonzaga was general of
the horse men, Peter Ernest 1578.
with his Son and many other Lords and Gentlemen, as the Earls of Re^lx, and
Falckenburg, Robles Lord of Billy, the Lord of Ruyrooke, the Lord of Lyques,
the Lord of Faulx, the Lord of Marle, the Lord of Rosingnol, the Lord of
Gomicourt, the Lord of Warlonzel, the Lord de Monteragon, and other strange
Lords, Don Alonso Martines de Lieua, Son to Don Sanchio, Vice-roye of Naples
who in times past had been general of the Galleys of Spain, this Don Alonso
had a company of two hundred strong, wherein there was ten brave captains, as
Don Diego, and Don Pedro de Mendoza, Don Sanchto de Lieua his brother, and
others, his Ensign being black, with a crucifix therein, which was holloed and
consecrated at Naples, by the Cardinal Gesnada, and that Don John to have the
vantgard of the army, hoping that it should fall out as well with him that
day as it did at Gemblours. Don John himself in his Ensign, had a cross,
with this poesy, By this sign I overcame the Turks, and by the same sign
also I will overcome the Heretics, and being thus prepared, upon the last day
of July, he came with all his army to Arschot, with full intent to set upon the
states camp, or with advantage, to procure them to a battle.

But the Earl of Bossu, being advertised by his sentinels of horse, that
there were The great skirmish by Rymenant.
about some a leaven or twelve cornets of horse coming against them, with a
great squadron of footmen, which were about 90. or a hundred men, they all
gave charge that the States gards should retire to a place, where he had set
five or six hundred Don John's men being imboldened, gave a strong and
mighty charge upon the States Ruyters, and other horsemen, which valiantly
withstood them, and yet in such sort as the enemy had some advantage, but
after that being seconded, they turned so bravely back again, as they forced
Don John's men to leave the heath, and to retire themselves to certain hedges,
but for that the Earl of Bossu, to keep those hedges, had placed certain
Englishmen (under the regiment of Colonel Norris that was come thither but an
hour before, and certain Scots) hard by the River all alonge to his camp,
Don John could not break thorough, Treslon. This skirmish beginning at seven
of the clock in the morning, continewed until evening about five or six of
the clock, being a wonderful hot day, so as the English, Scots, and other
souldiars were forced to put of their clothes and to fight in their shirtes,
where they behaved themselves as bravely as possible they might, considering
the great number of the enemy, and that they were all old experienced Soldiers
that they had to do withal: Colonel Norris, son to the Lord Norris, with
the Englishmen behaved himself very valiantly, and had certain horses
Bingham, a man of great experience and policy, although he was but hardly and
badly used by his men, being then Lieutenant to Captain Candish, and there
lost two brethren. The like did the Scotts under Collonell Stuart, the French
and Netherland foote-men showing also great courage and valor, for that the
ground was not very fit to use many of the horsemen.

If at that time the Earl of Bossu (which as I have heard he has since
repented) had charged the Spaniards in their retreat with all his forces, as he
had the means and power, having four times as many men more as the enemy;
without doubt neither Don'Iohn nor any one of his men had escaped, and this
day had been Don John having committed this error, full of blasphemy and
cursings, carrying 1578.
La Guard thither with five hundred French shot of the one side: and Colonel
Balfour with a thousand Scots on the other. La Guard, arrived first, and forced
the Spaniards by a way that was low and narrow, cutting all in pieces that
he incountred, so as the town was taken and spoiled. The Vicent of Gant
chief of this enterprise, thinking it not convenient to keep it, for that it
was nothing strong, caused it to be abandoned, and by the advice of the said
Colonels retired with his horse and foot to the Camp. This affront was done
unto Don John the tenth of August, within two leagues of his army.

At the same time some troubles being grown in the town of Valenciennes, the
Archduke and the States sent the signior of Harchies to take information, and
to order all things. Being entered into the town the Burgers began to be
divided, some A tumult at Valencienes.
held with the signior of Harchies, and others with the Maiestrates. This
tumult continued eight days, the people being still in arms, not without
great danger of effusion of blood. In the end Richardot a Councellor of State,
was sent thither, who did reconcile them, and pacify all troubles.

The Duke of Aniou before he sent such succors to the States as he had
promised had capitulated with the States, first of all: to declare himself, an
open enemy to Don John and to his adherents: to entertain for the assistance
of the States ten The duke of Anicus capitulation with the States.
Auesne Quesnoy and Landrecy but they refused) notwithstanding that the Abbot
of Marolles was sent to persuade them) that all towns, places and fortes lying
beyond the river of Meuse, and not in the association of the States (as
Bourgongne and Luxembourg) which should be taken by his forces alone or
jointly with the States, should remain under his power, command and
obedience, during his life, and Defender of the liberty of the Netherlands,
against the Spaniards and their Adherents. He declared himself enemy to Don
John, and The duke of Anious (...).
to all his followers by a printed declaration. But of all the troops which
he brought, after that he had taken a view of them being put in battle
near unto Bins, they were not above seven thousand foot and eight or nine
hundred horse: most of them Licentious and disordred souldiars, the skum of the
civil wars of France, and the relikes of the massakers of Paris.

With these forces he entered into Henault, the which (during his abode at
Mons, with the Earl Lalain his Gossip) who was put from the place of Captain
General of the States army, for that without their priuitie and leave he had
abandoned the army in the country of Namur when as Don John had that victory
near unto Gembblours) Don John was far weaker in forces then the States, and
might easily have been defeated. 1578
The states ar mie vnpr^table for want of pay.
Anious forces, and to take Genap, Niuelle, and some other paltrie Towns,
unworthy the stay of an army. This conjunction with the Duke of Aniou lost the
States a months time: and when they were ready to join all into one body of
an Army, the Duke retired with his Bussia' Amboise to Mons in Henault, by the advice of his gossip the Earl of Lalain, and then began his Army to vanish,
whereby the best season of the year and the best opportunity was lost: the
States became more indebted unto the Army, who grew discontented to see
themselves so ill governed, their forces both of horse and foot decreased by
mortality and famine, and in the end the hope which they had of such great
forces, as the Prince had never the like, went to smoke, and they were to
begin again. Don John fortified himself the more, and then began the The
beginning of the malcontents.
Montigny, Heze, Egmond and Alennes, of which Malcontents (as we will
here-after show) Montigny made himself chief.

After this disbanding as well of the Duke of Anious troops, as of the
malcontents, the States Army being retired from Remenant, went and camped
two leagues from Louvain. The Earl of Bossu general of the Army, went forth
with two thousand Harguebuziers, and two hundred horse, and approached near
unto the Town, the A great skirmish near unto Louvain.
Spaniards sallyed forth bravely upon them, where there was a gallant skirmish.
The Vicont of Gant General of the horse, charged them with his men at Arms,
even unto Quesnoy his Lieutenant. The Earl of Bossu would gladly have besieged
the said Town, but the want of three or four thousand Pioners, and of thirty
Three castles taken by the states at one instant.
or forty Canons, necessary to batter so spacious a place, which had two
leagues circuit, and furnished with five thousand men, made this desseigne
seem unreasonable. The same day the Army in passing took the Castle of
Dyon, la Motte, Helsenne and Sart: La Motte endured a battery, in the which
were fifteen or sixteen Soldiers, the rest peasants, and was taken by
assault, where-as the Seignior of La Noue Marshall of the Camp, the Vicont and
the Collonell Michell Caulier, past through the water in the ditches up to the
waste (the which was no discreet part of the Vicont,

In September following certain companies of Malcontents of the aboue-named
Regiments (among the which was that of Captain Christien of Mons) being come
to lodge in the quarter of Gaure (which is of the Principality of them of
Egmont) about three leagues from Gant. The Ganthois, advertised thereof by the
grievous and daily complaints of the poor pesants, for so many oppressions and
insolences committed by these Wallon soldiars, Malcontents, and doubting also
some enterprise upon their Some compan^ of m^contents surprised at Gaure.
town, (for that the said Malcontents had vanted that they would teach the
Ganthois to mock at the mass) sent some of their companies in the night, who
went to

The Barron of Montigni and other Colonels Wallons, to be revenged for such
an affront upon the Flemings and Ganthois, came early in a morning before the
Borough Menin surprised by the Malcontents
and two of Lille, having intelligence with the Curat, the Baylife, called
Nicholas Robert, and some others: who knowing of the Malcontents approach, after
the ringing of the morning bell, persuaded them that were in guard to go to
their rest. And as there remained but few Bourguers at the Ports and the places
but newly begun 1578.
Mathias and the council of State, with which demand they were much troubled,
Jesuits ch^urch; half of that of the Franciscans, Iacopins and of Saint
Andrew. And so with leave of the sovereign magistrate, they began their first
public Temples granted in diverse place; to the Protestants.
preaching the last day of August: some days after the Protestants of the
confession of Ausbourg having also demanded temples, obtained the Sheer-mens
chapel, the great hall of the Carmelites, and the grange near unto Saint
Michells. The like was granted in the towns of Brusselles, Macklin, Breda,
Berghen upon Soom, Liere, Bruges

While the armies were gathering together on both sides, and the State of the
Netherlands standing in suspense, the potentates round about desirous to
reconcile the Peace propounded to Don John by foreign Princes.
distracted minds of the Netherlands against their Prince, as also to prevent
bad examples de Bellieure, and the Queen of England, the Lord Cobham, and Sir
Francis Walsingham her Principal Secretary, with a great train, which
Ambassadors having moved both parts to hearken unto a peace, the estates
propounded certain conditions, the contents whereof were, that all that they
had don since Don John's going to Namur, should be approved, allowed of, and
held to be well don, that Don John should depart out of all the Netherlands
within the said month of August, and deliver up all the towns and forts into
the States hands, that the Archduke Mathias Don John thereunto, and thereby to
keep his Majesty in possession of his Netherlands, without Don John to depart
out of the Netherla^ds entreating him not to seek to hazard his good fortune
upon a doubtful battle aledging unto him 1578
great an army, and money like wise to maintain the same: saying, that he might
depart with honor, when as his departure should be procured, by the Mediation,
and intercession of the Emperor, the King of France, and the Queen of England,
which dying, they said, he might assure the Netherlands unto their natural
Prince, and by that means procure the maintenance and furtherance of the
Romish Catholics religion: touching the said articles, the Ambassadors had many
conferences and meetings between them, the estates and Don John; speaking with
Don John himself at Lovuain and there abouts: Don John refuses to make
peace, but desires to have a truce.
but it was al in vain for that Don John would have the states to give over
their arms, and to send the Prince of Orange into Holland, and then he said he
would harken to a peace, yet telling them plainly that he would permit no new
religion and many things else, Don John likewise for his part, having gotten
more soldiars, and being advertised that the States men wanted, pay at the last
he made answer to the Ambassadors, that the King of Spain had referred the
whole dealing for the peace unto the States only, to whom full power and
authority should be given for the same, (being indeed somewhat jealous of
France and England)

The general estates, thinking verily that they had well secured and assured
the The causes that moved the Stats to tolerate them of the religion
Catholic Romish Religion by the new publication of the pacification at Gaunt
found it to avail them little, for that they were forced neuer-the-lesse, to
satisfy and content the minds of the peolpe in every place, thereby to
maintain the wars, and that they had need of such soldiers as they might
trust, which they esteemed to be Hollanders and those of the religion, and
therefore in every place they put such as were of the religion into offices
within the towns, as knowing them thereby, to be The Protestants request for
a religious peace.
a request unto the Arch duke Mathias, and the general estates, bearing date
the twenty two of June, therein showing, that they desired to live according to
the reformed religion, and that they had separated themselves from the Romish
Church for many Don Loys de Requesens, the great Commander of Castile who also
had driven an innumerable number of good men out of the Netherlands, and caused
all traficke and good handycrafts (wherein the chief riches of the land
consisted) to be carried into strange and forrene countries, by which means the
wars began: showing the Spaniards expense and loss of their lives and goods,
gotten the victory, which must of necessity 1578.


They likewise hoped, that touching the reformed religion, some order would
before that time have been taken by the general estates, which by many
hindrances had been put off, and chiefly by the means and practices of the
enemy, or else by some that hoped (the enemy being overcome) once again to
roast the Protestants at a fire: and therefore they desired that no credit
might be given unto such men, as rejected the pacification of Gant, thinking
that two religions could not be maintained in one kingdom, and that there
could be no security given to the spiritual persons: saying further; that
the enemy had manifestly broken the pacification of Gant, and that for as much
as it concerned the land, they might by common consent,

But for that they got no answer presently hereunto, (in regard of the
waightinesse of the cause) upon the seventh of July, being fourteen days
after, they gave a second request, wherein they sought to satisfy certain
doubts, as if there were no security to be found from the Protestants if they
should grant their request. And therefore that there should be no alteration,
they propounded and set down that in every town some of the Magistrates might
be appointed to take particular knowledge of all oppressions and abuses, or
certain good Burgers, men of good name

And besides, that all Preachers Elders, and Deacons, should likewise promise
the same, as on the contrary side, the Priests, Deanes, Pastors, Vicars, and
Treasurers of the Parishes should do the like. That they would also faithfully
promise and but as much as in them lies to hinder the same. And that if it
proceed so far, that 1578.
make it known unto the Magistrate, that order might be taken therein, as
cause required. Whereunto the chiefest persons amongst them, should make
promise to perform the same, in such places or towns where the free permision
of the said religion should be granted, and in such number as they should
think good: Once again promising, (according to the contents of the first
request) to entreat some great Lords or Princes, to give their words for them,
requiring the like of them, that made profession of the contrary religion,
desiring nothing else but to live peaceably under the protection of their
Magistrates, and that the breakers of the common peace might be punished.

To pacify and satisfy the people touching this request, the Arche-duke
Mathias, the Prince of Orange, the counsel of Estate, and the general
estates, after long and mature deliberation, devised a religious peace in
Antwerp, for all such towns as would The states resolution touching a
religious peace.
desire the same, the which did not in any sort contradict the pacification of
Gant, so that thereby the provinces of Brabant, Flanders, Arthois, and Henault
were not bound one unto the other, but remained free and at liberty, amongst
them, to do as they should think convenient, and that so likewise they of
Holland and Zeeland might not attempt any thing, in the other provinces against
the Catholic Romish religion: and for that the pacification tended only to
the driving out of the Spaniards, and other strange garrisons, they thought it
a necessary peace, and politic union, for that as verbatim as it was devised.
Every man apparently knows, that the tyrranous proclamations which had before
been made, touching religion, by the secret counsel, and The preface of the
religious peace.
practices of strangers, specially of the Spanish nation, without hearing the
estates of the Netherlands once speak therein, and since that great rage and
extremity has bin shown for the upholding of the same, which are the causes
of all our present calamities, for that by means thereof the privileges,
rights, and lawdable customs of the Don. John of Austria, in the name of the
King, making an accord with the estates aforesaid, touchching the pacifying of
the war, and the avoiding of all other inconveniences: and Don John, whose
office specially was, (as being appointed to govern and rule the said
Netherlands) to have holden and maintained the same in peace and tranquillity:
neuer-the-lesse doing the contrary, he had broken the said pacification in
many points: and by diverse means (contrary to his oath) made show he would
not be satisfied therewith, so that the afore-sayd war is once again
renewed by him, which has for the preservation of our natural liberty and
defense, mutually to bear arms together, being thereby, and by means of the
extremities where-into the said war, (as the mother of all disorders and
insolences) has brought us, forced to do and permit diverse things that are
prejudicial to religion, beginning of this war, we have protested both by
letters, and Ambassadors sent unto 1578.
Don John. and although we want neither will nor means, to procure our
defense, not-with-standing for that the diversity of the provinces and of men's
opinions, hinder the cause, it is to be douted, that neither our good wills,
nor yet our abilities, will prevail unless we proceed to a more strict and
stronger band of amity, indissoluble accord and union; especially in the matter
of religion, for considering, that not only by reason of the war, but also
in regard of the inevitable frequentation, and conservation of the merchants,
and other inhabitants of the countries and Provinces bordering upon us, as of
France, England, Germany, and others, having the pretended reformed religion
amongst them, the same religion has for some time been followed and
maintained in diverse Provinces of the Netherlands, so it is

All which we having well considered, and specially, that the enemy fears
nothing more, then that he should see us once united in religion, and
therefore seeks (under pretense thereof) on all sides to hold and keep us in
division, meaning neither to spare reformed nor Catholic what-so-euer, if he
may prevail; having also considered, that they of the pretended reformed
religion have by diverse petitions instantly desired, that the free exercise
thereof, might be permitted unto them, with and under such restraints and
conditions as are convenient; we for the common peace and quietness of the
country after mature-deliberation therein taken; not only with the deputies of
the general estates, but also perticularly, having therein heard the advice of
the estates of every Province, ordain, and The articles of the religious peace.
think it good.

First that all wrongs and Injuries, happened and done since the pacification
of Gant, in regard of the religion, shall be forgiven and forgotten as if they
had never happened, so that for them, no man shall be called in question nor
molested neither by order of law nor otherwise, nor any inquiry or search made
touching the same, upon pain to be punished as transgressors, and breakers of
the peace, and perturbers

And to the end, that the aforesaid liberty of conscience in religion, may be
used and observed with convenient and tolerable conditions, for the quietness,
and saffety of either part, it is ordained that from henceforth the Catholic
and Romish Religion shall be reestablished and set up again, not only in the
towns of Holland and Zeeland, but 1578
to be peaceably and freely exercised without any trouble, or molestation given
or procured unto those that desire to follow the same, so they be not lessee
then a hundred households in every great town or vilage, such as have dwelt
and inhabited therein at the least for the space of a whole year, and in the
small towns and villages, the most part of the inhabitants to be of a years
standing. And that also, the aforesaid reformed Religion, shall and may
hencefore be freely erercised and used in every town and place of the
Netherlands, whereas it shall be desired or required by the inhabitants of the
same, being in number as aforesaid. Always provided, that both they of the
one, and the other religion, shall present themselves before the magistrate,
where they shall seek to have the exercise of their said religion, who
presently shall

In which places, every one of them, shall and may do, hold, hear, and
celebrate,

It is likewise forbidden to all preachers, lecturers, and others, of what
religion soever they be, that are to speak or preach openly, to use any speech
or proposition tending to uproar or sedition^. but shall behave themselves
indifferently and modestly, saying or speaking nothing else, but that only
which tends to the instruction and edification of their audience, upon pain
aforesaid. Forbidding likewise, (upon like pain) all soldiers of what religon
soever they be, to bear any signs, tokens or shows whereby they might move
or stir each other to strife or contention. That they of the afore-saide
resormed religion both in Holland and Zeeland and elsse where should be bound,
to observe the laws and customs of the Catholic Church, touching or doubt,
neither yet denied, nor withheld from the children produced, or to be produced
1578.


That they of the religion out of Holland and Zeeland, should be bound to
keep and observe the festival days, ordained and kept in the Catholic
Romish church, as Sondayes, Fair days, the feasts of the Apostles, of the
Anunciation of the Virgin Mary, the Ascension of Christ, Candlemas day, and the
Sacrament days, and shall neither work, open their shops, nor buy nor sell
upon the same. That also upon such days, as by the said Church it is forbidden
to eat flesh, the Butchers houses and

And yet it shall not be lawful, for any man to slander an other, without
cause or reason, neither yet to bring his name or fame in question, or to
back-bite him upon

And that touching the same, they shall therein give no commission nor command
1578.


In Antwerp, Brussels, Mechelen, Bergen, Breda, Liere, Bruges, Ipre, etc. as
also in Friseland, Gelderland, and other Provinces and Towns, it gave great
contentment, and in those places those of the reformed religion had Churches
appointed for them, Moabite, the Jesuits Church, the Friars Churches, the
Dominican or preaching Friars, and Saint Andrews Church, and after that also in
the great Church of our Lady, and Saint James Church, they of the Catholic
religion keeping the Quiers and Chapels, and part of the great Church for
themselves. The said Churches being divided amongst the Frenchmen and the
Netherlands, that were of the re^igion, Saint Georges Church, and the Nuns
Church, with other places, were appointed for them of the confession of
Ausbourge, as making profession of the reformed religion, with the Swinglians
and Caluinists, and agreeing in the points

In Brussels the Lords of Champigni and Heze, the Marquis of Bergen, the Lord
of Fassigen, and the Lord of Glymes, with others, presented a request, to
hinder the religious The Gentlemen in Brussels present a request against (...)
religious ^ce.
peace in that place, and that the Protestants might not preach there,
all^dging that it was a principal town whereas the Princes of the land were
commonly resident; Vanden Temple apprehended and committed to prison, and the
better Champigni committed to ^on.
to be kept (as being found culpable of the same action, for the which the
Lords were committed in Gant) he was by means of some of the Bourgers sent to
Gant, to the

The Duke John Cassimire, having at an Imperial diet at Worms, offered unto
the 1578.
Duke Cassimires army.
after that he had mustred his men in the County of Zutphen being seven
thousand foot (whereof there were four thousand French shot) and six
thousand horse, remaining some-time in the Camp before Deuenter, the which was
all that time besieged, he came into Brabant, and the six and twentieth of
August joined with the states army: whereas the Archduke Mathias went to
receive and welcome him, with all the military duties accustomed at the
reception of a general of an Army that comes to succor. He had before stayed
long with his forces in the Duchy of Geldres, and had much trouble before he
could make them to pass the river of Meuze, for want of money, which the
States could not furnish by reason of the Ganthois tumult, and the
discontentments of the Wallons, which hindered the contribution of the
Provinces, Cassimires, cost monthly eight hundred thousand Florins. In which
payment Arthois and Henault were the first, which breaking their promise with
the other Provinces, made default. Those of Flanders did not in like manner
furnish any thing, or very little, under color that they were to defend
themselves against the malcontents: although for their parts they were to
pay the third of all the charges of the army: Arthois and Henault either of
them an eight part, from whence nothing came: so as in six months the other
voluntary Provinces could not furnish above four hundred thousand Florins, the
which was far short of the reckoning. Wherefore this goodly army must of
necessity be thus poorly dispersed, as it was, and the States run more in
debt, as well to Cassimire, as to the Duke of Aniou, and to their own men. In
the mean time the Prelates and Noblemen of Friseland that were kept prisoners
at Leeuwarden, as we have showed before, seeing that for no commandment of
their Superiors, The Prelates and Nobles prisoners in Friseland escape.
as of the Archduke Mathias governor; of the Prince of Orange his Lieutenant,
of the council of State, nor for any Commissioners that were sent unto them,
their deteiners would set them at liberty, they found means to escape all out
of prison the seventeen of September, except three Prelates, and three
Gentlemen, who would not hazard themselves to be surprised in their flight
and for fear to be brought back again in disgrace.

On the other side, in Arras the chief town of Arthois, certain young
advocates (whose names I conceal for their credits, some of them being allied
unto me) under color to be reputed good and zealous contrymen, being
through favor of their places, and Captains of the Bourguers (whereby they
were armed) brought in contrary to the accustomed order, on the eeue of all
Saints 1577. in the election of Aldermen, adjoining the Magistracy although
incompatible with the Captaineship: yet favored and applauded by the people,
for the good opinion and hope which they had conceived of them, that they would
maintain the commonweal in the union of the general Estates. Yet some of
them having been the motive Secret practices in Arras.
to draw from Antwerp to Arras Captain Ambrose le Duke, to whom was given the
place of Sargiant Mayor of fiueteene companies of Bourguers within the Gale his
son in law, levied for the safety and preservation of the Town: yet soon
after these men suffered themselves to be corrupted by the flattering of the
Lord of Capres, Governor in particular of Arras and of the City, and
Lieutenant to the Vicont of Gant Governor of Arthois during his absence at the
Camp, and by the pensions and promises of Prelates. Whereof the Archduke
being well informed, and considering of what importance the disjunction of
this Province from the generality might be in time (the said Town of Arras
and City, being sufficient to keep all the other Towns of Arthois in the
union) if it were not prevented, and if Capres, who covertly sought to supplant
the Vicont of the general government, of Arthois. Of which Prelates, and of
some others tending to the said disjunction* Diverse committed to prison in
Arra^.
some were committed to prison by the suspicious Bourguers: Among the which was
Damp Iean Sarazin Abbot of Saint Vaast in Arras, the keeper of his grain, the
Signior 1578.
Valhuon his great Bayliffe, Gerard de Vos Signior of Beaupere Lieutenant
civil in the Town. James de Lattre Advocate to the Lord of Capres, the
Chanoine Merline, the Signior of Warluzel, the Signior of Comtee, and ^swatines
son in law to the Signior of Naues President of Arthois: the Deputies of the
Town of Saint Omer (being then resident in Arras) the Councellor of the
Town, the Register of the States of Arthois, the Proctor Pinchon, and diverse
others of quality, all suspected to be ill affected to the general union.

This I say, made the Archduke to ordain (the which he did afterward
reiterate by express charge and commandment to Capres Governor and Magistrate
of the said Town) to have a College erected of fifteen of the quietest The
names of fifteen Deputies in Arras.
Robert Bertoul Signior of Halenges, Master Nicholas Gosson a great. Lawyer,
William Caulier Signior of Belacourt, Master Peter Bertoul Signior of Bois
Bernard. James Moullot a Bachelor of the Laws: James Caffart Receiver to the
Vicont of Gant, Robert Vassal, Nicholas Denis, Louis Roche, John Widebien
Signior of Iumelle, John Pottier, Morand Camp, Sebastien Chocquet, Vincent
Flamen, and Robert Penin a Proctor.

Not-with-standing these fifteen Deputies, as well in private as in open
assembly of the Bourguers, laboring continually to maintain the union of the
town, representing the great inconveniences which did hang over the country
of Arthois, if they should be at any time so miserable, as to disioyne
themselves from their ancient good neighbors and confederate contrymen,
the Flemmings and Brabanders, being as it were allied to Arthois, from whom
they had received so many benefits, yea that of hospitality, with all good
usage and courtesy, when as during the wars against the French, they had
been oftentimes forced to fly unto them. The said fifteen producing many
re-markeable examples of former times to confirm them.

In the mean time the Signior of Capres, and the young Magistrates, hauing^ir
first heat of zeal to their country cooled, whereby their ambition had
mounted to the highest degree, one being become Pensioner to the Abbot of Saint
Vaast, and another to the said Governor and other kinsmen favorers and allies
to the said William le Vasseur, began to give ear to them that practiced this
disunion. By whose persuasion the chief of Arthois made diverse assemblies in
the Bourough of Secli, at Beau^ort in the Abbey of Mont Saint Eloy, and in
other places, where as some of these young Aldermen assisted, to second them
that did so much affect the disjunction of this Province, sometimes writing to
the Towns of Lille, Douay, Mons, and others, to bring them to their bow. But
not-with-standing all the aduertisements which th^se fifteen

The Signior of Capres his partisans and the magistrates proceeding on still in
their dessigns, 1578
Omer, Air, Hesdin and other places, nothing remaining more but Arras, where
there were so many opponents and so clear sighted as it was imposible for them
to execute their practices, if they did not first supplant and displace these
fifteen contradicting deputies; and the Captains Ambrose, and Gele, for the
better effecting whereof they appointed a general assembly of the States of
Arthois on the twelfth of October in the town of Bethune (against all ancient
custom) in the which it was resolved and decreed to free themselves of the
said fifteen, at what rate soever, which resolution was soon The States of
Arthois ^eld extraordinarily.
after discovered, by the chains that were newly drawn cross the street upon
all the passages to the little market place of Arras, none being so simple, but
by this innovation

This confirmed every man in the apprehention which he had formerly conceived
of some future broils, and did so alter the minds of some of the most zealous
to the good of their country, who had a promise to be seconded by captain
Ambrose and his horsemen; as about noone they came with a resolution and forced
this guard of the sworn band, without any effusion of blood, but only of two
or The Magistrates of Arras seaz^d on.
done to any of them) they were deteyned (except three or four of the most
simple, who at the entreaty of the fifteen deputies were presently let go)
four days, until the twenty one of the month, during which time the most
resolute and best affected of these fifteen, in the absence of John Caffart
their companion (who was then in Antwerp with the Arch duke and the council of
State, to take direction what was to be done in the like troubles) were
Mediators to reconcile the Magistrates with the Bourguers that were thus
transported, expecting the coming Caffart had required to be sent from the
court to Arras. The which being long delayed, the Provincial council of
Arthois beholding this confusion with grief, having by promises and fair
words wone Captain Ambrose his cornet and chief officers, together with
Captain Gele and his company, they prevailed so by the favor of some, and by
the respect of their authority, many Bourguers being in arms (Ambrose and his
men remaining spectators) as they with enseigns displaied came unto the town
house (not without danger of a great slaughter of the citizens of either part)
and set the Magistrates at liberty by force.

The party of those that were well affected to their country, seeing
themselves Geles company of foot durst not stir: the Magistrates were
desirous to be revenged for this injury: the Governor Capres being then absent
returned hastily to Arras, and joined with them, being glad of this The
Magistrat^ of Arra^ i^larged reueng themselves.
alteration; setting up a gibbet before the town house: they seized upon a
notable Bourguer, called Valentin Mordac, whom they committed to the Arcenall
of the town, and there caused him to be hanged: they depose the fifteen
Deputies from their places, they apprehend Allard Crugeot an Advocate, and
Peter Bertoul one of the fifteen, a man of seventy years of age, they make
their process with all diligence, and the three and twenty day at night
caused them to be hanged by torch light. And in the mean time the seditious
Preachers did Preach and storm in and discharged from the bond and oath of
association, Master Nicholas Gosson a learned 1578.


But contrary-wise thereby to begin to show forth this monster, on Sater-day
the five and twenty of October, the Seignior of Gosson being in his bed, they
caused him to rise, and arraigned him, accusing him (for this good council
which he had given them) to be the Author of sedition, tumults and popular
mutines, and a troubler of the public peace, he who was a man so decayed and
decrepit as he came not out of The Seignior of Gosson be^dded in Arras.
hours space from the beginning of the process to his execution. A very
extraordinary thing and of bad example for such a person.

Afterward they seized upon one Morand Camp one of the fifteen, whom after
they had kept languishing six months in prison, they caused to be hanged
the very day that their disjunction was concluded in the Abbay of Saint Vaast.
The rest of the fifteen Deputies reconciled themselves with the Magistrates.
John Caffart and one other which could not be taken, and without doubt had
been executed, were banished and their goods forfeited against the preuiledges
of the city. Many good Bourguers were used in the like sort, which had been
noted to be forward in this trouble. And thus was the disjunction of the
Provinces of Arthois, Henault, Lille, Douay and Orchies made; Arthois having
led the dance, as we shall hereafter show more at large. The Ganthois to
suppress the roads and spoils of the Malcontents Don John having been the
first breaker of the Pacification of Gant, and they so much oppressed by the
Malcontents, they could not do less then to stand upon their guard, and
encounter them that came to assail them at their own doeres, without any
cause or authority from their Sovereign. They also called Duke John Casimire
to their aid, whom John d' Inbise chee^e Bourgue master of Gant had set for
of his private authority, (some would say that he would gladly have made him
Earl of Flanders, but being a doubtful Duke Casimire comes to Gant.
thing I leave it in suspense) whether he went with some Cornets of Reistres
unknown to the States. But he profited little for his own particular, and
did less

The first day of October, Don John of Austria, bastard brother to the King of
Spain, 1578
The death of Don John of Austria.
Netherlands more then ever. But others are of an opinion, that it was conceit
and grief, as it apeared by two of his letters, which were intercepted by
Monsieur de Saint Ledger, whereof the one was written unto John Andrea Doria
Prince of Melfi, and the other to Don Pedro de Mendoza, Ambassador of Spain,
lying in Geneua, both bearing date in the camp a mile from Namur, the
seventeenth of September, in the year of our Lord 1578. wherein he
complained of the long delays used in Spain, William Siluius in Antwerp, by
which letters, (written not long before he died) it appeeres, what a troubled
mind, and how much discontented he was, being young, high minded and
inconstant, yet wanting no judgment, he had great adversaries in the Court of
Spain, as the adherents of the duke of Alua, who sought by his policy and
great experience to draw Don John's proceedings into dislike.

From his youth upwards he always sought to aspire to a Kingly estate, and to
effect great matters, as it likewise apeereth by a Spanish book, made by
Anthonio Perez Secretary to the King of Spain touching the death of John
Escouedo, Secretary to the aforesaid Don John for the which the said Anthonio
Perez, (after long imprisonment and persecution, and great vprores touching the
same in Arragon, about the priueledges of the country, whereof the King took
great revenge) was forced to fly into France, and after that into England, and
there stayed. In the said book it is showed that Don John's mind was wholly
addicted to aspire to high matters, and that the King of Spain had appointed
him a trusty Secretary called John de Soto, who served him well in the wars
in Granado, and in his office of Admiral in the great victory against the Don
John was in Italy, the Pope was secretly dealt withal, to make him King of
Tunis, which the Kings secretary understanding, and the motion being
afterward made by the Pope unto him, the King thanked the Pope, for the great
care, he had of his brother, but he denied the request, as being much moved,
and very iealious thereof, for that he seemed to depend more upon the Pope,
then upon him, suspecting his Secretary John Soto to be the cause thereof, and
therefore took council and agreed with Anthonio Perez his Secretary, to
devise the means to place John Escouedo to be Don John's Secretary,
promooting Soto to a better place: and gave Escouedo diverse and particular
instructions, to pull down Don John's haughty and proud mind, and to bridle
the same, and so to amend that which Soto had neglected, Don John being sent
for to be governor in the low countries, pretended that as soon he should
have gotten the full charge and command over the souldiars in the said
countries, and settled the same in peace, that he would enterpize somewhat with
them against England, (as it has been partly showed) and there to put 1578.
John Vargas, Don John not once perceiving it, although he caused his
pretended enterprise against England to be certified to the King by the Popes
legate.

But that was broken off, for that the Estates in the Netherlands, being then
in treaty of peace with Don John, would by no means consent, that the
Spaniards Escouedo, and specially by one bearing date the tenth of February in
the year of our Lord 1577. Wherein he wrote that he was so much out of
conceit with himself that he had failed of his enterprise against England,

Remembering likewise some of the words he used before he went into the
Netherlands, saying, that whenever he was King of England, that then he
would be equal with Spain, especially if he once got the entry into Saint
Andrews, and the castle, which is the frontire of Biskaie, and a fort upon the
rode called Megro, from whence all Spain was to be ouerrunne and vanquished.
These and the like dealings with the Pope, and the Duke of Guise, being known
unto the King and some of his familiers, bred great suspicion in the Kings
mind the falt thereof being laid upon Escouedo Don John, the King gave
express commandment that he should be stayed there, and for that Don John
wrote so earnestly for money and for his secretary Escouedo, the aforesaid
Anthonio Perez the Kings Secretary, had commission, to find the means to kill
him, as secretly as he could, that Don John might have no suspicion thereof,
for that the said Anthonio Perez was the only man, that with the King, knew
all Don John's and Escouedoes proceedings, and two or three more, that were but
partly made acquainted therewith, which Perez by his aforesaid book
acknowledges to have done by the Kings commandment, vseing therein a certain
soldier called Gartia Darze, and five or six others,

The death of this Escouedo, brought many iealousies into Don John's head, who
finding himself to be charged with many limmited instructions, and
commandments 1578.


Don John being dead in the army, his body with great and stately pomp was
borne into the Church at Namur, and from thence carried into Spain, leaving
his Lieutenant, Alexander Farneze Prince of Parma, governor in his place, that
was afterward invested with the same by the King himself: this death of Don
John, fell out very well for the Netherlands, considering the state wherein
they as then were, as I have already showed.

ALEXANDER FARNESIVS PARMAE ET PLACEN: DVX GVBERN: ET CAP GENER: BELGICAE.
ALEXANDER FARNEZE DVKE OF 1578.
Parma and Placentia, Lieutenant and Captain General for the King of Spain.
Of all the Governor; that in the Netherland,
(Whereof most were unfit) did take their wars in hand,
I was the only man, that ruled them prudently:
And longer then the^ all maintaind the wars co^agiously.
Like valiant champion, and h^d a most great care
My promise to fulfill: for such a royal mind I bare,
That never in my life unto my enemy,
I falcified my word or faith, which was the cause that I
A good report obtained, which was my recompense,
Else gaind I naught, but for my pains was put to great exp^nce.

The Argument of the 1578
eleventh Book.
ALexander Farneze Prince of Parma Nephew by bastardise to the King of Spain,
Son to his bastard sister, succeeded Don John in the government of the
Netherlands: the Ganthois begin to mutine. The Prince of Orange is much
troubled to reconcil^ them: the Duke of Aniou retires into France. The building
of the disunion of Arthois and Henault the which is conc^uded in the Prince of
Parmas camp before Masstricht: Whereupon they make a more stricter union at Vt
echt, betwtxt the Provinces which continue in the generality. The King of
Spain hinders the Emperor and some Princes of Germany from treating of an
accord, and general reconciliation, whereupon an assembly is made at Collogne,
where they treat of it but in vain, those of Holland* Zeeland and their
Associats thinking it had been only to circumuent them. Gant falls again into
troubles by the practices of Imbise the Burguemaster, the which the Prince
going thither in person does pacefie by the absence of Imbise. The taking of
towns and overthrows at that time of either part: the speech and advice of
the Prince of Orange to the estates of the general union: the state of
Friseland and Groninghen. The Duke of Aniou brother to the French King called
for Protector, and partly Lord of the countries remaining in the union: the
Archduke Mathias after thanks given him, retiers by reason of his
insufficiency: the King of Spain proscribes the Prince of Orange, and sets his
life to sale: to every point of which proscription the Prince makes answer.
The unfortunate seege of the states of Flanders before Ingllemoustier,
defeated, and the signior of La Noue taken prisoner. Macklin and diverse other
towns surprised by the States: the Prince of Conde coming from England into
the Netherlands is at Gant: the Prince of Parma makes a vain enterprise upon
the said town, but not without great danger thereof: what past in Friseland at
that time: St^nwic beseeged by the Spaniard, victual^ed and succored by the
States. The death of the Earl of Reneberg and what he was: the taking and
retaking of towns of either part in Friseland, Flanders and else where: the
Prince of Parma having long beseeged and blockt up the Cittte of Cambray, the
Duke of Aniou comes in person to su^cor it, and victuells it, the Spaniard
refusing to fight, whereas he was received and acknowledged for Duke of
Cambray and Cambresis, the signior of Inchy remaining Governor of the town and
Cittadell in the said Dukes name.

ALEXANDER Farneze Prince of Parma, the son of Duke Octauio and the Lady
Marguerite bastard to the Emperor Charles the fifth being the year before come
into the Netherlands, succeeded after the death of Don John of Austria in the
government of the said countries, being before his Lieutenant: a Prince much
more mild and temperate then the other, to whom the whole army took their
oath, and acknowledged for Governor in the camp near unto Namur. Yet through
the death of Don John the Spaniards affairs were somewhat crossed and hindered,
Bins taken by the Duke of Anicu.
for the duke of Aniou embracing this occasion, went to beseege Bins in
Henault, the which he battred and gave an assault, and although he took it
not at the first, yet in the end he forced it, the Spaniards being to much
troubled in their camp for the death of Don John, so as they neither had
means nor leisure to succor it, and when they would gladly have done it, it
was too late, for it was forced and taken by assault, the French killing all
that they found armed, spoiling the town and Churches, the which happened the
seventh of October.

The same month the Ganthois meaning to build a fort in the Village of Lauwe a
league from Menin, they sent three hundred Prioners and Pesants, with some of
their The Ganthoi^ defeated.
companies, to labor there. The Malcontents hearing that this fort upon the
river of Lys should be a bridle unto them, went and fell upon these poor
laborers and soldiers of Gant, whom they defeated, and cut some of them in
pieces, and carried others prisoners to Menin: from thence they went to the
village of Warneton, where there is a castle belonging to the Prince of Orange,
betwixt Menin and Ypre, two leagues from the one and the other: a place very
famous for the good cloth is made there, in the which there were two companies
of the garrison of Ypre, whom they charged, and for a long time found good
resistance, but the Flemings not able any longer to endure their force fled
some 1578.


Some of the chief of the town of Gant, among others the Seignior of Rihouen
great Baylife, moved at all these acts of Hostility of the Malcontents, and to
be revenged of their enemies drew forth of the town the forth of October
Master James Hessel in former times councellor of the council of troubles in
the Duke of Aluas time, James Hassel and vis^h hanged at Ga^t.
and the baylife of Englemonere named Visch, whom they caused to be hanged on a
tree Hessel had a long gray beard, the which was cut of, and the said Bay life
ware it in his hat for a triumph, entering in this manner into the town: the
which afterward: (thinking he had done a great piece of service, and that it
would be an acceptable present) he sent unto the Prince of Orange, who would
have been gladder such an insolency had not been committed, although that
Hessel was a great enemy unto him, having assisted the Attorney general to make
the Princes process. This act was much displeasing to many good men, by reason
of their manner of proceeding, although that these two men were wicked,
perverse, cruel and odious to all the world: some judging that these
executions were done upon spleen, others to be revenged of the extraordinary
executions Gosson, Bertoul, Crugiot, and others.

The Prince of Parma having taken upon him the Government of the country and of
the King of Spaines army, past the river of Meuse near unto Ruremonde withal
The Duke of Parm^ p^eth the Meuse.
his troops in the beginning of November, attending the return of Duke
Casimiers Army. In passing, Collonell Mondragon with his Regiment of Wallons
and Spaniards seized upon the strong Castle of Carpen in the terrytory of
Cologne, after that he had battered it a whole day, he caused Captain Byel to
be hanged at the port, and six and thirty soldiers upon trees, for that they
would not yield when they were somoned, The taking of Carpen.
but would attend the fury of the canon. Then having taken Weert, Helmont, and
Faulquemont Casimirs going to Gant had caused these bad impressions in the
Wallon Provinces of Arthois Henaut, Lille, etc. as if by the alliances made
with the Queen of England, the Duke of Aniou and Duke Casimire (whom it
seemed the Flemings had sent for) they would have dismembered all the
Netherlands, and all under pretext of religion: they sought all good means to
purge them that we^e The States acti^s (...).
Valentine de Pardieu Seignior of la Motte Governor of Grauelinges reconciled
to Don John before his death, the Seignior of Capres, some prelates and others)
interpreted sinisterly as tending to a dismembring, and so they persuaded
others that were not yet moved, whereupon the Arch duke and the States
appointed the Prince to go into Flanders, who arrived at Deudermond the twenty
of November, where he entered to that end in conference with the
Bourgue-maister Imbise, Borlut and others, as well Masters of the companies,
as chief of the Bourguers, to whom the States had the fourth of November
according unto their without attempting any thing against the State, upon pain
of exemplary and rigorous 1579.
Articles propounded to the Ganthois.
labor to draw the other Provinces to consent and to accept of like liberty of
religion: and that they should have a care that the Nobility were not
contemned, nor held in any other esteem or rank then was fitting for
gentlemen. That no Provinces were oppressed nor their jurisdictions broken:
that good justice should be administered to the gentlemen that were prisoners
at Gant, as soon as the strangers were retired out of the country: And in the
mean time they should send the said prisoners with a good guard into a neuter
place, to whom there should be no violence nor outrage offered. Which
Articles if the said Ganthois would accept and entertain, they should be
received under the protection and common defense of the Archduke, the Prince
and generals estates against any force that should

For the better persuading of them of Gant there came unto them certain
deputies from the magistrates and Colonels of the town of Antwerp; who laid
open before Deputies sent to the Ganthois.
them, the oath sworn by them and the fruits thereof, how requisite and
necessary it was to have it observed in all points, to chase the enemy out of
the country, or at the least to make him retire beeyond the river of Meuse.
That without the contrybution Offers made by the duke of Aniou to the Ganthois.


The next day the comissioners of the Archduke, Prince and States, did exhibit
their commission to them of Gant, and propounded that which they had to say
unto them, with a deduction of many pregnant reasons, and inconveniences that
might The Queen of Englands declaration to the Ganthois.
grow, if they did not yield unto the Articles which had been offered unto
them. The that they sought nothing more then to entertain a mortal war,
whereof all their 1578.
themselves to any superiority or higher power, but would make a world by
themselves, whereby some might be easily moved to assist the States to force
them to obedience. That they should be careful that for the appetit of some
quarrels and private intrerests, the good and welfaire of the generality were
not endangered, to fortefie the enemy, and to weaken their brethren and
countrymen, and of friends that were strangers to make them enemies. And
although it was to be presumed that Duke Casimir being come to succor the
States by the means of the Queen of England, had been secretly called by
them to aid them, yet (said the Ambassador (her Majesty found it very strange.
The which made her think, that all this trouble might be easily pacefied, if
the Ganthois would conform themselves to the council of the in esse; in the
suffering of liberty of religion, and to deliver into her majesty's hands (or of
some other neuter Prince) the prisoners where they should be kept with as good
guard as the Ganthois could desire: wherefore her Majesty sent them word that
if therein they would not be persuaded and yield, they should give her great
cause not only to be a stranger unto them, but also to abandon them quite;
wherefore they said Ambassador entreated them, that they would duly consider
and resolve thereon: Finally he required at their hands (in the Queens name) a
bond for forty five thousand pounds sterling, conformable to them of
Brusselles, Antwerp, Bruges, Middelbourg, Dordrect, Amsterdam, Dunkerke and
Nieuport. The thirteen Deputies from Brusselles to Gant.
complaints and propositions which they of Antwerp had formerly done, with some
other reasons tending to make them leave of their partialities and factions,
producing many goodly examples at home of former times happened in the like
occurrents.

Unto all these propositions and aduises, of the Ambassador of England and the
Deputies of Antwerp and Brusselles, the Ganthois answered the eighteen of the
month. That they found not themselves in any sort bound unto the Articles and
conditions that were propounded unto them, until that their stipulations and
promises had been first propounded unto the Archduke, Prince, and General
estates, and The Ganthois answer to the articles propounder unto them.
by them accepted: That is, that the Ganthois should not be bound to receive
the

This answer of the Ganthois being seen by the States did not greatly please
them, which was the cause of the Princes going (as we have said) to Denremond,
and from thence (after many conferences and contradictions) he came the 4. of
december to Gant where being arrived he sent for the deputies of the
Magistrates of the town to hear his propositions and demands, contained in
six Articles. First that they should Articles propounded to the Ganthois by
the general est^ts.
accept the articles of the act, which they had formerly sent unto them
touching no order set for the time togather in the common money, nor for the
providing thereof; 1578


These articles were approved by most of the Bourguers and Magistrates, who
entreated the Prince that he would persuade the companies of trades, and the
members of the town thereunto, that no man might make any difficulty; for as
for that which The Princes reasons to persuade the Ganthois to Concord.
that were like to grow if they were not united, the neighborhood of the
Wallons Malcontents, who practiced a private reconciliation with the Spaniards;
the oppressions which the lesser towns of Flanders were forced to suffer to
contribute besides their ordinary taxes, to these wallons, so as they of
Oudembourg had for a long time paid eighteen hundred florins a day. That the
other members of Flanders would not depart from the obedience of the Archduke,
the Prince and States: The Romish Religion established in Gant upon certain
conditions.
service, and liberty to go in procession within the Churches only, and to
carry the Sacrament in the streets without bells or other ceremonies. The
religious men were restored to their Cloisters and couents, but if any would
not return by reason of their consciences, then the Magistrates should appoint
them reasonable maintenance. And All things reconcil^d in Gant.
al these points and articles, as also the chief of trades and companies with
the ministers, those of consistories, clergimen, chapters, colleges and
couents, shall also swear the same. As for the prisoners, not any thing was
determined, but that nothing should be attempted against them without good
knowledge of the cause. After this accord, 1578
Monasteries and Churches, but this good union continued not long, as we will
show.

All things being thus reformed in the town of Gant, the Archduke, Prince and
States thought it good to treat and make an agreement with the Malcontents and
The Malcontents treated wit^ but in v^e.
Wallons that were at Menin, wherein they employed some noblemen and gentlemen,
whom they knew to have some credit and authority among them, with the best
perswations they could devise to pacify them, and to draw them to some good
accord. But nothing was effected, for those that were the chief motives of
their alterasions for the kings service (as they said) that is Damp John
Sarasin Abbot of Saint Vaast of Arras, the Seignior of Capres, William of
Vasseur Seignor of Valhuon la Motte woone sometimes one and sometimes an other.
And in the end the Vicont of Gant fearing to loose his government of Arthois,
The vicont of Gant and the (...) in ^ue the States.


The Ganthois on the other side imputing all these actions of the Malcontents
(where of the Seignior of Montigni Heze, Capres, la Motte and Alennes were the
chief) to mere ambition, private profit, desire of rule, and hatred to the
Protestants religion, and for their parts having tasted the sweetness of
ecclesiastical goods which they had formerly seized on, the which to fall to
some agreement with the Malcontents, they had left, seeing the practices of
these gettlemen to continue that moved Charles the fifth to have the lead she
was wrapped in, troubling the rest of the dead, who lay for a time upon the
pauement without sepulkers. Then they began to chase away all Preests, Monks
and other Churchmen, pretending that they had broken the last accord, in
suffering Monks to preach in their Churchs, whereas none but their Curats and
Viccars should have been admitted. And in truth a Monk preaching sediciously
in Saint Michaels Church was the cause of the first muti^e. The like happened
in march at Denremond and Oudenard, so as those Casimiers troops feeding upon
the poor countrymen all the winter about Tillemont, and Arschot, attending
their pay. The Prince of Parma marched into that quarter with his army, and
began to treat with them to make them retire, so as in the end they had a
pasport to depart out of the Netherlands within fifteen days; robbing,
spoiling and carrying away all they could lay hand on in the villages where
they past, having no entry given them into any town. Duke Casimire being at
Flessinghes at his return from England, hearing of the retreat of his troops,
followed them with all The retre^t of Duke Casi^ (...) of (...) army.
speed, taking no leave of the Archduke nor of the States, being then assembled
at Antwerp: who hearing of the departure of his army, they sent after them
entreating Lazarus Muller did also retire.

The Germains that were in Deuenter after that they had made as great
resistance as 1578.
Deuenter yielded to the States.
Freezland, seeing the assault ready to be given, they yielded upon
composition to have their lives and goods saved. The first of December the
Earl of Swaertzenbourgh (of whom we have made mention before) being
Ambassador from the Emperor, presented himself again unto the States, by
advise of the Emperor, and of some Princes Electors, upon the last
propositions and treaty of Peace, demanding an answer Cont Swartzenbergh
pur^ues his legation.
thereof, with the which, for the desire he had to pacify the wars, and to
settle the Netherlands in peace, he transported himself to the Prince of
Parma, but they could

The one and twentieth of the Month Maximillian of Henin, Earl of Bossu,
general of the Sates Army, Lord Steward to the Archduke Mathias, Councellor
of State, being taken with a burning fever, died in Antwerp, who was much
lamented both of the The death of Cont Bossu.
Nobility, soldiers, and common people. The five and twentieth day the Duke of
Aniou, defender of the liberty of the Netherlands (as he termed himself)
gave the States to understand by Monsieur Domartin, the causes which moved him
to return into France, and to leave those countries. Among other points he
alleged the insta^ce, which the king his brother made, by reason of some
tumults which had happened in France: and that in The Duke of Anious retreat into
France.
country, wherein he would disprove them, in delivering up all things after
his departure into the States hands. He also made an offer, that where-soeuer
he were, he would remain always well affected unto them: In the end taking
his leave of them, he wished them to remember the great charges he had been at
to succor the^: leaving Monsieur D'Espruneaux for his Ambassador Leeger with
the States. The States being amazed at this sudden and unexpected departure,
they sent the Seignior of Fromont, and Doctor Gilles Martini, Secretary of the
town of Antwerp, to let him understand how much they were grieved: beseeching
him so to accomodate his affairs, as he might remain

In January 1579. Salentin Earl of Isenbrug Archbishop and Prince Elector of
Cologne, leaving his ecclesiastical dignity, married with the daughter of the
1579.
Earl of Arembergh. The Chapter and the Diocese could not at the first agree
upon the election of a new Prince, yet in the end Trucses was chosen, but
being also married, and seeking to reform his Diocese and to retain the
dignity with his wife, there followed great wars, the Chapter having
dispossessed him: At the last Ernest the Trucses, and dispersed his troops, was
acckowledged Arch-bishoppe of Cologne, Bishop of Liege, of Frissinghe,
Hilessem and other Bishopprickes and great Benifices, and the Popes Legate in
the lower Germany. The first of March the Prince of Parma caused his army to
advance before Antwerp, trusting it may be upon some intelligences, which he
presumed to have; presenting himself in the quarter of Deurne and Burgerhout,
suburbs of the town. The Burgers having drawn the chains of their streets,
set their rounds of every side, appointed every man his quarter, and showed
themselves very resolute and united to defend the town; saluting the Spaniards
with their great ordinance, who were in skirmish with certain companies of
English and Scottish, in the trenches of those suburbs and of Berchem, whom
they charged until night; but in the end they were forced officers of the
States side, that were either flaine or hurt, were brought into the town: 1579.
good service: those of Antwerp complaining of the bad payment the States made
unto the soldiers, considering the great sums of money which they had
furnished to that end for their parts. Whereupon not long after the English
companies, suing for their pay from the general Estates being assembled at
Antwerp, seeing they delaid them too much, some forty of them attending the
coming forth of the States from the Council, about noone day, seized upon the
Abbot of S. Michael, (a rich Abbay in the said town) carrying him in the midst
of them through the town, unto the haven, where they imbarkt him in a ship
among their men, threatening him, that if they were The English men take the
Abbot of S. Michaell.
not paid by his means, to cast him into the water. But the Prince of Orange
and the Colonels of Antwerp, did pacify them, and upon promise that they
should be speeddily Montigni himself, The coullord reasons of the
Malcontents.
but by a long pretended practice) was at the first colloured for their pay,
and not (as they said) to alter any thing in the general Union of the States:
The which Montigni himself showed his letters written unto the Archduke, and
to the Prince of Orange. Whereupon the said Noblemen were persuaded to send
the Seignior of Bours, Governor of Macklin to treat with them, and to reclaim
them: He went and propounded certain articles unto them, yielding unto all they
could demand. The Malcontents according unto the articles which were granted
unto them upon their demands, took La Motte-Pardieu was the broker) for the
which he received a hundred and fifty thousand florins: and as they of Arthois,
thrust on by the Seignior of Capres, and the Abbot of Saint Vaast, and also by
them of Douay Charles of Calonne an advocate of Lille, unto the Prince of
Orange, with letters of the seventh of August 1578. and goodly protestations
that he would continue in the general Union. The Seignior of Bours who had
been (as we have said) sent to treat with the Malcontents of Menin, Diverse
Knights and Gentlemen c^upted with money by the Spania^ds.
Alonso of Curiell a Spanish pay-maister, as it appeared by their letters which
we have seen: Finally the capitulation being made in Grauelingh by the King
of Spaines Commissaries, made mention of seven hundred thousand Florins (that
is to say to 1579.
Montigni, according to the agreement made by La Motte at Mont Saint Eloy.
Which accord was set forth by them, and printed at Douay by John Bogard a
sworn printer, the same year as follows. We Emanuell of Lalain Baron of
Montigni, etc. Do acknowledge and declare, that we have this day the sixth of
April 1579. concluded and agreed with An accord made by the Baron of Montigni.
Mounsier De la Motte Governor of Grauelingh in his Majesty's name, in the
presence and with the reverent consent of the Bishop of Arras, the Baron of
Selles, and Mounsier de Valliuon, as well for our own person as for that of
the Lord of Heze, by virtue of the authority which he has given us, and also
for all other Colonels, Captain^s, Officers, and Soldiers, as well of foot as
horse, which have obeyed us in Flanders and other places, for these seven or
eight months, being at this present about seven or eight Valentine de
Pardieu, Seignior of La Motte, Governor of Grauelingh, promise in his Majesty's
name, to pay and deliver

In witness whereof we have signed these presents, and set to our seals of
arms in the presence of the Vicont of Gant, Monsier de Capres, and of Monsier
D'Allennes, the day A confirmation of the Baron of Montignie^ accord.
an assembly of the States of Arthois held at Arras, as follows.

My Lord the Baron of Montigni, in an open assembly of the States of Arthois,
and deputies of the States of Henault, Lille, Douay, Orchies, held in the
Abbaie of Saint Vaast in Arras the 7. of April. 1579. has showed the contract
and accord made by him with the Seignior of La Motte, the which declared that
the oath mentioned therein, tended to no other end but to serve his Majesty for
the maintenance of the pacification of Gant, the Union which followed, and the
perpetual Edict, especially for the real retreat of the Spaniards out of al
these countries, with sufficient cautions of a durable peace.

Behold upon what coullor the disunion was grounded, and the private
reconciliation of them of Arthois, Henault, Lille, Douay and Orchies conceived,
the which burst forth of Espinon their governor, and to them of Tournay and
Tournesis, of the which we will 1579.
unto the height of this division, whereof those of Lille made the first open
demonstration by their resolution which they sent to the general Estates
assembled at Antwerp, the which we have thought good to insert, with the
States answer to their letters, the tenor whereof was.

My Lords, we would not fail to advertise you of that which by a general and
joint Letters from them of Lille, Douay and Orchies to the general Estates.
consent of the members of state of this Province has been resolved and
decreed in an Assembly held this day, as well for the universal good and
general assurance of all these countries, as for the quiet and maintenance of
this Province in particular, which is to seek and embrace the means to put
the Spanish souldiars and other strangers out of the country, being the spring
and original of al our miseries. Or at the least once Fontaine.

Such was their resolution. The 30. day of March. 1579. in the assembly of the
four chief Justices of the Chasteleny of Lille, the Aldermen and Council of
the said town of Lille, representing the states of the said towns and
Casteleines of Lille, Douay and Orchies, with the Prelates, Clergy and Nobility
thereof: Deputies of the accounts, Officers of the government of Lille and
other preuileged persons: resolve touching the reconciliation with his Majesty,
and the maintenance of the Provinces strictly united, during the treaty and
real effecting thereof. The said States, Prelates, Clergy, Noblemen and
preuileged persons, in the presence and with the advice of Mounsier de
Villerual Governor of the said town and Chastelenies, and of the Baron of
Montigni, considering month, to entertain and keep in every point the
pacification of Gant, the union, and 1579.
Fountains. Whereupon the general Estates answered, as follows.

My masters we have received your letters dated the last of March, with an
act of the resolution taken by you the day before, touching the reconciliation
with his The States answer to them of Lille.
Majesty. And although we find your desire and intention to be commendable,
to seek and imbrase the means to free the country of Spaniards and other
souldiars strangers, the spring and beginning of all our miseries. Yet we
think the haste you make to treat in particular, very dangerous; seeing that
by this means the progress of the treaty of a general peace is stayed and
hindered, being already begun at our instance and request by his Imperial
Majesty, and his Ambassador the Earl of Swartzenbourg, being greatly to be
feared that if you proceed in this private treaty with the enemy, in steed
of procuring a good peace, you will Rhoda: where he was commanded to
entertain them, and to show them a good countenance, until that he were come
to the end of his affairs: and in like sort commandment was given unto Don
John of Austria to do the like. And it is apparent that he sent not the
Spaniards out of these 1579.
Escouedo, which seek to divide us, and to stir up a war for Religion, and
to chase away and massaker one by an other; as hereto fore has happened in
Germany, England, France and elsewhere. Entreating you a^aine ^o weigh and
consider all things well, and to continue united with us, to repulse the common
enemy, and presently to send your deputies hither, to determine and resolve the
Prince of Parma, as you may see more at large by the coppie of our answer.
Whereupon 1579.
A. Blyleuen. The superscription was. To the states of Lille, Douay and
Orchies. During all these practices of private reconciliation of the of
Arthois, Henault, Lille etc. The Prince of Parma holding Mastricht beseeged
with a mighty army, where as the Mastricht beseeged by the Prince of Parma.
said Provinces had their deputies, who solicited all they could, Peter of
Melun, Prince of Espinoy, Seneshall of Henault (newly succeeded to the said
Principality by the death of Charles of Melun his elder brother) governor; and
the States of Tournay and Tournesis, according to the first practices, which
were made in October 1578. and The Prince of Espinoy tempted.
the instruction given unto the signior of Charpesteau by the states of
Henault, at the same time when as the states of Arthois and they of Arras began
their broiles: which Iosse of Ca^pen squier, signior of Charpesteau, Ostregnis
etc. at the^e quest and deputation of the states of the country and county of
Henault, shall transport Instructions given to the signior of Charpesteau.
himself with all speed unto the states of the country, town and City of
Tournay and Tournesis, and shall present unto them the humble commendations of
the said states of Henault and their letters of credit. According unto the
which he shall give them to understand, that we ought always to stand upon our
guard, and to foresee al inconveniences that may happen; much more when we see
the fire kindled, we must fly to the remedy, to hinder and prevent a greater
ruin and combustion. It is most notorious, that although the He me^nes the
Duke of Aniou whom the Earl of Lalain had called, or the Prince of Orange, or
Duke Casimire judge ^ich.
seem to be displeased therewith, and help to suppress and punish such
outrages. Whereas contrariwise we see that he which is come mercinarily, and to
the great charge of the country, to serve and succor it against the common
enemies thereof, is gone with his forces to succor them, being called (as the
brute goes) to be not only their Protector and Defender, but also governor or
Lord of the country: leaving and abandoning both the camp and the country, in
prey to the common enemy, if they had power to do it. The which we ought to
prevent in time, and to seek all means (which is the Office of Christians) by
a common course, and in discharge of the union so sollemnly sworn augment
daily and to continue, to the ruin and rooting out of all Piety, Nobility
1579.
Defender of the Belgike L^ertie, as every one knows. Wherefore for that we
understand that the Provinces of Holland Zeeland, Flanders, Geldres and others,
are entered into league: it is fit after the example of those Heretics, which
thus join together to do evil; that in like manner the Catholic Provinces
of Arthois, Lille, Douay, Orchies, Tournay, Tournesis, Valenciennes and Henault
should join and unite themselves of the States, the 13. 14. and 15. of
October, and signed underneath Carlier. 1579.


Upon these points contained in this instruction, being so inuectiue, and
injurious, they of Henault, Arthois, Valenciennes, Lille, Douay and Orchies,
grounded their disjunction from the other Provinces comprehended in the
Pacification of Gant, and wrought their reconciliation with the king, laboring
to draw the town of Tournay, and Tournesis into it: but they did not consider
that by this instruction they did secreatly pourchase the kings indignation, in
that they did so much protest against the retreat of the Spaniards and other
Srangers his servants in whom he most relied for the preservation of these
countries, the which being retired they spoiled the King of his forces and
authority, as if under collor of a reconciliation, they would prescribe him a
law. And also in that they speak so heighly of the Duke of Aniou, giving him
They of Tournay and Tournesis refuse to Enter the reconciliauon.
Pentaflour, made great instance, and was very importunate with the States and
Prince, who being always unwilling to give ear to private reconciliation,
answered that to attain unto a general one, he would employ both body and
goods, but he would never disioyne himself. That he had taken an oath unto the
Generality, against Don John and his adherents, the which he would maintain
unto the death until he, were absolved and despensed thereof of by the said
generality: that they knew well the condition of Kings that hold themselves
wronged by their subjects: that if he had two heads he would hazard one of
them for the Kings service, but he had but one, no more then the Earl of
Egmont: Whereupon the Bishop replied they would seek to obtain a general
peace: the Prince asked him how they would think of the question of relligion
to attain unto the said peace: the Bishop then answered, alleging the parable
of the husbandman, who suffered the darnell to grow among the good corn until
the day of harvest: whereupon the Prince asked him again when that harvest
should be, when as the King had subjected all the country unto his will? noe
said the Bishop, but at Deputies sent from Brussel^s to the States of Arthois.
Willian van Hecke tresorer, and Cornellis Artsens secretary of the said town
who were neither welcome nor well entertained by the Seignior of Capres,
Governor of the said town, one of the chief Authors of the disunion.

The States knowing well that all these practices of disjunction were managed
by the Seignior of La Motte Governor of Graueling, they sent the Seignior of La
Noue La Noue makes war in Flanders.
their Marshall of the camp with six hundred horse and two thousand foot
into La Mottes Government about Graueling, in the quarter of west Flandes, the
which he wasted, and having taken the forts of Lincken and Watenen, which are
upon the river going from Saint Omer to Graueling, he entered into the Valle
and jurisdiction of Cassell, took the town and castle, and then reduced all
that quarter under the States obedience, having fortified Cassel, Where he left
the Seignior of Waroux 1579
Zutphen, Vtrecht, Freeseland, Ouerissel, and other their associats, finding in
the end of the year 1578. by all the former treaties, that the duke of Parma
sought only to divide the united Provinces, and that the mutine of the
Malcontents tended to no other end but to root out the reformed religion, they
resolved to make among themselves, and with such as would join with them, a
stricter union and alliance, assembling to that end at Vtrecht, where it was
concluded in the beginning of this year 1579. The tenor whereof follows.

As it it notorious since the pacification made at Gant, by the which the
Provinces of the Netherlands were bound to succor one an other with body and
goods, to expel Don John and other their Commanders and Captains having
sought by all means (as they do at this day) to reduce the said Provinces as
well in general as in particular under their slavery, and as well by arms as
by there practices to divide and dismember them breaking their Union made by
the said Pacification, to the total ruin of the said countries, and
continuing in their said desseigne, they have of late by their letters
solicited some towns and quarters of the said Provinces, having sought to
make an irruption into the country of Gueldres; wherefore the Inhabitants of
the Duchy of Geldres and conty of Zutphen, with them of the conties of Holland
Zeland, Vtrecht, Freeseland and the Ommelands, bewixt the rivers of Ems and
Lauwers, have thought it expedient

First that the said Provinces make an alliance, Union, confederation together:
as by these presents they are allied, united and confederated together for
ever, to continue and remain so in all sorts and manners, as if all were but
one only Province, and that they may never hereafter disioyne nor separate
themselves, neither by testament codicill, donation, cession, exchange, sale,
treaties of peace, or marriage, nor by any other occasion whatsoever; remaining
not-with-standing whole and absolute, without any diminution or alteration of
the particular preuiledges, rights, freedoms, exemptions, statutes, customs,
uses, and all other preheminences, which any of the said Provinces, towns,
members and Inhabitants thereof may have, wherein they will not only forbear
to prejudice or give any hindrance: but will assist the one and the other by
all

That the said Provinces in confirmation of the said alliances and union, shall
be taken arms against Don John, for for that they had received the Archduke
Mathias for 1579.


That the said Provinces should be in like manner bound to aid, succor and
defend one another against all Princes and Potestats, countries, towns, and
fo^raine commonweals, be it in general or in particular, that would molest,
hurt or make war against them. Always provided that the assistance which
shall be appointed by the generality of this union, shall be done after
knowledge of the cause. And the better

And to supply the expenses they must be at in this case, for the defense of
the said Provinces, it has been agreed that through-out all the Provinces
there shall be imposed

That the frontier Towns, and all others where need shall require, shall be
at all times bound to receive such garrisons as the said united Provinces shall
think fit and convenient, and that by the advice of the governor of the
Province, where those towns are, that require garrison, the which they may not
refuse. And the said garrisons shall be paid by the united Provinces, and the
Captains and Soldiers, besides the general oath, shall take a particular oath
to the Town or Province where they shall be placed, the which shall be set
down in the Articles of their entertainment. entertainment of this
confederation, and that which depends thereon, they shall 1579.


That none of the said Provinces, Towns or Members, may make any cofederation
or alliance, with any Noblemen or neighbor countries without the consent of
these united Provinces, and of their confederates. It is notwithstanding agreed
that if any Princes or neighbor countries, shall desire to join in League and
confederation with these united Provinces, that they shall be admitted and
received by the advice and consent of them all. That touching coins, in the
course and valuation of gold and silver, all the said Provinces should conform
and govern themselves according unto the Orders which should be set down at
the first opportunity, the which the one cannot alter nor change without the
other.

As for the point of Religion, they of Holland and Zeelande may carry
themselves as they please; and in regard of the other Provinces of this union,
they may govern themselves therein according unto the Proclamation of the
Archduke Mathias Governor General of the Netherlands, set forth by the advice
of the Council of State, and the general Estates touching the liberty of
Religion. Or else they may either in general or in particular, set such order
as they should think most fit and convenient, for the peace and quiet of their
Provinces, Towns and particular members, both Ecclesiastical and Civil,
every one in the preservation of his goods, rights, and prerogatives: so as no
other Province may give them therein any hindrance or let, every one
remaining free in his Religion, and not any way

That in like sort, entertainment shall be given during life, according to the
commodities and revenues of their Cloisters or Conuents, to all persons of
these united countries, that would depart, or are already departed, be it for
Religion or for any other reasonable cause. Always provided that such as after
the date of these presents, shall go to live in these Cloisters and Conuents,
and afterward would depart again, the shall have no entertainment given
them, but they may retire if they please, and retain that which they brought
with them. And that all they that are at this present in the said Conuents, or
that hereafter would enter, shall remain free in their Religion, profession
and habits, upon condition that in all other things

And if it should happen (which Almighty GOD forbid) that there should be
any question or division made betwixt the said Provinces, wherein they could
not agree, that the same, so far as it concerns one Province in particular
shall be ended and determined by the other provinces, or by those among them
which 1579.


That the said Provinces, towns and members thereof shall be careful not to
offer any occasion of war or quarrel to any of their neighbors, Princes,
noblemen,

As also if it should be thought necessary to augment or diminish any thing in
the articles of this union, confederation and alliance in any of their points,
it shall be done by the common consent of all the confederats, and not
otherwise. All which points and articles and every one of them in particular,
the said united Provinces have promised and do promise by these presents, to
accomplish and entertain, and to cause to be accomplished and entertained,
without any opposition or contradiction directly and before all Judges and
jurisdictions, where they shall be found) seized on and arrested 1579


And for the greater corroboration, all governors and Lieutenants of the said
Provinces, which are there at this present, or that may be hereafter, together
with all Magistrates and chief Officers of these Provinces, towns or members,
shall be bound to swear and take an oath, to keep and cause to be kept, all the
points and articles, and every one of them in particular, of this union and
confederation. As also all bodies

The fourth of February following this union was signed by them of Gant: the
third Many enter into the union of V^echt.
day of May by the Prince of Orange in Antwerp; the eleauenth of June by George
of Lalain Earl of Rhenebergh Governor of Friseland, Oueryssel, Groninghen and
the Ommelands. After followed they of Antwerp, Bruges, Breda, and many others.
All this was done whilst that they of Arthois, Henault, Lille, Douay and
Orchies labored The signior of Boxtel governor of Boisleduc.
did also pretend, sending some troops of their Burgeses to assure themselves
thereof. Afterward John of Horn, Barron of Boxtell was sent thither with
commission to govern and to assure the town for the states. But as by the
changing of captains he sought to bring in a new order and government, he
found great oppositions and many crosses by them of the adverse party,
especially by one Henry Bloyman Baylife and by others of the old council of
the town, tending to their private proffit, and adhering to the Abbot of Saint
Gheertrude, who was gone in the states behalf, to the assembly of the treaty
of Cologne, and who passing that way had so persuaded them, as they desired
nothing more then the issue of the said treaty. The signior Maximilian of
Horn signior of Locren there. True it is, that before that time the liberty
of Religion had been brought in; and a sworn companic of Harguebuziers
erected, most of all the which were young men, who during the Spaniards
government were retired out of the town and had served the Prince of Orange:
these men maintained the liberitie of Religion all they could and sought to
reduce the town under the union of Vtrecht, but therd grew such a jealousy
and hatred betwixt the Protestants and the Harguebuziers of the one part, and
the old Magistrates with the Catholic Romans on the other: as when the said
company of Fencers had the guard of the port, the others placed an the town
for the King of Spain. Then did the Protestants insist more to receive 1579.
Fears seizes upon the Protestants of Boisledue.


The next day after, as their distrust increased, and the fear of the enemy
increased more and more, the Protestants were advised and did resolve to
receive a garrison, so as they would leave the ports open to suffer them that
would depart; as if their chief and greatest fear had been that they would
retain them. Whereunto this answer was made. That if any one did fear he
might depart, and go where he pleased. Whereupon a great multitude went
suddenly away out of the town, one

Those of the towns of Amersfort and Montfort, under the jurisdiction of
Vtrecht, as they also of Zutphen, refused also to submit themselves to the
union of Vtrecht, wherefore meaning to force them, they began first with them
of Amersfort, as nearest unto Vtrecht, being accused to be of a party
contrary to the states, to have refused to pay their parts of the
contribution; to have chased away the States garrison and the Protestants
ministers, and to have had secret intelligence with the enemy. Wherefore the
town was beseeged the seventh day of March in the year of our Lord 1579. and
the tenth day following reduced unto reason, manned with a garrison,

The union, and contract made in Vrecht, was signed by the governors of the
said Provinces, as first by John Earl of Nassaue, governor of Gelderland and
Sutphen, and then by the commities of the other towns and Provinces, which was
done in Vtrecht upon the 23. of January, and upon the fourth of February the
deputies of Gant signed to the same. The third of May it was ratefied in
Antwerp by the Prince of Orange, and the leauenth of June by George de Lalain
Earl of Renebregh, governor of Freeseland, Ouerissel, Groaning, and the
terretories thereof, and also by the towns of Bruges, Ipre, Breda, and others,
and by that means those countries were called the united Provinces. This union
made in Vtrecht, produced good fruits amongst the Provinces and pacification
of Gant, the union, and 38. articles more, whereby they of the reformed 1579


In like manner those of Groningen refused. Whereupon the Earl of Rheneberg
Groningen refusing the union is forced.
Governor of Friseland and of the said town, received commandment from the
states to force them unto it: for which effect he caused Delfs I Will, Winsum and
other places there abouts to be fortefied. The Groningeois seeing themselves
beseeged a far off, would prepare to war, but finding themselves most
commonly beaten, and that the chief towns in Friseland were entered into the
said union, they sent their deputies to treat an accord, giving hostages, the
which were led to Campen: and the 18. of June A tumult at Bruges for the union.
the union, the Clergy first oposed themselves, fearing to be chased away (as
they said had been lately done at Vtrecht) to whom there joined some chief
men, and some of trade being stirred up by the seditious preaching of that
reverent Friar Cornellis (of who^ we have formerly made mention)
notwithstanding that the Deanes had consented to the said union. The
Magistrates of Franc whose jurisdiction extends into the country, banded
themselves against the Magistrates of the town, provoking the Burgers to
demand a Colonel of the company of Burgers, that were at their devotion.
Whereupon George Verbrakelen signior of Hauteruie Bourguemaster, they required
to have Ierosme of Mol signior of Watermael to be given them for Colonel, a
supporter of Friar Cornellis.

The Burguemaster was amazed at this demand, and would willingly have delaied
it until the afternoon, or till the next day, that he had assembled the
council. But they understanding that the Protestants were at their sermon,
they would have him to name the said Colonel presently. The Bourguemaster
seeing all the guard that was there assembled in arms to be Catholics, who
would not depart, was forced to yield unto them. This Colonel thus made in
have accepted the charge, and presently cassired the A Colonel made in have
and by force.
deputies, which were men of good account, and put others in their places that
were Catholics; he would reform all, and make them take a new oath, and
committing many insolences, he sought for the Minister, who was a Wallon, to
kill him, and not finding him, he beat his wife and troad her under his feet.
The Magistrates and Burguemasters seeing this disorder and outrages, and
fearing some greater inconvenience would follow, caused their four companies
of souldiars to come, commanding captain Hans Flyesch to ceaze upon the
Eastgate, and captain Reinen Winckelman of the Bridge which goes to the same
Port. Captain Remy Artrik had charge to seize upon the East-shambles, and
Anthony Outreman of the bridge of Oak in the fullers street, Hans Fleysch had
turned the Cannon toward the town, keeping the port open to receive in
succors: they went with the aid of them of Franckford to beseege the Burcht,
they took the Magistrate prisoner in their towne-house, and kept the
Protestant Burgers from joining with the soldiars.

Both parties being thus in arms one against an other, in danger of great
effusion of blood, by the means of some that were more temperate, they fell to
parle, so as by Winckelman: and then the accustomed guard entered the
marketplace and the Burcht which the Catholics would keep. But they could not
send any guard to the Eastgate, whether Winckelman was Collonell knowing how
the Protestants had fortified themselves, did also seize upon 1579.
two bridges, with whom many of Franck and of the Nobility did join. In the
mean The States more quick to succor Bruges.
la Motte, and the malcontents, who approached as nere as Roullez, and the
Protestants sent to the States, who were in camp at Tournhout, and used more
expedition, so as the next day morning eight companies of Scotishmen of Balfors
regiment with an 150. horse were at the East-port and entered the town,
marching directly to the market place and the Burcht, from whence the
Catholics fled. Collonell Nol abandoned also his Barricadoe, and thinking to
save himself by a hole through the town ditch, was taken being in the water
up to the chinne. All they of Franck were taken prisoners except the Siegnior
of Breda and Nantius. There were also some of the chief mutines prisoners, the
which after that the tumult was pacified, and the town well as Menin, burning
that goodly Borrugh of Roullez for despite: the which was much to be pitied,
being one of the most famous places of Flanders, for the infinite store of fine
linen cloth, that was usually made there.

They of Brugges, having found them of Franck faulty in this and other things,
determined Noel Carron Seignior of Schoonewall (who that day had been
imprisoned by the mutines in the town house, and in danger of his life, by
reason of certain letters of credit, sent unto him by the Prince of Orange,
which the mutinous companies, would conster as pleased them) resolved together
with D. Nansius, and Mounsier Withs, Schoti, and Capelle (that had not meddled
with the said uproar) to seek the liberty of the said Vrie or Franck, and at
the last proceeded so far therein, that they of Bruges granted to their
desires, and the rather, for that they saw, that they of Maestricht beseeged by
the Prince of Parma
Maestricht, which he suddenly caused to be invested by his horse men; then his
footmen being arrived he camped of either side of the river of Meuse, causing
forts to be built upon all the approches.

The beseeged had within the town a thousand soldiars, French, Wallons,
Scottish and others, and twelve hundred Bourgers well armed. The Prince of
Parma's la Noue was sent thither, but to late by reason of the great diligence
and speed the prince of Parma made to inuest it round, so as la Noue turned to
Antwerp: Captain Bastien a Frenchman, who commanded in the town, did his best
endeavor to defend it, affronting the Spanish camp daily in diverse skirmishes,
and annoying them greatly. The Prince of Parma (by the general consent of all
his Commannders) was advised, to plant his cannon, whereas the town seemed
most weak, and unfurnished of defense and the ditches narrow, that they might
have the better means to go to the Assault. But they that gave him this it
with about fifty pieces of ordinance, cannon, demie cannon and culuering. His
first 1579.
An assault appointed.
that they had been with Don John of Austria, at the defeat of the Turk, in
the Strait of Lepantho) the second was given to the Tierce of Lombardie. Before
they began to go to the assault, they shot eight hours continually at
either breach. Collonell Mondragon was on the other side of the River, shooting
continually with two field Fabio Farneze advanced unto the first breach: The
Spaniards seeing it, being jealous that the honor of the victory should be
attributed only to the Italiens, ran so suddenly to the assault, as they
advanced the others, and came to the top of the breach, fighting
veryfuriously, whereas they were as courageously resisted.

Before they went to the assault, they set fire to a Mine, but it wrought
small effect. The combat was so furious on either side, as the one would not
yield nor give ground A brave assault well defended.
to the other, nei her was there ever place better assailed nor better
defended* the assault was but newly begu^ at the first breach, when as a
horseman came first alone, and then two A dear Assault without any fuite.
so as standing still firm, they never altered their mark, but were as
suddenly charged as they were discharged. In this assault there died fifteen
Captains and five Enseignes Sp^niards: thirteen Italien Captains, and about
3000. soldiers; For besides that they within the town fl^e very many, fire
fell into certain barrells of powlder through the indiscretio of some soldiers
going to fill their flaskes. There died many also of them within the town but
most part Peasants, whom Mondragons two pieces did wonderfully annoy. The
besieged gave the States to understand how they had carried themselves in
these two assaults, requiring succors, the which were promised them: for the
effecting whereof those of Antwerp did their uttermost indeauors, every Burger
and merchant, contributing a portion to relieve it, and to hasten the succors.
They of Antwerp ^bot to relieve Maestricht.
had their money disburc'd the succors could not be made ready until the Town
was out ofhope, and in the end lost: yet it held out very long, and resisted
this mighty army beyond men's expectation.

Whilst that the Prince of Parma was thus busied before Maestricht, those of
Gant being very desirous to do some service to the public cause, and to do
an affront unto those provinces which labored for a private reconciliation,
which might hinder the conclusion: They sent four companies of Wallons, to
make an enterprise Cosne Pesarengis (...) ^ntois (who had been sometimes a
Lombard in the said Town) said he (...) this (...).
had (...) many of the baser sort.

These four companies (whereof I had the leading and charge) the first being
that of the said Cosme, the second of captain Matthew Villers, the third of
captain 1579.
La Croix, and the forth of captain Alladio, with about thirty horse, the
which captain Hubert did command, parted from Dynse, a little town three
leagues from Gant, as secretly as they could, and marched day and night
without any rest until they came about midnight before Douay, on that side of
the port of Ock, whereas they placed themselves in a great Farm, attending the
break of day, and the opening of the port. There was within the town fifteen
souldiars and a Sargent called Vetspecke, attired like merchants, who on the
Thursdaie morning before Easterdaie should seize upon the port. But being
open, these souldiars having stayed too long at breakfast, (to put themselves
in heart) two poor women going toward the town, did advertise a cou^try-man
being at plough, that this farm was full of Spaniards.

This honest laborer (to whom the name of a Spaniard was odious) vnharnised one
ofhis horses, and ran to give advertisement to the town: Captain Villers
following him as fast as his horse could run cried to him to stay, who still
making have (as captain Hubert and my self advanced with ten or twelve horse
to seize upon the Bar) he discharged his pistol at him: at which noise they
that were in guard at the port shut the Bar, which kept us from entering: and
in the mean time the fifteen souldiars that were within the town, came unto
the gate, and were ready to seize thereon, but hearing the bell over the port
give the alarm, and seeing the Bar shut, they retired back into the town,
and saved themselves by the other ports, all but the Sargent, who was taken
flying to the Rampar, and suffered for all the rest. The enterprise

The Malcontents of Menin and Lanon, hearing that the souldiars of the four
members of Flanders were gone so far up into the country with so small a
troop, meant to attend us in our return, and knowing that we were lodged at
Blandin, a league from Tournay, they came with three hundred horse and some
eight hundred foot to charge us. But we being intrencht within the
Churchyard, and having stopped up Courtenbus, and of some other parts of the
village, having lost above a hundred men, they retired, carrying away seven
or eight Wagons full of hurt men, fearing least at the break of day, those of
Tournay (who had all the night heard their charges) should come to succor us:
Day being come we past by the suburbs of Tournay with the consent of the
Prince of Espinoy, the Malcontents coasting us on the other side of the river
of Escaut, near unto Audenarde. I had commission from the Magistrates of Gant
for the order that

The 28. of May on Assention day, the Clergy of Antwerp being grown bold,
and presuming upon the presence of the Archduke Mathias Governor general, and
some A tumult in Antwerp at a general procession.
Noblemen that were Catholics, notwithstanding the persuasion of some to
desist, for fear of an inconvenience and to be satisfied in making it in our
Ladies great Church, would needs make their procession general throughout the
town, after their accustomed man and a woman slain, the Priests and the whole
procession flying toward the Church, 1579


The Prince of Orange arrived with his Guard, and pacified the multitude, who
cried continually Pape vuit, Pay vuit, that is to say away with the Priests,
away with the Priests. The Archduke and his followers who were at the said
procession, were in like sort retired into the Church, whom the Prince brought
forth, promising that no Priests should come out, until it were otherwise
decreed, within three hours, which the people limited, upon promise that in
the mean time they should not offer any violence: but afterward they demanded
to have them all chased out of the Town: which the The Priests and Monks
chased out of Antwerp by the people.
A shameful enterprise made by the Earl of Egmont.


The Burgers were on the sudden much amazed at these unexpected troops,
seeing them to seize upon the chief parts of the Town; whereupon they went
to Arms, every one coming out of his house half unready, and joined with
certain companies of the Regiment of Oliver vanden Timpell Seignior of
Corbeke, Governor of the town, being there in garrison. Who being encouraged,
and fortified, shut up the Earl of Egmont and his men, with wagons, carts,
tables, forms and other things fit Bemberghe Collonell of the Burgers, went
to charge them in the flank on either side of the Rampar, so as they were
forced to abandon the said Port. In the mean time the Seignior Vanden Timpell
fortified the Court with some of his Regiment. The Earl being thus besieged in
the midst of the Town, and taken like a mouse in trap, the Burgers were
wonderfully incensed, and ready to fall upon him and his men: In this Estate
he pleading simplicity, and speaking them fair, and the Burgers being in
arms, they stood one against another two days and two nights, until the
Seignior of Lissieldt, Councellor of State,

The Prince of Parma having received so great losses (as we have said) in his
affaults before Maestricht, as well of men that were slain, as of them that were
wounded and made unfit to fight, and that all his Artillery was not sufficient
to batter so great a towns he 1579.
The Liegeois help the Spaniards at the camp before Maestricht.
with all munition requisite, but they also sent him 4000. pioners. Being then
resolved not to rise from before it until he had taken the town, he drew all
the men he could out of the garrisons that were nere unto him, with the which
he sortefied his camp. And seeing that he prevailed little by mine, battry or
assault, he caused a high Caualier to be made close unto the town, whereby
he might discover all that was done within: without doubt the Prince showed
himself in all his preparations and attempts very active and diligent: and the
rather for that he did see the States protract the succors The states
negligent to succor Mastrient.
which they had promised unto the said town: and the bad order there was among
the Commanders in the conduct of this war by their weak resolutions, rather
hindered

Moreover there was a great rauelin joining without the rampar, with a large
ditch, the which did defend the courtine of the said rampar, the Spaniards
would gladly An other assault whereas the signior of Hierges was slain.
with fresh men, so as Maugre any resistance, they forced the defendants to
retire unto the rampar, at which assault, the signior of Hierges Earl of
Barlaimont Colonel of a regiment of Wallons, a brave knight, was shot with a
Harguebuse, whereof he died soon after.

The States knowing well that the beseeged had need of many things, thinking
to victual it, they found that all the passages were held by the enemies, and
that there was

In the mean time the Spaniards having been so often chased from their
rampars, did not return to a new assault, but filling the ditch with earth,
they came and lodged close to the wall, so as they might encounter the beseeged
with stones, and in this manner they did often skyrmish. But the beseeged
relying much upon their treaty of an accord, which they did hope soon to
obtain, were no more so active nor vigilant as he understanding, although they
were ready to part, yet he commanded that they 1579.
An assault given to Mastricht during a part and the town taken with fury.
July the Spaniards, Wallons, Italiens and Germans being put in battle,
they advanced without any brute by the breaches to the top of the rampar, and
cut the Corpse de guard in pieces; so as notwithstanding any resistance they
forced the town and carried it with a terrible fury, putting all to the
sword, they incountred for three hours space, sparing neither men nor women,
young nor old, until that the Prince commanded them to cease from killing.
Then they began to take the Burgers prisoners and to ransom them, yet this was
a dear conquest unto them, for they lost many men there: few of the states
soldiars escaped the sword, but all were slain. Captain Captain Bastien
taken prisoner.
Bastien who commanded there, was sore hurt and brought prisoner to the Prince
of

Swartsenburg of Herld was there slain, and so Mastricht, after four months
siege was won, being one of the resolutest, and valiantest defended towns,
(considering the small means that it had) of all the former towns that were
won by the enemy. Since that time the town is wholly wasted, and in a manner
desolate for that there stayed not above 300. Burgers therein, which afterward
likewise went away, in whose places many Liegoeis came thither, and is yet a
ruinated town, the inhabitants being most soldiers that lie there in
garrison, who afterward burnt up the empty houses, for firewood: with this
siege, the Prince of Parma's forces were much weakened, so as after that
victory he could not attempt any thing of importance, and he himself was
very

The loss of this town caused many to murmur, and to accuse the states of
negligence, for that they had not relieved it in time, as they might well have,
if they had used diligence and done their endeavors. During this siege they of
Arthois and Henault, Lille, Douay, Orchies, Valenciennes Macklin and some
castles of Flanders, having their deputies in the camp with the Prince of
Parma, obtained their reconciliation, the which was concluded the seventh day
of May, and confirmed by letters pattents the twelfth of September as follows.

Philip by the grace of God, King of Castille, Leon Arragon etc. To all them to
A private reconciliation of Arthois Henault etc.
whom these presents shall come greeting. As after the retreat of our dear and
well-beloved Don John of Austria (deceased) unto the castle of Namur, being then
Governor and captain general of our seauenteene Provinces; there had happened
many dislikes and discords betwixt him and the general Estates of our said
Provinces, the which not being able to be pacified, by the conferences that
had been made to that end, had bred (to our great grief) a great and cruel
war, to the ruin and desolation of a good part of our country. Being
therefore desirous to do the part of a father and a good Prince having since
these last troubles always sought the means of reconciliation. Finally by our
dear and well-beloved Nephew the Prince of Parma and Placentia, Lieutenant,
Governor and Captain general of our Netherlands, with our Provinces of
Arthois, Henault, Lille, Douay, and Orchies, having to that Matthew Moulard,
Bishop of Arras, John of Noricarmes Knight, Barron of Selles a gentleman of
our privy chamber, and Lieutenant of our guard, and William le Vasfeur, signior
of Valhuon, has offered unto them in our name, the entertainment of the
pacification of Gant, the union which followed, and the perpetual Edict, as
also unto the deputies of our other Provinces in our town of Antwerp, by
letters of the twelfth day of March last past. Which offers being rejected by
the deputies of some Provinces, and otherwise interpreted then was our
intention; had by the said three Provinces of Arthois, Henault, Lille, Douay
and Orchies (understanding better our sincere intention) been embraced: the
said three Provinces having resolved upon certain points and articles, thereby
to purchase a good difficulty found in them: whereupon it was decreed that
comissioners should be deputed 1579.
Mons, our dear and faithful cousine the earl of Mansfeldt, Baron of
Heldrune, knight of our order of the golden fleese, of our council of State,
Governor and Captain general of our duchy of Luxembourg, and marshal of our
camp, and our beloved and faithful knights John of Noyelles Seignior of
Rossignol of our council at war; and Adrien of Gomicourt Seignior of the same
place a gentleman of our household, together with John of Vendiuille, and
Anthony Houst Doctors of the law, counselors and masters of request in
ordinary of our privy George of Wezendorp a Doctor also of the law, and one of
our council in Freesland, who having conferred there-vpon with our
well-bee-loued and faithful cousine Robert of Melun Marquis of Rombais,
Seneshall of Henault, vicont of Gant. etc. Governor and captain general of
our country and Conty of Arthois, and of our town and Baylewike of Hesdin: and
with our dear and well-beloved the Deputies of the country of Arthois, and with
our dear and faithful cousine Philip Earl of Lalain, Governor, captain
General and great baylife of our country and conty of Henault, and our dear
and wel-be-loued the Deputies of the said country: our most dear and faithful
Maximilian Villian Baron of Rassengien Governor and Captain general of the
towns and Castells of Lille, Douay and Orchies: Adrian Dogines knight,
Seignior Mons, have concluded and resolved upon the said doubts and
difficulties: we therefore make it known that the premises considered by the
advice and council of our said good nephew the Prince of Parma, and of our
council of State being with him, have conformable to the said Articles, for
us, our Heirs and Successors, ordained and decreed, ordeine and decree, in
form of a perpetual edict irreuocable for ever, the points and articles which
follow.

First that the treaty of pacification made at Gant, the Union, perpetual
Edict, and ratification which followed on our behalf shall remain in their
full force, and virtue, and shall be really effected in all points. And the
better to unite our said subjects in a Mathias, the estates and the council of
State, so far forth as the ordinary authority of our Governors and
Lieutenants general in our Netherlands has hethereto streched. And in regard
of provisions especially reserved unto our self, at the instance, request and
entreaty of the said estates, we have in like sort confirmed and do confirm
them for this time might be made since the 17. of May last past, the which
shall be held for void, not comprehending 1579
or call in question, nor cause any one to be called in question for the
demolition or beating down of any castles or forts, which castles or forts may
not be reedified nor built up again in the reconciled Provinces, without the
express consent of the Estates of every Province in particular. Item we do
grant, decree and ordain, that all our men of war as well Spaniards,
Italians, Albaneses, Bourguignons and other stangers, not pleasing to the
States, accepting this present treaty, shall depart out of our said
Netherlands, and out of the Duchy of Luxembourg, six-weekes after the
publication of this present accord, or sooner if the army before mentioned, may
be levied and on foot; and in case that provisions necessary for their
departure may be sooner made ready:

And the said men of war, Spaniards, Italiens, Germains, Bourguignons and
others, John Baptist. 1579. We have and do maintain all new Governors of
countries towns, places and forts that are reconciled, as before the retreat
of our deceased dear Brother Don John at Namur.

As also those shall be maintained that have been advanced to any Governments
that 1579.


And for better assurance we have and do ordain according to the leauenth
article of the perpetual Edict, that the said Estates of the united Provinces
and all persons in

We promise not to charge nor cause to be charged the towns nor country of
the said reconciled Provinces, with any strange souldiars, nor with them of the
country, unless they shall desire it by reason of war or some iminent
dangers, or that they have been usually accustomed to have them, in which case
the garrisons shall be of the natural borne of the country, pleasing to the
said Estates respectively. We will and ordain that in all Towns and
Borroughs where the Magistrates have been renewed, extraordinarily since the
beginning of the troubles, shall be restored Charles our Lord and father. And
that order be given the said Magistrates be respected and obeyed, as is fit,
for the avoiding of all new inconveniences.

We promise to employ always in the general government of our Netherlands a
Prince or Princess of our blood, having the parts and qualities requisite for
so great a charge, wherewith our subjects ought in reason to be satisfied, who
shall govern with all Justice and equity, according to the laws and customs
of the country, taking a sollemne oath to maintain the pacification of Gant,
the union which followed, the perpetual Edict, and this present treaty, in
all points and Articles, and namely the Catholic, Romish Religion and our due
obedience, fore-warning the and all that which depends thereon, all commissions,
provisions and Edicts being made 1579.
to the said government, either him or some other of thelike quality (to the
end that no disorder nor confusion shall happen) it shall be governed by the
council of estate, attending a new provision.

Which council of estate shall consist of twelve men at our choice, as well
noblemen and gentlemen as lawyers, borne in the contry, as has bin accustomed:
whereof two third parts shall be pleasing to the said estates, and such as have
followed their party from the beginning unto the ending. Of the which five
shall have an accustomed commission from us, and the other three but a simple
provision for three months, at the end whereof we may (if we please)
continue them, or chose others of the like quality, to l^aue a means for the
Provinces to reconcile themselves. And with the resolution Charles which shall
be viewed by one of the said counselors, to prevent all inconveniences. That
to all Governments which hereafter for six years to come shall fall void in
the said provinces reconcyled, we shall prefer such as are borne in our
Netherlands, or strangers, either of them being pleasing unto the estates of
the said Provinces respectively, capable, fit and qualified according to the
preuiledges thereof.

And as for our privy counselors, of the treasor, and other officers of
importance, we will advance such as are borne in the country, or others to the
good likeing Charles the ^ift, and by the consent of the Estates of every
Province respectively.

That all privileges, uses and customs, as well in general as in particular,
shall be maintained, and if any have been violated, they shall be repaired and
restored. The said reconciled Provinces shall be bound to renounce all leagues
and confedetions which they may have made, since the beginning of the changes
and alterations. And for that the said Estates held themselves bound unto our
dear sister, the Queen of England, and to the Duke of Aniou Brother to the
most Noble and Christian King, for the good assistance that they have received
from them. We will send (two months after that our said Nephew the Prince of
Parma and Placentia

We are content that al provinces, Chasteleines, towns or private persons of
our said Netherlands, that would enter into reconciliation with us, upon the
conditions of this said treaty shall be received by us, and receive the same
benefit with the reconcyled Provinces, so as they come freely within three
months after the real departure of the 1579.
said Spaniards out of our Netherlands.

We have consented and agreed, and do consent and agree, that the said
Estates may beseech his Holiness: our most dear and well-beloved good Brother
Nephew and Cousin the Emperor: the Archbishops of Cologne and Treues and the
Duke of Cleues, as Zealous of the good and quiet of the Christian co^mon-weale,
that they will be pleased to look and have a care that this treaty and accord
may be in all points effected, accomplished and inuiolably observed. And if in
the execution and accomplishment of this pacification there shall grow any
difficulty or question to be decided after the publication thereof, we and the
Estates of the said reconciled Provinces shall depute respectively
commissioners to hear reconcile and execute. Always understanding, that by
those words Agreeable to the States, put in many articles of this treaty

To this reconciliation ran those of Macklin, which town the signior of
Bours (leaving the party of the generality) delivered into the Prince of
Parmas hands: but soon after fearing that through his lightness he should do
as much as he had done with the castle of Antwerp, he was displaced, and the
signior of Rossignol his Cousin put in his Many towns enter into this private
reconciliation.
place. The town of Niuelle in Brabant, the town and country of Allost, the
town and Chasteleny of Bourboure, and many private persons joined likewise:
The rest of Brabant, Flanders, Geldres, Holland, Zeeland, Vtrecht, Ouerissell
and Groninghen, remaining yet firm in the union of Vtrecht. Whilst the camp
lay before Mastricht, The treaty of Cologne unprofitable.
Ambassadors with the Electors of Treues and Cologne, and some deputies from
the Duke of Cleues, as intercessors, to find some means of an accord and
peace, betwixt the King of Spain and the reconciled Provinces, in whose name
appeered the duke of Arschot and some Noblemen with the deputies of every
Province, and withal the deputies of the general Estates which continued in
the union of Vtrecht. But the conditions of the duke of Terranoua being long
debated of either side, were not receiuable by them of the union of Vtrecht.

The King of Spain (among other points) refusing to allow generally throughout
all his countries, of any other Religion, then of the Romish, and they of
Holland and Zeeland would by no means be deprived of the reformed Religion,
whereof they had made free and open profession for some years, so as they could
not agree, whereupon the deputies of the general Estates of the said union
retired without any effect, having a strong impression that they sought only
to circumuent them by this offer of a peace; who being retired, the Noblemen
which remained, (among the which was the duke of Arschot and the deputies of
the reconciled Provinces, with the said duke of Terranoua) concluded certain
articles, which they quallefied with the name of a peace. The sum whereof was,
the observation of the Romish Religion, and obedience to the King. Moreover
that all Officers should be restored to their Estates, to the which the King
would in no sort admit them of the reformed Religion. And that those of the
reformed Of Arschot, and the Deputies of Arthois, Henault, the Chasteleine of
Lille. etc. Mac John of Imbise Bourguymaster of Gant, after 1579.
their brech of the relligious peace, played the madman in spoiling of Churches
and Monasteries, seazing of their rents and goods, selling their mouables and
timber trees, which his fauorits bought at an under rate: to conclude he would
govern all at his The behavior of John d'Imbise in Gant.
pleasure, without the advice and council of his Brethren and companions in
the law. He forced Mounsiere de la Noue (for that he could not allow of his
actions) to depart out of Gant in the night: and brought into the said town
the twenty eight of July great numbers of foot and horse at his devotion, and
being fortefied and supported by them he displaced the magestrates, and
created new, confirming himself of his own private authority, in the dignity
of the first Bourguymaister, upon whom commonly depends the chief mannaging
of affairs and the government of the Imbise fearing, knowing where his soar
did pinch him, he sought with his partisans to prevent it, whereupon he
caused to be printed four articles of the reasons why it was not fit the
Prince should come: yet the Seignior of Ryhuen great Baylife of Gant and his
faction, being contrary to Imbise, with the members of the town, thought it
fit the Prince should come, upon promise that he should neither bring nor leave
at his departure any garrison: that they should enjoy their preuiledges: that
he should leave the chief of the trads in their Offices, and the estate Imbise
hearing of his coming, pretended some excuse, and retired toward the Sas,
where he was pursued on the Princes behalf by captain Monault, but too late:
for Imbise having caused the bridge to be drawn up after him, embarked for
Flessinghe, and from thence went into Germany to Duke Casimir, where he
remained until the Ganthois called him home again, as we shall hereafter
show. The Prince being at Gant, was much troubled to create any other
Magistrate then Imbise, and to repair the disorders which had happened by his
bad government, yet he redrest some Peter d' Ahene a Flemish Minister, a great
partisans of Imbises, retired also, being in fear of his life, for a certain
Inuectiue which in favor of Imbise, he had written against the Prince in the
Dutch tongue.

The Malcontents had at that time an enterprise upon Gant, whereof having
failed, they marched toward Renay, where there was a garrison of them of Gant,
whom they defeated and slew many of them, as they did also at Bosserode, which
they burnt and abandoned. After that the Prince had ordered some thing in Gant,
he went to Bruges, to The Prince accept the government of Flanders.
settle their affairs, the which he did, suffering himself to be persuaded
upon certain conditions to accept of the government of Flanders, and then he
returned to Antwerp. The Prince of Parma somewhat to satisfy the contract of
reconciliation with them of

The Earl of Rheneberg governor of Frisland, having by seege, (as we have
said) reduced the town of Groninghen under the union of Vtrecht, marched with
some troops and three field pieces toward Couoerden, the which was then but a
Bourrough with a castle, giving charge to captain Cornput to fortefie it: the
which he began with great ditches large and deep, making five Rauelins, but
this work surceased for that time, The first (...) of Couerden.
the which was afterward finished by the Drossart Ens, (upon the same
foundations Cornput had laid) for the Kings service, The German companies of
the said Earl of Rheneberg, lodging in the country of Oueryssel, feeding upon
the poor countryman at discretion, for want of pay, the Peasants put
themselves in arms, and chased away the companies of horse of Dodo Van Laer
and Rhynswoud, Bartell Entens went to 1579.
Hohenloos troops. But the Earl returning with greater forces, defeated them
near unto the Cloister of Sion, and cut some 700 of them in peecees; so as
he forced them to lay down their Arms, and redeem themselves from spoil.

After the Treaty of Cologne (which some did quallefie with the name of peace)
the reconciled Provinces, with the Malcontents of Menin, supported by them of
Macklin, thought to cut of the passages to the town of Brusselles, and to take
away their victuals, thereby to force them to reconcile themselves with them.
And as the Malcontents carried a conuoy of fifty wagons with all sort of
munition to Macklyn, A conuoy of the Malecon tents defeated.


The Estates seeing the town of Macklyn in the Spaniards hands, did forbid all
persons by a public proclamation, to carry any thing thither, upon pain of
forfeyture of body and goods; summoning them of Macklin to return unto their
Confederation with the generallity, within four days. This did much trouble
the Burgers, and moved them against their Magistrates: Who upon fear they had
of the Estates, required Macklyn summoned by the Estates, will remain Neuters.
a Spanish garri^on: The which the Burgers refused, saying that they would hold
themselves neuters, and keep the town: Seeing that they found themselves de
la Noue Marshall of the Estates Camp, to free the River which goes from Antwerp
to Brusselles, went by commandment from the Prince of Orange, to charge the
Germans who began to make a Fort at Villebrouck, at the mouth of the great
River of Eschaut which runs before Antwerp, who hearing of his approach, left
the place, and passing the River at Macklyn, La Noue makes the Germans leave
Villebrouck.
cast themselves into the town, La Noue finding of what importance that place
might be, caused the fortifications to be finished with all speed. The Prince
of Parma being grieved that this place had been thus wone, sent some troops
to recover it; but they came to late, for it was finished: Whereas some
companies of his horsemen were Mornaut; but whilst the victors were busy at
the spoil, and pursued not their victory, the Spaniards being rallyed again
together, charged them and defeated all Mornaults company, who saved himself,
with the loss of 40. of his men slain upon the place, and the rest prisoners.

The reconciled Provinces of Arthois, Henault, etc. Having raised the body of
an Army, as it had been promised by the Treaty of their reconciliation. The
Prince of Parma went to besiege the Bourg and Castle of Mortagne in Henault,
where there were certain companies of the Estates, both English, Scottish, and
The taking of Mortagne and S. Amand by the Parmois.
Wallons, the which he took by force; whereas Captain Sohey brother to
Collonell Sohey was slain: From thence he went to set upon the Bourg and
Abbay of S. Amand; which he likewise took, whereas Collonell Morgan an
Englishman was taken prisoner. About that time they of Brusselles and other
garrisons thereabouts, did subtilie surprise Niuelles a town in Brabant, at
the opening of the Port: whereat the beginning they made some little
resistance, and some were slain. The Seignior of Glimes great Bayliffe of
Wallon-Brabant Governor of the town, was taken there, being Niuelle surprised
by the Estates.
found hidden in a stable: the town was partly spoiled, and part ransomed, the
Abbess and religious women were also prisoners and carried to Brusselles. This
enterprise was made by the commandment of Olliuer vanden Timpell Governor of
Brusselles, who came thither, and after he had taken order for the garrison,
he left his brother Denis vanden Timpell to command in the place. The Seignior
of Glimes had been Martin Schenck of Nydecken a Gentleman of Gelderland, grew
to great credit: in his youth he had been Page to the Lord of Iselsteyen, and
after that he served the Prince of Orange with two horses, but after the
pacification of Gant having taken the house of Blyenbeek, near to the river of
Meuse, lying beyond the 1579
from the Estates, he fell from them, and having stabd an Ensigne-bearer, he
put himself into the Prince of Parmas service, forcing the whole country of
Gelderland to pay him contribution, and likewise the river. Whereupon the
Estates caused captain Hogheman to beseege it, but the Prince sent both horse
and foot to relieve him, so as they were forced to retire.

As the Malcontents in the beginning of their war had taken a great rich
village in Flanders called Menin lying upon the river of Lice, which by their
chief commander called Emanuel of Lalain barron of Montigny, was made strong,
(calling it his first conquest) from whence they ouer-ranne all West Flanders,
and made them give contribution, Peter Vercruissen, who was much troubled and
molested by the Wallons, for harboring of a preacher in his house, so as at the
last they meant to proceed against him, as a cryminal offender by order of law.
For which cause he divised a means to get out of the fort, and early in a
morning, being appareled like a countrie-man went out, and being to pass by a
sentinel, he took his halbert out of his hand, and slew him, with the which
also he killed two other sentinells, and by that means escaped, from thence
he went to the Bourguemaster of Bruges, called Jacques Broucqsanke, showing
him, by what means he might free the country from their oppressions, which
he esteemed an easy matter to effect and that with very few men: which the
Bourguemaster imparting Balfour, having received charge and commission to
effect the same, from the Archduke, and the Prince of Orange, the said
Bourguemaster, and his sons, Peter and Ioas, caused a certain number of
ladders to be secretly made in his garden-house, to serve for that purpose;
and al things being ready prepared, upon the one and twenty of October in the
evening, Colonel Baulfour went unto the Scottish companies that lay in
Rousselase, and the next morning about four of the clock went with them under
the walls of Menin, joining upon the stone-way or causie that goes from
thence to Renselase, and with them the said Peter Vercruyssen: At the same time
also, there came certain Flemish companies by ship from Cortrick, which set
upon Menin on that side, and so on both sides they secretly clome up to the
rampar, and An enterprise by the Malcontents against Cortrike, but took no
effect.
of Menin were all as then (by counsel and procurement of the Lord of Erpe)
gone toward Cortrike, being led by Monsier d' Allennes, in the like sort, and
at the very same time to take and spoil it, the which garrisons being before
Cortrike, and busied to take the depth of the ditches with their halberds and
pikes, the chief Baylife of Cortrike d' Allennes hearing, suspected that his
enterprise was discovered, and that those words were spoken to that end. For
which cause he went to his company to consult further with them, and
presently there-withall he heard the alarm given at Menin, which made him
withal speed to return back again to help them, and that if Menin should
chance to be taken, to set upon them, and to take it again, while the
soldiers whereby the Scots and the rest of the soldiers had the better means,
to take the spoil 1579.


Upon those news, the Prince of Orange caused certain English and French
companies that lay in Willebrook and other Flemish companies to march thither,
conducted by the signior of La Noue, to preserve their victory, who upon the
foureteenth of November came to Werwicke, wherein were two of the aforesaid
Wallon companies, that had insconsed themselves in the Church, and two more in
the castle, that lay on the other side of the river, thereby keeping the bridge
free between both, those in the Church were enclosed by the French men, and
shot at by the souldiars that stood above in the houses, and leueled at them
through the Church-windowes, they within De la Noue, understanding that the
Wallons assembled themselves together at Comene, was fully resolved, if they
entered into the field, to set upon Caroudolet Lieutenant to the Earl of
Egmont, the other Croisset, but neither of them both was found amongst the
rest. They within the castle expecting no better usage, in the same evening set
it on fire, and fled to Comende.

The sixeteenth day of November Mounsire de La Nove, being about three hundred
horse and four hundred French foote-men past over the river of Leye to seek
some adventure: and marching toward Halewin, met with four cornets of horse,
the one being the duke of Arschots, the other the Earl of Lalains, and the
rest new cornets, which he presently charged with such fury, as at the first
encounter they were wholly broken and disperced, and presently began to fly,
where they were followed The Malcontents horsemen overthrown by La Noue,
whereby they forsook many places in Flanders.
till they came to Marquette: and if it had not been so late, few or none of
them had escaped, and yet the greatest part of them were slain, as it apeared
by the horses and the prisoners, which the Scottish captains Seton and Mornou
brought into Menin. Which they of Halewin understanding, without longer staying
set La Noue presently manned with garrisons, and diverse other places
thereaboutes, In which exploit his French souldiars were so furious, as hearing
that their pay was come to Menin, they refused to receive it saying, that it
was then no time to receive money, but to fight, thereby to show their valors,
and to do their duties.

In the mean time the Prince of Orange seeing how negligent and careless the
Estates were of their affairs, whilst that the Prince of Parma did domineere
and ^ortefie himself from all parts, and that in the end al would go ill being
loath to lay the blame his reasons should be of more weight, and have more
credit and respect, to whom he 1579.


My masters although I am not ignorant of your good affection to preserve that
The Prince of Oranges oration to the states of Holland and Zeeland.
souerraigne good which it has pleased our Lord God to give us in this
country: yet seeing you are now assembled in this town, I think that this
good occasion does admonish and bind us to confer together to vnder-stand more
particularly and more certainly, what means we may find to repulse the
attempts and invasions of our enemies, as well by sea as land: and what orders
may be set down to attain unto so great a good: for it is more then
necessary to provide for it. And there is no doubt but the enemies employ all
their forces and means to this end, to see if they JESUS CHRIST makes mention,
who wanted means to finish their work. In the mean time my intent is not any
ways to terefie you, or make you faint, and abandon the work begun: but that
the consideration of their desseins and means should open our eyes, and
incline our hearts, to apply the remedy and means to prevent it and to
maintain our selves happily. And in truth this preuoyance and disposition may
cause two very notable effects and of great consequence: preparations as well
in Germany and France, as England and Scotland, have also for their 1579
and Spain: So as they have together ninety Ensigns of Wallons, sixty of
Spaniards, about What sorces the prince of Pa^ma then had.
forty of Germans, and some fifteen or twenty of low Dutch. It is also most
certain that they have made a great levy of horse in Germany. There are also
many aduertisements from sundry places, of the preparation which is made in
Spain, for the kings coming into these countries, or at the least of a great
army which shall come from thence. We know also, that the hatred to religion,
and insatiable desire to tyrannise, and to enrich themselves with the spoils
of these countries, makes them resolute and obstinat to continue the wars,
without any touch or apprehension of the ruin of the country. Behold briefly
and truly what we may consider of their parts: Let us now come to our selves.
First the justice and equity of our cause, and consequently the assistance and
protection of that great and mighty God,

These things are propounded unto you my masters, not to lull you asleep and
make you careless and negligent, but rather to quicken and encourage you, and
to the end you should understand what advantage we should have over our
enemies, if there were a true resolution in us to employ the means, which God
has given us, courageously. And if a good and convenient order were
established in the conduct of these affairs, how should the enemies counsels
be troubled, how should their hearts be daunted, and their forces weakened,
and

To conclude, the estate of our affairs, and the disposition of our enemies is
such, as if we resolve to employ the means which God has given us, as we
ought, we have reason to hope (by the blessing of God) not only to preserve
our selves, but also to advance our affairs, and to make the enemy to loose
all hope to compass his designs. And contrariwise if we stand unresolved, we
are half shaken, and the least thing will overthrow 1579
a course, employing the means which we have received from the Lord, to
attain unto it: our adversaries are not so void of understanding, courage, nor
force, but it will be very easy for them that have no other defense, but a
general and confused desire to preserve themselves. Finally considering
seriously in what estate we are, and that you have war against mighty
enemies, seeking to tread you down, and to tyrannise over you; You must first
advise if you feel in your selves a firm and constant resolution, to preserve
your selves, and to advance as much as possible you may, that incomprehensible
good which God has given you, changing that tyranny of bodies, consciences and
goods, unto so happy a liberty which you now enjoy. Then, whether you be
resolved to employ those means willingly, which the

I should also be very sorry, that through my negligence, standing without
any assured resolution, all the blame and reproach should fall upon me, in
recompense of my affection and zeal, to employ both the life and goods of me
and mine in the service of this cause^ having no intent to continue, unless I
first understand your wills, and whether the course, means, and order, which
you shall set down, shall be sufficient to ground a hope of our preservation
against our enemies. Desiring rather and being more reasonable, to give it
quite over, and to save our reputations by some appointment whatsoever, and
what we can of our lives and goods, than to see our selves, as it were, melt
away in languishing, and fail into the cruel hands of our enemies. But
contrariwise if you feel your selves resolved, advise if it shall not be more
expedient, to depute three or four among you, to examine, weigh, debate, and
treat

And if God has called me by your means, to serve you, leave not therefore
to embrace the cause, touching the means, being more yours than mine own,
And if this be well understood and practiced by you, there shall be no more
cause for the Estates to excuse themselves unto me, but (as if you were all but
one head) having in charge the preservation and 1579
for your defense and advancement. And so every man employing himself
faithfully in his charge, I hope that God will bless us, to the confusion of
our enemies, and the comfort and consolation of us all.

The prince of Orange seeing that the treaties of peace at Cologne, whereon
they hoped, was vanished to smoke, did wish, that the Estates would have
embraced their affairs with more zeal and earnestness, that through
carelessness (and to speak the truth they went but lazily to work) they might
not fall into those inconveniences, which through the diligence of the
Spaniards were to be feared. By reason whereof, for that in all asse^blies of
Estates the deputies of every province or town, were bound (as it is said by
the treaty of the union made at Vtrecht) to advertise their masters of all
propositions, and to attend the answer, during which time many The princes
advice for the establish^ of a counsel of State.
they should erect a counsel of Estate, the which might absolutely dispose of
all occurrents, without so many sendings and loss of time: and either to fight
with the enemy, or to provide for their defense. And therefore he thought it
fit they should always have a small flying camp, either to give some
camisadoe to the Spaniards, or to stop their courses: for otherwise with so
many reiterated assemblies of the Estates, so many delays, and loss of time
in sending to and fro, such diversity and contrariety of opinions in such a
multitude of men of diverse humors and dispositions, he said (and truly) that
it was not possible to Dom Frederic his son, and when they had not the means
to make head, and to assail as they had now: For which cause some foreign
princes which might have come to their aid grew cold, and would not have to
do with so great diversity of opinions: and none of those towns which the
Spaniard held in his jurisdiction and keeping, sought to join with them.

He said moreover, That it was not possible to subsist long, without an army
always ready of twelve thousand foot, and four thousand horse, besides the
ordinary garrisons, with

All towns that had any cause of complaint, or to demand succors, came unto
the prince, but he could not relieve them, nor provide for that which they
required: so as there was great need of this counsel of Estate, the which
should be erected of men of good quality, well acquainted with affairs,
courageous, resolute, and faithful, with an army of old soldiers, whereby

These admonitions of the prince made in an open assembly of the general
Estates at Antuerpe, were well accepted by them, but not greatly followed,
whether it were for that the Estates feared the excessive charge, or that there
was envy and jealousy among the great men, yet the said counsel of Estate was
established.

The peace of Cologne broken off in such sort, as there was not any hope of
peace to be expected from thence, upon the 28 of September past, the prince of
Orange, being then in Gant, caused this counsel and advice to be put forth in
print, which he had given, upon certain articles propounded unto him by the
Estates, concering four points, which were touching

Concerning peace, he complained very much, That he should be charged by
certain men, to be the only cause that it took not effect, whereas to the
contrary he had always given counsel, and did yet counsel them by all the
means they could to procure the same, as knowing 1579
had: but he perceived the matter to be brought to that pass, as those of the
reformed religion were wholly bent, not to forsake nor fly the country any
more, and that there was nothing else sought nor desired by the treaty of
peace, than to raise more division in the country, as by consenting and
desiring to continue the pacification of Gant, which before in the treaty with
the baron of Selles, they held and esteemed to be bad and unlawful, and that
for the same cause they ought to be rooted out: referring himself further
therein, to that which had been answered thereunto by the general estates.
Adding thereunto, That the enemy under that pretense of treaty of peace,
sought nothing else but the lives and goods of the inhabitants of the
Netherlands, when as all the towns and forts should be delivered over into the

Secondly, That he had as then attained to those years, which well deserved
rest and quietness, after so many labors and troubles by him endured: but for
that many men, not only such as made profession of the reformed religion, but
those also that seek the freedom of their natural country, wholly relied
upon him, he could not hearken nor consent to any peace, but only to that
which tended to the security of religion, freedom and privileges of the
Netherlands,

Touching the contribution, he referred them therein to that which was done by
the assembly at Vtrecht, as it appeared more at large by the answer by him made
unto every particular article of the same.

Concerning the duke of Aniou, considering the great endeavors and earnest
means sought Mathias, and the general estates, as also by diverse men of good
quality

Secondly, that he had many and several times understood, and made trial of
the queen of 1579
but also concerning the good affection, and great favor that she bore unto
the said duke, having written in his behalf unto the general estates:
therefore (under correction, and for the good of the united provinces and
towns of the Netherlands) he said, That there was no other means now
remaining, than to have their refuge unto the aforesaid duke, and the rather,
for that such an honorable work required a prince that might personally
effect the same, upon condition, that the Netherlands might be will provided
of soldiers, and sufficient means to withstand the Spaniards, with security
of religion and the privileges, and every province to remain in their old
and ancient rights and customs, without any alteration.

And that if the country thought it more convenient to choose any other prince,
he referred himself therein to their judgments, promising and offering his
service according to his ability, for the defense of the country: in the
mean time wishing them to consider of the best means that might be found, for
the withstanding of such an enemy.

Touching the government of the country, he referred that to the discretion
of the provinces, as also concerning that which they should please to ordain,
touching the person of the archduke Mathias: but for himself, he said, he
could not let slip certain manifest imperfections, which until that time were
not by any means to be remedied, for want of obedience, the which had caused
great complaints to be made by diverse persons, some for want of understanding,
and others of mere hatred and malice. He likewise said, That besides that the

And whereas the united provinces offered him the office of Lieutenant general
of the Netherlands, he well knowing and considering what crosses he had had
therein, gave them to understand, that for his part, he was content that the
same should be laid upon some other man, whom it should please the said
provinces to nominat and appoint, promising, according to his power, to do his
best endeavor for the service of the country, as he had formerly

Saying first, That there was no province nor town, that had been required to
receive garrisons, but as much as in them lay, refused the same, and that
having received any garrison, did not presently make all the friends they
could, to be discharged and unburdened thereof again: whereby whole
provinces and towns were lost, as it appeared by Aeth, Alost, Mechelen, and
others.

And whereas at that time all the towns were persuaded to take in garrisons,
yet in so small numbers, as they were not able to make any sallies, by that
means to molest and trouble the enemy, but were forced to stay within their
towns, and by that means unexperienced in arms and martial affairs, so as
the enemy did what he would in the plain country even to the very gates of
the said towns: And for that cause also the small towns 1580
or else must be lost: mean time the poor country man was on all sides
^ansacked and utterly spoiled.

Secondly he said, That the disorder daily more and more increased, by means
that the provinces (in regard that they were so much wasted and spoiled) were
not able to raise and bring in their contribution, wherewith they were taxed.

Which to prevent, he said, There was no fitter nor more convenient means to
be used, than to keep good and strong garrisons within their forts and
towns, which might hinder and keep the enemy from spoiling of the champion
country, whereby the rest of the country might be assured and unburdened of
so many unnecessary small garrisons, and the soldiers

Desiring also, That they would consider what in times past had been done in
Holland and Zeeland, where the towns made no difficulty to receive garrisons
into them, so that they were not only defended, but did also greatly annoy the
enemy. Also desiring (thereby to

Desiring also, That for the avoiding of all delays in the execution of
things, there should be a counsel of state erected.

He said moreover, That great difficulties were grown for want of money to
maintain the charges of the wars, and that thereby all good means,
occasions, and advantages (to drive and expel the enemy out of the country)
were utterly lost, which the enemy himself by his intercepted letters
confesses that he should have been forced to have done. As also that the
contribution money ordained to be paid, was not gathered: and that if it were
gathered, it was

Thus much I thought good to set down touching these articles, thereby to show
the estate of the country at that time: he that desires to see more, may read
the articles themselves.

The prince caused this his counsel and advice with all speed to be put in
print, that every province and town might read and consider thereof, to the
end, that at the next assembly of the general estates in Antuerpe, they might
be sent with full power and authority, for the full Another declaration made
unto the states by the prince of Orange.
if speedy remedy were not had, especially for that there was not a counsel
of estate appointed, that had authority to determine upon things that
concerned the generality, for that as then every particular province and
town did that which they thought fit and convenient for their own particular
benefit, without respecting what they and the country in general lost, by not
aiding and assisting every particular town when need required, which proceeded
from want of a body, or chief assembly, whereunto the particular members ought
to be subject. been able to set upon the enemy, or else have caused him to
have broken up his siege: For 1580
that had authority to dispose thereof, for that otherwise every province and
town, would discharge and send away their garrison, having no need thereof,
and they that had need, would not suffer their garrisons to depart out of their
towns, provinces, or commands: and many other such like disorders, he said,
would arise, only by that means, which by a counsel of estate that had full
and absolute authority, might be prevented.

By the which and such like disorders he said, That diverse good men were
discontented, and understanding not the ground of the cause, laid the blame
upon them that were most blameless, whereby it fell out, that they were forced
to see and behold first one town, then another, to revolt, and to be lost, and
that those that were most zealous, became faint and

Seeing then, that their bad resolutions were the only causes of the aforesaid
difficulties, and the bad accomplishing of that which was resolved upon,
therefore (he said) it was requisite that the same should be foreseen and
amended, before all other things whatsoever: for that there were yet many good
people in the Netherlands, that would earnestly proceed therein, especially for
that as then there was much more disorder found to be amongst the enemy, than
was amongst them, as want of money, powder, and all kind of munition,
contention, factions,

In the collections of the contributions (he said) there was likewise great
disorder, for that every province received and used their own money for their
best advantages, and not for the profit and commodity of the generality: as
also, that some collected their common taxes with too much partiality, whether
it were to draw more traffic unto their towns, or else by reason of
negligence or carelessness.

That there should great respect be had touching the oath that was usually
taken of the colonels, captains, officers, and common soldiers, for that many
of them, which were in service, were of opinion, that by reason of the oath
they had taken unto the king, they might enterprise and undertake any thing
against the estates. And that therefore (for more security)

Touching all these points, he said, it was more than requisite to be
considered of; and that many things would be repaired and amended, if they
would follow his advice, and choose certain persons that should have the
ordering and managing of al causes, with assured and faithful deputies
authority to appoint and ordain new impositions, or power to deal in all
causes, 1580
the collection of the general means of contributions, publicly agreed upon,
or that should be ordained and appointed, and to dispose them for the most
profit and advantage of the country; to cause the soldiers to assemble
together, and the same again (when occasion served) to send into garrisons,
and to take knowledge of all politic causes, for the service and welfare of
the Netherlands. And whenever this should be done, he doubted not, but that
in short time they should find a good alteration.

The deputies of the estates being assembled together in Antuerpe upon the
thirteenth of January, there was another matter propounded unto them, touching
the changing of their sovereign Consultation made by the deputies of the
states assembled in Antuerpe touching the change of their sovereign lord.
lord, that they might make report thereof unto their towns and provinces,
that so

For that the present estate of the Netherlands was such, as they could make
nothing but a defensive war, which was, only to defend their towns and
provinces, and yet very hardly and with great difficulty, by reason of the bad
unity and concord which was amongst them, together with the evil order which
had been taken touching the countries causes, both for war and otherwise, as
also the delaying and deferring of matters, whereby all good occasions and
oportunities were let slip and neglected; and although good order were taken
in all things, yet they could not (as it is said before) make nothing but a
defensive war, which might well endure long, and yet they must of necessity
loose more than they should win thereby, for

And that further it was to be considered, That the continual spoiling of the
country would weaken and decay their power, and take from them all means of
money, and other necessaries: and that therefore it was requisite, resolutely
and courageously to resolve upon making of peace, or else of proceeding with
the wars. As for peace, they found that it could not be made, unless they
yielded themselves once again, by as good means as they could, under the king
of Spaines subjection.

Touching the king of Spaines meaning and intent, they said it was well and
sufficiently

And for that it was impossible (in man's judgment) to uphold the war in such
sort as it had in times past been done, therefore it was requisite, that they
should resolve upon some (rebus adhuc stantibus) the sooner the better, before
they fell into greater danger: for that it was to be doubted, that they in the
next Summer (being unprepared and not ready) either should be ouer-run by the
enemy (which they well knew made himself strong) or else forsaken by their
reuolting friends, wherein their enemy used all the means and subtle
practices he could devise.

That in all Christendom there was no king, potentate, nor prince, that had
offered them more favor and friendship than the duke of Aniou, brother unto
Henry the third, king of France, who likewise had the best means to annoy and
hurt their enemy upon the borders

And therefore they were to determine, whether they should yield themselves
into the hands of the said duke, upon such conditions as should be propounded
unto him, or not: the principal causes why they had so long borne arms being
these.

First, for the reasonable and lawful governing of the Netherlands, under the
command of 1580
natural borne inhabitants of the same.

Secondly, for the restoring, and perpetual upholding of the rights, laws,
statutes, privileges, and freedoms of the land.

Thirdly, for the eschewing and avoiding of all unreasonable persecutions, and
for the permission of the exercise of the reformed religion, which was found
requisite and necessary to be suffered, for the common peace and quietness of
the same. All other causes (in respect thereof) being of much less importance:
and therefore it was to be considered, whether they could agree better with the
king of Spain, than with the duke of Aniou, touching the same.

First, it was most certain, and (without all doubt) plainly and manifestly
to be seen, that the will, means, and power to bring the Netherlands into
subjection, and under a strange yoke, were (without comparison) greater in the
king than in the duke, for that the king would have all the lords of the land,
commanders, and other officers (whom he would appoint and ordain at pleasure)
at his devotion, and under his subjection, so that every one would strive to be
the first that should be received into his good grace and favor; not they
alone, that of long time had been affected unto his service, and hoped for
reward, but also those which had always been his enemies: for that it had
been seen, that a great number of those which had been most earnest against
the Spaniards, had suffered themselves to be seduced by Monsieur de la Motte,
and, upon hope to be made rich, were revolted from the other provinces and

To the contrary, the duke of Aniou could not in many years purchase so great
credit with the people, as the king had already obtained, for that the king
had many towns in his hands (whereby he had more means to attain to his
desire, than the duke of Aniou, although his will were good) being likewise
much mightier, especially, if he once recovered Portugal into his hands:
whereby his power would every way be too great for the Netherlands, if they
sought not another protector, or else took better order in their affairs.

That the kings evil will toward the Netherlands, was manifest, for that he
was greatly moved and incensed against the same, and therefore (whether it
were to maintain his honor, or to give the rest of his subjects an example and
warning, that they should not hereafter attempt the like, or else of his own
nature and desire of revenge) he would epsy and watch all oportunities, to be
revenged upon the Netherlands, as addicted thereunto by nature. Which by his
former actions and proceedings in the country of Granado, India, and Italy,
and especially in the Netherlands, appears to be most true: for that the
blood of the principallest lords (most lamentably brought unto their ends by
sword, torment, and poison, against all laws of God and man, and his own
promises) was yet in a manner warm: besides many

It was likewise seen, that unto those, against whom he had the greatest
spleen, and was resolved to punish them, he wrote the most pleasing and
gracious letters that could be devised. And whereas he made show, as if he had
altered his mind, and seemed to begin another more pleasing and peaceable
manner of government, then did he by his Dom John, and others.

It was likewise found by example, and many histories, That such kings and
mighty potentates 1580
served, although for a time they seemed to wink thereat. For which cause,
king Solomon gives us warning, saying, That the kings wrath is a most certain
door or entry unto death, as it appeared not long since in France, whereas
neither the peace of two years, the delivering over of all the towns, forts,
and castles, nor yet the marriage of the kings own sister, could move the king
to refrain from taking revenge upon the admiral, and so great a number of
gentlemen, and other persons of diverse estates and qualities, whom he caused to
be murdered without compassion.

And in the Netherlands, they themselves had seen, That the emperor
Maximilian, grandfather to the deceased emperor Charles the fifth,
notwithstanding the peace which had been Maximilian himself had bound it by an
oath, yet nevertheless he was so revenged upon Bruges, and thereby satisfied
his humor, as every man that hears thereof yet unto this day, is stricken with
fear and terror: and yet Maximiltan was one of the most mild and courteous
princes that had lived in many hundred years.

What then was to be expected from the king of Spain, that would not hold nor
keep his promise? unless it were to assure the country in time to come, and
not to fall again into such great costs and charges, as all potentates use to
do, when they fear a revolt, and especially when as they think they have
received any disgrace or undutiful service at their hands, as the example of
Gant in Anno 1539 well witnessed.

Besides that, it was evidently known to every man, That all the
proclamations, promises, Cornelius Calidius Chrisopolitanus, Johannes Leuseius
Cunerus, bishop of Leeuwerden, and many others.

And if it were so, that the king were content to keep his faith and promise,
yet it is manifest, that the Pope of Rome and the Inquisition of Spain would
not suffer him, but still would put him in fear of conscience, and compel him
to root out and utterly extirpe all heretics, as it is well known that they
brought the king of France thereunto; so that without all doubt, the massacre
of Paris was first hatched and invented both in Spain and Italy.

Besides all this, it was to be considered, what thing had moved the king unto
such wrath and bitterness against the Netherlands: for that if it were merely
of his own nature and disposition, then there was no hope of any better to be
expected, for that there is no sudden action of man, but that nature can
expel it; but if he be naturally given to be gracious, peaceable, Dom John had
sufficiently declared, when as he might easily have made himself master of
1580
that his letters (by great fortune) had not fallen into their hands, or if
that, in steed of going to Mechelen, he had gone to the castle of Antuerpe, and
had taken it.

Now it was to be examined on the other side, if that those points might be
found in the duke of Aniou, or not.

As for him, he should have much less means, he being a stranger, and
suspected of the inhabitants, having no correspondence in the Netherlands, as
also that he had neither towns, forts, nor any of the chief noblemen of the
land at his command, nor would not lightly undertake any bad enterprise, out
of his own country, unless he were better assured.

Touching his power, it was already declared; concerning his will, it was
easy to be perceived,

Touching his nature and disposition, he was reported to be peaceable and
courteous, having behaved himself in very good sort both at the time of the
massacre, and in many other troubles, having given good testimony, that he was
displeased thereat, not without the danger of his life; yet at the last being
moved and provoked, he also bare arms against the Huguenots, which was one of
the causes of a peace, which he sought to uphold and maintain.

But howsoever it were, such care and diligence might be used, and he should
have such conditions prescribed unto him, as that if he would be moved or
procured to follow any evil counsel, he should not by any means be able to
effect it; and so much the rather, for that he shall continually have the kings
followers and adherents opposite unto him, which will be

On the other side, it were to be hoped, that they of Arthois and Henault would
seek to unite themselves with the estates, when they should see and perceive,
that it would be too chargeable for them to maintain war on both sides, or
that they could hardly let the states soldiers from inuading them: by which
means they should get great store of forcible contribution from the^, and so
require the injury done unto those of Flanders. The duke likewise should have
no cause to prefer the Wallons before other provinces, which until that time
had most been used, and would be much more, as it evidently appeared, if the
Spaniards once got the upper hand: and further it concerned the estates much,
carefully to take heed least the Wallons should procure the said duke to hold
on their side. And if any man should maintain, that the duke would not observe
the pacification of Gant, or that the country might thereby move the Q. of
England

Touching the queen of England, they knew she had rather have the duke than
the king 1580
whose power were to be feared, being the only lord both of the East and West
Indies, and so mighty a prince. Besides, the queen showed her self not to
have any bad opinion of the duke, in regard that she had proceeded so far as
to parle, and did yet parle with him about a marriage to be made between them;
and although the same took no effect, yet the English lords (that were most
addicted to the religion) would not be displeased, but rather desire to see
some good proceedings in the affairs of the Netherlands. Besides, that it was
to be thought, that Spain would provide so much work for France, as England
should not need to fear France, especially when as their intent was, to
include the queen of England in that contract.

And whereas some might perchance suspect, That the said duke should have
secret intelligence with the king of Spain, that was not likely: but it was
most true, and without doubt, that the king of Spain would always rather take
the Netherlands again into his own hands, upon such conditions as the^ were
offered unto him by the estates, tha^ to stand to such hazard, and after that
be forced to receive his country again at the king of France his brothers
hands, with many harder conditions than were then offered unto him: besides,
that all his dealings, letters, and actions showed the contrary, so that there
was no cause why any such suspicion should grow in any wise man's head.

Therefore the provinces were requested once again to resolve upon that which
they thought best to be done, that such means might be wrought, as the
Netherlands might

These reasons and arguments being long debated and consulted upon both by the
towns and the general estates, at the last they resolved and agreed to accept
the duke of Aniou for their sovereign lord, as hereafter shall be showed.

In September past, the captain (which commanded for the estates in Bryel)
made a bargain with the captains male contents of Athois and Henault, to
deliver up unto them the town and Island of Bryel; but it was with an intent
to surprise the^: the which they thinking to effect, with some ships of
Grauelinge, appointed like unto them of the Hollanders, they approached near
unto the Island, but they were charged by them of Holland, and all slain

The seignior of Alennes (mad for the disgrace he had received at Courtray,
which was Courtray surprised by the Seignior of Alennes.
redoubled by the loss of Menin) dreamed of nothing but of revenge: for the
effecting whereof, he sent a captain of Henault, called Ieams Corbetiers, who
(attyred like a pesant) went to view the weakest parts of the town, the which
he found to be betwixt the castle and the rampar of the town. D'Allennes
meaning to make a trial, his enterprise succeeded so happily as for want of a
greater garrison, he became master thereof by force. The 28 of February the
town was spoiled, and the bourgers put to ransom. A little before, the four
members of Flanders had sent them four companies of Wallons thither, but they
excused themselves, saying they had no need of them, which was the cause of
their ruin. It happens so most commonly,

About the same time, Monsieur de la Noue being general of the Frenchmen, and
of all other The earl of ^ont taken in Nyenouen.
soldiers that remained in Flanders, having intelligence, that the earl of
Egmont, with his wife, mother, and brother Charles, with diverse other
gentlemen, were in Ninouen, which is a small town lying betwixt Alost and
Geersbergh, and not very strong, nor very well manned: they took it in the
night by scalado on the 28 of March, with small loss on either side. It was
taken before the earl heard any alarm, being in bed with his lady; who
hearing the noise coming up to his chamber, rose in his shirt, and as the
seignior of la Noue entered, he only asked, if his men had made no resistance:
to whom they answered yes; but it was the fortune of the war: then
recommending the honor of his wives women (who were also in bed) he entreated
Monsieur de la Noue promised; yet the Frenchmen filled their pockets with their
chains and jewels: which done, they took him and the rest prisoners. The
earl remained long prisoner in Gant, and afterward in the castle of Ramekins
in Zeeland. The ladies and his brother Charles were soon released again.

Many troubles and vprores rising in Friseland, and thereabouts, the prince of
Orange went Mathias going with him to Breda, he entertained him there 1580
very honorably, from whence the archduke went back again to Berghen up
Zoome, and so to Antuerpe: the prince going to Campen, to set all things in
good order, for that the country pesants in Drenth, and thereabouts, were risen
up in arms against the Estates commanders of their forces, and the rest of
Casimires horsemen, where being very strong, they denied their contribution,
seeming to lean and to be affected unto the articles of peace made at Cologne.
The earl of Rennenbergh revenged himself likewise upon the pesants under his
command, and threatened them of Linghen and Oldenzeel, because they would not
accept of the religious peace. Bartel Entens plagued them of Berghe, and those
of the bishopric of Munster. Diericke Sonoy, governor of North-Holland, also
compelled them of Zutphen to receive in

The earl of Rennenbergh a little before began to incline, and to have some
intelligence with the prince of Parma, and for that cause had encouraged the
pesants of Drenth and Oueryssell against the soldiers, whereunto he was
persuaded by his servants and his kindred in Henault, with whom he secretly
dealt, and was a great seeker unto the Estates, to procure, that the articles
offered at the peace of Cologne unto the said Estates, might be accepted. And
after that, a certain uproar being made in Groaning by the Catholics (that
would force the town to allow of the said articles, which by those of the
Religion was soon pacified) he perceived thereby, that he might there have a
factious party; which to procure, he secretly set the hostages of Groaning at
liberty, being all affected to the Spaniard. About the same time also

Things proceeding in this sort, upon the one and twentieth of January
Cornelia de Lalain, his sister, with the baron de Monceau her husband, came to
visit him, bringing with her his pardon and reconciliation from the prince of
Parma, with certain money, and many fair promises, as to be created a
Marquess, and that he should have the Countess of Meghen for his wife, of
whom he was enamoured. But the said earl being doubtful what to do, his
sister never ceased to admonish him, and to persuade him, not to damme his
soul, by suppressing the Christian faith, and by being a principal leader
and captain of heretics and rebels, and to suffer himself to be ruled by a
multitude of weauers and other occupations, whereby he

But the prince of Orange and the Estates of Friseland having had many causes
to suspect him, The castle of Leewerden taken by the states of Friseland, and
broken down.
thought it better to begin with him, than he with them, and for that cause, in
the month of February, determined to assure themselves of the castle of
Leewerden, and secretly caused Bowinga and Ferno with their companies to
enclose it behind, and with the bourgers to fall on it Schaghe (who after the
death of Matenesse, was made governor of the castle) seeing the slackenesse of
the soldiers to make resistance, being terrified, yielded it up, with
assurance of life and goods, and promise of a yearly pention. But the
townsmen entering into the castle sooner than they expected, were not
satisfied, until they had thrown down the walls that were next unto the
town, and joined the rest of the walls thereof unto those of the town. This
castle was built in Anno 1499, at the charges of the town, being thereunto
forced and compelled (the town being besieged) by Willeboort van
Schouwenbergh, general for the duke of Saxony, so that it had stood about 80
years. Whilst that the bourgers were busied about the rasing of the castle,
the companies of

The next day Beninck Camminga, and others, with four companies, went to
Harlingen, and encamped themselves in the town, as then not walled, and
summoned the castle to yield unto 1580
Rennenbergh hearing thereof, much abashed, sent Baly his secretary to
Leewerden, with secret instructions and authority to deal in that matter as
he should think good, and as time and Harlingen castle taken by the states of
Friseland, and broken down.
occasion should serve, thinking all had been well there. Balie being come
thither, was presently taken prisoner, and being searched, they found certain
blankes about him that were signed by the earl of Rennenbergh, they of
Leewerden compelling him to write in one of those blankes unto the lieutenant
of the Drossart Ozenbrighe (who as then was at Groaning) in the earls name, to
will him to deliver the castle of Harlingen into their hands: who suspecting
nothing, and knowing not, that he ought to have bin thrice commanded so to do,
upon the 5 of February yielded up the castle, which was likewise demanteled on
that side that lay next to Albert duke of Saxony built it up again in anno
1500, so that it had stood seventy nine years.

After that, Sonoy governor of North Holland, with certain deputies, and four
companies of soldiers went to Staueren, where they summoned the castle to
yield unto them, which the Drossart Pipenpoy having received a good warrant and
discharge from the prince of Orange, delivered unto them, which they presently
(without good advice) demanteled, before they The castle of Staueren taken by
the Estates, and broken down.
fortified the town; which afterward was their own disadvantage, for by that
means the earl of Rennenbergh took it from them again. This castle was first
built by Albert of Leyden George Schenck, in the emperor Charles the fifth his
name, and so had stood 57 years.

While this was done, the earl of Rennenbergh being in Groaning, was in great
perplexity, perceiving, that he could not perform his promise with the prince
of Parma, which was, to yield up all his government into the kings hands, and
that at his own costs and charges. But while he kept this close to himself,
he made complaint to every man of the breaking of the religious peace, the
rebellion in Friseland, and the great wrong and disgrace that had bin done unto
him, showing his great services done for the Estates, in Mechelen,
Valenciennes, Groaning, and before Campen, Deuenter, and other places: and that
for recompense thereof, he had Poppo Vlfkins and John Cornput (both well
addicted to their country and the Estates, and having great familiarity with
him) gave him counsel to go to Vtrecht to the prince of Orange (whither he had
bin sent for) there to make his complaints, and to remove all suspicion
conceived of him, and by that means the lost places should be restored unto his
government again. And touching the breaking down of the castles, they told
him, that he knew long since, that the same rested at the will and pleasure of
the Estates, and had then bin done by their appointment, and that therefore he
had no cause to complain thereof, but only of the manner and form of the
action, for that it was done in his government, and without commission from
him. Not long after, as some of his practices were discovered, and that he and
his adherents sought Poppo Vlfkins of his life, the said Vlfkins left the town,
not without acquainting him with his proceedings, in presence of the deputies
of the country, as also of his friends, praying some of them, namely, captain
Cornput, to give the earl good counsel, and to persuade him to be constant,
in regard that he showed himself to be wavering; which the said captain did,
praying him to take better order in his government, that the country people
might not have cause to turn their hearts from him, and that from thenceforth
he would be ruled by the general Estates, and not follow the secret counsel
of Oyenbrugghe, Gruyter, Cottereau, Baly, and such like, that were suspected by
the country; and especially, that he should without all delay go to the prince
and the deputies of the Estates at Vtrecht, thereby to put himself out of all
suspicion, if he could discharge himself thereof, especially when as he might
be persuaded, that the ouerrun, yet these towns would be able to maintain
themselves by traffic at sea, whereas 1580
constrained to yield: for that their champian country being spoiled, all their
hope and traffic were gone, for want of havens, to bring in necessary
provision; saying, that the king could give nothing but bare titles, that were
no better than smoke, and dear honors without profit. And that if the
Catholic Religion moved him thereunto, he might well suppose, that he should
bring no more to pass by force, and with his own overthrow, than the kings of
Spain and France, by so many fires, executions, and ruin of places had done:
and therefore he gave him counsel to keep that he had, and so quench the fire
that the houses of Lalain had begun to kindle, remembering their device, De
Lalain sans reproach, and to remain in the union with the prince and their
associates: and that if he did to the contrary, it was to be feared, that he
should find himself ruined, when he least suspected it. The earl all this
while hearkened unto the said Bartel Entens, making show as then, as if he
would be constant unto the Estates, but his sister still heartened him on,
whenever he seemed to make conscience of his oath, whereby he had bound
himself unto the Estates, and yet he dissembled and concealed it as much as he
could.

After that, it fell out, that the Estates sent letters and commissions unto
Abel Frankena, Doctor of both the laws, which was gone to Groaning about the
Estates affairs: which letters the earl of Renenbergh had caused to be taken
away from the post, as he entered into Groaning: in the which letters he found
the commission, that the Estates had sent for Bartel Entens, Frankena, and
caused him to be kept prisoner in a chamber, although it was told him by
diverse, that it was against the laws of all nations, to show any such rigor to
an ambassador; but not long after Frankena got out at a window, and so escaped
away, by which dealing the said earl sufficiently discovered his intent. For
which cause, amongst others, captain Cornput (who was also of the said earls
regiment) secretly counseled some of the magistrates and bourgers of Groaning
(especially the bourger M. Jacob Hillebrand, and others of the reformed
Religion) to make themselves masters of the town, before their adversaries
should attempt it, offering to be their leader, and to put the earl in safe
keeping: but they made answer, that as yet there was no need to do it, and that
they were the strongest party, and would be careful enough thereof, Vlfkins
not long before was likewise gone. The earl for his part knew so well how to
flatter with them of Groaning, who by reason of the countrouersie they had with
the territories therabouts, were so blinded, as Jacob Hillebrand, bourgomaster,
who was chief commander of the kings chamber in Groaning, and the chief man
in the town, and he on whom they of the Religion did chiefly rely, the
evening before the town revolted to the king, supped with him, and told him
very plainly of the report that men made of him, saying, That he hoped he had
no such bad intent being armed at all points, he rode out of his house, with
all his adherents (every man having 1580
hand, he said, Stand aside, stand aside, good bourgers, this day am I right
governor of this town, let us now accomplish and effect that which is
requisite for the kings service, and our own defense, and therewith caused
diverse trumpets and drums to be sounded, and a great noise to be made. The
aforesaid bourgomaster Hillebrand putting himself presently into arms, with
some of the reformed Religion, marched thither, saying unto him, How now sir?
is this done as a good governor ought to do unto the people? but one of the
earl of Renenberghs boys shot at him, and slew him presently: whereupon the
rest began to fly, whereof some were taken prisoners, and some fled into their
houses; but there was no more killed, but only a bourgers son of Breame.
After that, they ran through the streets, shooting at all that looked

The earl having in this sort gotten Groaning into his hands, presently changed
the magistrates, and caused their reconciliation with the king and the prince of
Parma to be proclaimed, and the townsmen to swear, to be true unto the king,
writing unto the territories therabouts, to move them to join with him, with
commandment, to arm themselves to withstand the mutinous regiment of Bartel
Entens, and others. But the joy and triumph made by the earl Cornput the same
morning having intelligence thereof, by certain that fled out of the town,
presently caused Olthofs company of Dam, and the companies of Suyetlaren, of
Vliet, Schaghen, and Weda, to march toward Groaning, that if peradventure
Groaning besieged by the states.
those that were affected unto the Estates within the town, could find any
means to relieve themselves, they might be ready to assist them; who got good
booty in the cloister of Essen, for that Aelkin Ousta (who had married the
earl of Renenberghs aunts daughter) and Asin Entes that lay at Vries, the same
evening were come to the cloister of Essen: and for that Cornput feared least
they of Groaning should kill their prisoners, he wrote, that if they did so, he
would revenge it upon their friends and adherents. At the same time the earls
letters were intercepted, Sonoy) they of Campen received Hans Pluyms company
into the town.

The townsmen of Deuenter likewise rose up in arms, and brake down the
Images and Images broken and thrown down in Frise land and Oueryssell,
the cloisters, in despite of the Spanish faction. The like did they of Swool,
as also of Vtrecht and other places round about, a month before. They of
Friseland, and the territories, and those of Drenth brake down the Images in
every place, and sold their cloister lands and goods,

The smaller towns, as Oldenzeel, Steenwicke, Hasselt, and others, still held
with the earl of Renenbergh, although they made show to be for the Estates.
But the prince of Orange lying in Campen, sought by all the means he could to
keep those of Oueryssel in obedience, willing Sonoy, with Cornputs and
Wynegards companies, to go to Coeuoorden, to keep the passage that way, and
also by Wedden, that they of Groaning might have no aid. Sonoy forthwith
fortified Coeuoorden, wherein he used an enginor of Alcmar, and enclosed it
with seven bulwarks, letting the castle (that was begun by Cornput) lie as he
found it, in regard, that the country would not endure to have any more
castles: but not long after the malcontents

This work begun by Sonoy (for want of money) was afterward neglected, as also
the new fortification, with the five bulwarks, made in the middle of
Boertange, whereby the country not long after endured much spoil and great
trouble.

At the same time the prince of Orange sent the earl of Hohenlo once more
against the 1580
tenth of April took the town of Oldenzeel upon condition, and from thence
went to Linghen, but did little there. Mean time Bartel Entens had besieged
Groaning with thirteen companies of foot, and two cornets of horsemen, which
before were of the earl of Rennenberghs regiment, and every day insconced
himself nearer to the town, making a dam in Reediepe, and certain bridges
over the other waters, whereby he thought in short time to famish them out,
where many skirmishes were given on both sides. They of Groaning having raised
certain companies of their townes-men, fortified the suburbs and two
myll-hils without the town, by which means every day they drove their cattle
to pasture in the meddowes. But for that there was little done in that siege,
which Bartel Entens was told of, and in regard of a certain controversy
between him and those of Duwsum, in the territories of Groaning, Christopher
van Iselstein his soldiers, and nine companies of the regiment belonging to
William Lodowic, earl of Nassau, son to John earl of Nassau, as then made a
colonel, which disliked Bartel Entens, in regard that he thought to have had
all the honor, thanks, and profit unto himself, but it fell out otherwise: for
that upon the seven and twentieth of May, being at Rolde with the earls of
Hohenlo and Nassau, where he had drunk and made good cheer, he rode with a
drunken head unto the camp before Groaning, saying, That he would do
something, that men might speak of him: and when he came thither, and found
the captains consulting together about some enterprise to be done, he checked
them as if they had been boys, and bad them follow The death of Bartel Entens,
with a brief description of his life.
His father likewise long before was stabbed by one of Wigbols men of Duwsum.
He had been a student in Groaning, and commonly went apparrelled in white, and
there had consumed vander Mark to take the Bryel, where he was his lieutenant
colonel, and after that went with certain companies to besiege Ter-Goes in
Zeeland, where (for want of experience, and before he saw the enemy) he fled
shamefully away, as soon as he heard that Mont-Dragon had passed through the
water, to aid them of Ter-Goes. After that, when Harlem was besieged by Dom
Frederic, son to the duke of Alua, he and the earl vander Marcke, with two
companies of foot and some horsemen marched against the enemy, without any
order, forgetting to take the rest of his companies with him, where he was
overthrown, but vander Marcke to be so insolent, as he began to make no
account of any superiors, the Estates committed him to prison in Delft. But the
said earl vander Marcke seeking to carry him forcibly out of the town, he was
likewise taken and committed, where they remained prisoners a whole year
after, and there Bartel Entens spent all the money he had gotten, unprofitably.
After that, being released in anno 1576, he once again went to sea, by
consent of the Estates, and did a certain enterprise upon Oostmahorn, where
(in the beginning of May) he made a sconce: but for that his mind was more upon
covetousness than any other thing, upon the eighteenth of July Monsieur Billy
drove him from thence. After that the pacification of Gant being made, and that
Monsieur Iselstein had committed 2 or 3 Vlfkins; which being discharged within
3 months, Bartel Entens ran away with their pay: for which cause he had like to
have bin taken prisoner (with the consent of the prince of Ora^ge) by the
Markgraue of Antuerp; but having intelligence thereof, he escaped.

Not long after that, he help himself, by means of the controversy between
the town 1580
he was by them taken and committed to prison, where he lay a whole year, but
after that, he was again entertained into service, and so remained (as I said
before) until his dying day. He was a man much given to drink, women, and
playing at tables, setting fifteen hundred gulderns upon a game with the lord
of Koutsbach. He made no account of any Religion, and yet his conscience
accused him of his bad life, and especially for the drowning of diverse
merchants, which in his time he had thrown ouer-boord, whereof he was wont to
tell, that once a dead body swam a great while after his ship, wheresoever it
went. At the last, he began to leave off his great drunkenness, and to look
more after getting of money, both from the pesants, and every man else, in such
sort, as he left great sums of money behind him, and yet

The earl of Rennenbergh and they of Groaning were exceeding glad of Bartel
Entens death, and yet sorry, because the war by that means should be
conducted by wiser colonels; Escheda was by provision made his lieutenant
colonel. At the last, they of Groaning were driven out of two sconces, and yet
although they heard bad news, That Mechelen, Willebrooke, and other places
were taken from the prince of Parma, and also that the succors promised them
by the said prince, and had been gathered about Carpen, were ouerthrown, and
that they saw more men and ordnance brought before the town, and all things
dear within the same, yet they would not hear of any composition: for that
receiving letters daily, they were promised by the prince of Parma to be
relieved. The territories thereabouts were very importunately desirous to take
Groaning, to that end raising great taxes amongst the pesants, and seizing upon
the cloister goods, which for the bigness of the country are in greater
Sonoys means they begun to fortify, making a great new haven thereunto; but
they let Staueren, Sloten, Docom, and other places remain as they were. These
three territories notwithstanding could not resolve upon the fortifying and
repayring of the passages of Coeuoorden and Boertange, whereon most of their
defense consisted, to keep the enemy out of the country. But what means
soever Sonoy, Corneput, and others used, still either the one or the other of
the said provinces drew backward, without any resolution, although they daily
heard of

As soon as the prince of Parma had news of the earl of Rennenberghs
proceedings in Groaning, he caused a great troop of soldiers to be gathered
together about Carpen, who having lain long there, and much burdened the
country, and thought with certain horsemen to pass by Nuys over the Rhin,
they were by Philip, lord of Hohensapen, Iselsteen, and Hegeman, with certain
horsemen, set upon and slain, and those that escaped, driven back again
beyond Nuys, where the gentlemen of Bercke and Marcke likewise stopped their
passage. After that, for that they overrun and wasted the territories of
Cologne, and would pay nothing for that they took, and for that the Elector
had given them warning

After that, in June, the said troops were once again renewed, and by the
diligence and Bucho Aytha, provost of S. Baefs, there were fourteen companies
of Dutch footmen 1580
assembled together at Ghenet, and by him named the Friseland regiment: whereof
Billy Martin Schencks forces sent to relieve Groaning
was colonel, and in his absence Martin Schenck, that joined his horsemen unto
them, as also old captain Thomas (a Grecian, or Albanoys horseman, much spoken
of, for that he had been at the winning of six battles) with three other
Albanoys launciers, and a cornet of Carabins, being in all about three thousand
foot, and six hundred horsemen. All these went over the Rhin, with a months
pay, but without any ordnance, and made great marches toward Linghen.

The states of Friseland willed the earl of Hohenlo to march against Martin
Schenck, and to that end assembled their soldiers about Boccholt, and caused
some of earl William of Nassaus regiment Sonoy, to aid and counsel him in the
siege, little esteeming Schencks forces. The earl of Hohenlo would gladly have
had more footmen, and to that end wrote unto the camp before Groaning for more:
But they of Entens regiment were unwilling, and those that were sent came too
late. And so upon the sixteenth of June he went to Vtsen, and that night to
Coeuoorden, with full resolution to set upon the enemy. But for that they of
Swool would take in no garrison, the bourgers that were addicted to the
Spaniards, against Schencks coming, had drawn certain of the peasants of
their faction, into the town, and having armed them, certified Schenck
thereof: but those of the reformed religion, and such as Uproar in Swool.
were addicted to the Estates, being led by captain Vlger and others, presently
insconced themselves Michaels church, the Lamper gate, and the red tower,
sending likewise for help to Campen and Deuenter. And although the messeng^rs
which they sent were cruelly murdered, and some cut in pieces by the peasants,
yet upon the sixteenth of June in the morning, there came some of the garrison
of Campen, and about two companies of the bourgers of Deuenter, into Swool:
whereupon diverse of those of the Spanish faction were in great fear, and fled,
whose houses were presently ransackt. And not long after there was a company
sent thither out of Holland.

The villages and places of Wastenbrook, by reason of their faction and holding
against the States, were for the most part burnt down, whereas they of
Ouerissell also burnt the castle of Geelmuyden, which the emperor Charles the
fifth had caused the keeper of the castle of

The enterprise in Swool failing, Schenck kept still by Herdenbergh, and the
earl of Hohenlo departing from Coeuoorden, marched toward him, wholly against
some men's opinions, that dissuaded him from fighting, giving him counsel only
to cut off his passage from having any provision, and so force him to retire,
and that it was to be hoped, that for want of victuals, money, and by mutiny,
they must of force depart from thence: as also that the aduenturing of a
battle was dangerous for him, in regard that he was too weak of footmen,
and had but a few pikes, so that he was wholly unprepared for a battle: But
others provoked him thereunto, especially his horsemen, which caused him in
great have to set forward, in the hot time of the day, and to pass over a dry
heath, where they could find no water, so that John van Duyuenuoord, a strong
young gentleman: whereas Schencks soldiers had rested themselves in the shadow
three hours together, and eaten well, and had fourteen barrels of beer
spare.

But as soon as the earl of Hohenlo came thither, presently without long
stay, he placed his men in order of battle, having with him Sedenesca his
own Ensign bearer, with his company that came out of Oldenzeel, and
Iselsteen with seven of his, and six of the earl of Nassaus companies, led by
lieutenant Kunigam; Wingardens company, and an hundred men of Cornputs
company he placed on the right hand, which stood Southwestward, and with them
the earl of Nassaus companies, and Iselsteen with Sedenesca on the left side,
hard by a field Wingarden would willingly have had the earl to have taken the
village of Herdenbergh, or the field, for their advantage, and to have stayed a
while to rest themselves; but his counsel would not be heard. All those
footmen were not full eighteen hundred men. Before those two battles were
placed three cornets of shot, belonging to Eustaes, Rinswouden, and Asin
Entens, all well appointed. On the other side stood the Holstein, 1580
Adelsdorf, Rampt, Transwits, Pier, and others, and Huybert van Kemen, with
three hundred horse, that had promised the Estates twelve hundred horse, so as
they were not above foureteen hundred horse. The village of Herdenbergh, which
was not far from them, lay but a mile from Coeuoorden, and four miles from
Swool, upon the river called the Vecht. The battails being both placed in
order, it was then about noone day, so as Schenck standing toward the
Southwest, had the sun at his back: and the earl of Hohenlo coming
Eastward, the sun in his face, the wind being still and very calm. When the
earl had prayed, the soldiers casting up their hats, signs being given, and
the ordnance shot off, the three companies of the earl of Hohenloes Friseland
horsemen, rod forth, against two cornets of Schencks Albanoys A battle
between the earl of Hohenlo, and Mar, Schenck.
Schencks footmen began to give back: so as it seemed as then that the earl
of Hohenlo should have had the victory, but as the Friseland horsemen began to
place themselves in order again, ready to give a new charge, and that another
company of Schencks lanciers, and some good harguebusiers, set forward toward
the earls footmen, who had no hope of any assistance to be given them by
their pikes, because they had so few, they gave back toward the field, whereas
some of them yet were, but all the rest fled away like a sudden flash of
lightning, through the midst of the trees, and which way they could over the
moore to Coeuoorden. The horsemen seeing this, were as ready to fly as the
footmen, Schencks men following them: Captain Wingarden staid fighting Niuelt
the Ensign bearer, with diverse other commanders, gentlemen and soldiers.
Captain Niuelt, Renoy, and some lieutenants, with others, were taken
prisoners. Pompeius Vlskins thinking to fly away in a wagon, was pulled back,
and slain. Schenck got all the ordnance, and a little baggage, the greatest
part being left at Coeuoorden. The earl of Hohenlo went to Oldenzeel, to
secure that: the horsemen and footmen got most to Coeuoorden, which was not
above an hours march from thence, and brought both footmen and horsemen
prisoners with them. Captain Cornput who was left in Coeuoorden with 50 men,
stood at the turnepike, and would not suffer the horsemen to enter, unless
they would first swear to stay there by him, and help to keep the passage:
but having gotten in they kept not their words, but road out again at the
other turnepike, toward the Drenth: They were Cornput and Stensel of Namslo
persuading them to stay all together at Coeuoorden, and there once again to
gather a new head, saying, That they would presently send for the fourteen
companies that lay before Groaning, but many were of contrary opinion, because
the place was not strong, and that the advantage of the rivers was then
nothing, by reason of the drouth, whereby men might pass clean over them: as
also that they had no necessary provision, nor any biscuit: and for that cause
they determined to leave the place, which they did about midnight, and Cornput
also with them, and went most to Oldenzeel, to the earl of Hohenlo. Schenck
Schenck was in Coeuoorden, they could not be persuaded, neither by the earl of
Nassau, nor by Sonoy, to stay any longer there, but presently they set their
sconces on fire, and went into diverse places to lie in garrison, as to Doccum
and Collum, The siege before Groaning abandoned.
and some into Steenwick: and the walls of Oxlagh being newly repaired, Sonoy
put companies into it. This place lay about half an hours march from Nieuzeel
toward the sea, upon Wigholdt van Encosum, lord of Nieuoort, that had his salt
kettles there, and was by him in the time of the lord of Billy, made strong
against the water Gueux, but in the earl of Renenberghes government it was
again cast down, as many others likewise were.

This victory thus won, Schenck stayed not, but went to Groaning, where he was
received 1580
the 7 of July he and the earl of Renenbergh went to Delfziel, which they
presently insconced, and took in the mouth of the haven, where the old castle
once stood, for that Bartel Entens had made the fortification inwards, clean
contrary to all other men's opinions; otherwise the walls were indifferent
strong, being high and thick, with 4 bulwarks, but no casamates: the ditch was
about 110 foot wide. The soldiers that lay in it, were three companies that
had bin of the earl of Renenberghes regiment, whereof many were yet addicted
unto him: which being besieged, the earl of Renenbergh went with the rest of
the forces to besiege Oxlagh, before it was provided of victuals, and other
munition: Which to prevent the Estates sent the companies of Rinswouden and
Escheda thither: but Rinswouden was incountred by the earl of Renenbergh
Escheda retired back again. Not long after that, Oxlagh was yielded unto the
earl of Renenbergh, and the 5 companies of soldiers that were therein, went
out upon certain conditions. From thence he went to Collum, and thought to get
Doccum, in regard that it lay open, for that, since John Golstein Drossart of
Gueldre, in an. 1523, gave it up unto the lord of Wassenare, and George
Schenck, the walls and the castle were broken down, and laid open, and never
since fortified, it being nevertheless a place of great importance, and a
frontier sea town. Thither the earl of Hohenlo went, and caused it to be
insconced, and gathered a great troup of soldiers together, at which time also
he caused Oostemahorn, a mile from Doccum, to be fortified. The Diep right over
against Collum he defended by the peasants, which done he insconced Doccumsiel.
Ens Drossart of Coeuoorden with two companies of soldiers, and diverse peasants
went to Meppel, and made it strong, and repaired the walls of Kinckhoorst,
lying hard by the town, which in ann. 1536, being yielded up by Mager Hein,
were broken down: but they of Campen overthrew those two companies, and took
Meppel and Kinckhoorst from them again.

Mean time they of Delfziel were so hardly besieged, and the haven so well
enclosed, as not any man could pass neither out nor in, and yet the Hollanders
sent at least 50 ships of war, with the admiral Duyuenuoord, into the river
of Ems, to keep the enemy from victuals that might be brought them from
Embden: and the earl of Hohenlo did all he could to relieve them, but he was
not strong enough, for that his men were not al assembled together: he wrote
Delfziel yielded up to the prince of Parma.
conditions, going forth with white wands in their hands, without any arms,
leaving the captain and chief commander prisoner, and yet had bin but three
weeks besieged, and had good store of butter and cheese. In the mean time the
earl of Hohenlo coming from Delfziel, went to Doccum again, where he left
the earl of Renenbergh, and besieged Oxlagh again, which not long after
yielded unto him, and Monickerziel also, which the earl of Renenbergh had
insconced. About that time, in hope to relieve Delfziel, the States sent Sir
John Norris into Friseland, with ten companies of English, and diverse
commanders, as captain Morgan, Cotton, Bishop, Fitzwilliams, Chatterton, Dale,
and others, and one company of horsemen, and Michael Caulier, with six
companies of Wallons, under John Petin, Grenu, Noir, Jasper, Cressomiere, and a
company of Dutch horsemen, al which companies joined with the earl of Hohenlo
at Noordhorn: There were likewise 4 companies more coming unto him, but they
were met by the earl of Renenberghes horsemen, and overthrown, but two of the
companies with their colors were presently again relieved by the English.
With them also joined Iselstein, and the earl of Nassau, with either of them
ten companies, so that the earl of Hohenlo being very strong with those
companies, he went toward Groaning, and drove the earl of Renenberghs
soldiers out of their strong sconce of Ponterbrugge, and so kept the passage
of Hornedeip, where Renenbergh lay very strong with his soldiers, and could
easily have let the said passage. close under the walls of Groaning, there to
defend himself, perceiving that the States had 1580
and munition behind him. The next day the earl of Hohenlo went close to the
ditches of Groaning, where they of the town discharged their ordnance at him,
and there was a hot skirmish, where Sir John Norris behaved himself valiantly;
and there the enemy lost 70 men. At which time they took counsel whether they
should besiege Groaning again, but after they had well considered thereof, they
found it not convenient, and so upon the tenth of August, they went and lay at
Zuyet, and North-Laren, and ^conced the way to Pontenbrugge, where Cornput
began to fortify the great castle of Weerdenbras again, which was built by
Edsard earl of Embden, as general for George duke of Saxony, in anno 1505,
to stop the passage that no corn might be carried through Drenth to Groaning,
and after that was thrown Euerwin earl of Benthem, lieutenant to the same
duke in anno 1516. The earl of Hohenlo went to Coeuoorden, whereas Iselstein
with six companies took it: and about evening when it was late, the earls of
Hohenlo and Nassau past over the town bridge, to the bulwarks of the castle,
from whence William Lodowick, earl of Nassau was hit with a faulcon shot, on
the left leg hard by the knee, for which cause they were forced to carry him
in a coach to Swool, where he was cured of that wound. At the same time also
was slain the Ensign bearer Quaet, being that day newly released from
imprisonment in Groaning, upon payment of his ransom.

The next day the earl of Hohenlo sommoned them to yield up the castle of
Coeuoorden, and they within, being 150 soldiers, after counsel taken,
although they had bestowed Coeoorden taken by the earl of Hohenlo.
Blomart van Breda, that once led Montdragon through the water to relieve
Tergoes, and two commanders more were taken prisoners there. From thence the
earl of Hohenlo sent some of his soldiers into diverse garrisons, and went
himself to besiege Linghen, and there left the English regiment to lie before
it, and with the rest of his forces went to Weeden, and for that the castle
would not presently yield, he left certain forces to besiege it, with two
pieces of ordnance; and went from thence to Slochteren, having great desire to
get Delfziel again, which he sought to effect by all the means he could: but
the dividing of his forces, and the taking of too many things in hand at one
time, was the means to

The earl of Renenbergh hearing that he was gone to Coeuoorden, marched again
with Oxlagh taken by the earl of Renenbergh, and broken down.
all his forces, and some ordnance, to Oxlagh, which place was well fortified
and furnished with all things necessary: but the garrison being a company of
new soldiers, upon the first of September, for want of experience yielded it
up, with safeguard of lives and goods; and so issued with their rapiers only,
about two weeks after they had been besieged, and but once shot at, contrary
to the opinion of the earl of Hohenlo, and diverse others: which being taken
the earl of Renenbergh brake down the walls thereof, and so in all have went
to Slochteren, where in a morning betimes he suddenly set upon the regiments
of the earl of Nassau, and Michiel with his light horsemen, where colonel
Michiel had like to have been taken prisoner, but Renenberghes whole forces
came together, he was forced to retire, and being pursued by Renenberghes
launciers, many of The earl of Hohenloes forces overthrown by Weeden.
them were slain, and the eight companies of footmen, and a cornet of horse,
with the ordnance that lay before Weeden were all taken, and great store of
their arms lost, and thrown away. Mean time the earl of Renenbergh having
left the new companies of the Drossart Ens, and Blanckenuoort in the abbey of
great Auwart, they did ouer-run all the country thereabouts, and went toward
Collum, the which cloister they took upon the 8 of September, and

The earl of Reuenbergh went presently to Coeuoorden, which being not
fortified, upon the 20 of September, after that they had begun to dig through
the water, was yielded unto 1580
companies of the lord of Sneeten, and Fisher of Amsterdam, both being about
two hundred men, Coeuoorden taken again by the earl (...) Reuenbergh, and
after that Oldenzeel.
and the horsemen of Elleborn, lieutenant to captain Goor, their governor
being the lord of Eck, a young gentleman of the East country. This town of
Oldenzeel is a reasonable pretty town, lying five small miles from Coeuoorden,
and six miles from Deuenter, in the Eastland way, it has no river, but a great
high stone wall with towers, after the old manner, with a ditch, and without that
an earthen wall, and another ditch, whereby it should seem to be very strong,
and yet it has no bridge, all the water in the ditches being kept in by
dammes, by which means it may well be let out, and has no bulwarks at all on
Benthen side (from whence it lies but two miles and a half) it has on the
one side a hall full of bushes, and on the other Petin, lieutenant colonel to
Michael Caulier, and captain Cressomiere, that thought to have entered therein,
and both were taken Villers, brother to the lord of Hautain, having in former
time been governor of Nyuelle in Brabant, where (as we have said) he had
carried himself valiantly, was then governor of Bouchain. The male contents,
among the which one of their co^manders was the baron of Selles, brother to the
lord of Noircarmes, who treated with a lieutenant of a company of the town,
called Grosbedon, whom he thought he had won at his devotion, to deliver the
said town to the king of Spain: whereof the seignior of Villers being well
informed by this lieutenant, suffered him to treat, and to manage Meurant
their patron, presented themselves at the port, which they found open. The
governor Villers, to the end the undertakers might be assured of their
enterprise, had the day before sent forth his horsemen as it were by chance:
whereof the malcontents being advertised, were the more assured. In the mean
time they of the town had prepared a banquet, to feast them at their entry:
After they had suffered as many to enter as they thought good, and as their
forces would bear, the which they might easily defeat: the which being entered
to the number of five or six hundred, with the baron de la Noue, and some other
prisoners of mean quality, which the king refused: wherein the Estates made
show of their love and affection to strangers that came voluntarily to serve
them: and on the other side, the king his ingratitude to such great personages,
1580


The earl of Egmont in like sort for despite and hearts grief, that the king
would not exchange him for la Noue, grew distracted of his wits, and during his
frenzy, he so hurt the baron The earl of ^mont di^ed.
of Selles his fellow prisoner in the throat, as he died thereof: so as to
bring him again to his right senses, and to comfort him, at the suit of the
lady Francis of Egmont, his sister, he was transported into Holland, where he
was well entreated, until the king should free him from his imprisonment, the
which made him recover his senses, which before were much troubled. In the end
he was set free in the year 1584, for the said seignior of la Noue, yet upon

This kind of rigorous proceeding in the exchange of such prisoners, gave great
occasion to the nobility of the Netherlands, the kings subjects, to murmr at
his ingratitude, and of the esteem which he made of them, and of their lives,
which they so willingly exposed for his service.

The malcontents having received this affront and loss at Bouchain, to be
revenged thereof they went in August following to besiege it, and did batter it
with such fury, as the Pouchain yielded by composition.


The Estates knowing their own forces by sea, and upon the rivers, and what
the Spaniards were at land, they resolved by means of their ships of war to
hinder the passage and distribution of victuals, and munition, by the rivers of
Rhin and Meuse: Wherefore they sent their ships well appointed and manned,
every one carrying eight, ten, or twelve great pieces of brass, besides the
less, and having his pinasse: wherewith they held the same rivers subject, and
cut off the passage, both for men and victuals, that were appointed for the
country of Groningue. The which did much trouble the princes of the Rhin, who
also manned out certain ships of war, to chase away those of the States: But
for that they would not incense these

Macklin being revolted from the States, and having committed many
insolences, this Macklin taken by the St^tes.
year they sent the Englishmen that were in Liere toward Macklyn, with their
colonel Sir John Norris, a valiant gentleman, and with these Englishmen (the
which would not leave Liere without their pay) the Estates sent Oliver vanden
Temple, governor of Brussels, with his garrison, and that of Viluoord, and
Charles of Lieuin, lord of Famars, with his cornet of horse. These troops came
upon the ninth of April in the morning, before the town, where the Englishmen
giving an alarm on the one side, in the mean time monsieur de Temples
soldiers, Peter Wolf, a mutinous friar (who had before drawn them from the
States) was one, who being well armed fought with a halberd Rossignol, and
Boeskerke the scout, with certain Albanoys, 1580
got out at the gates as soon as the town was taken, where there was about an
hundred soldiers, but most bourgers slain. They began to ransacke the town,
notwithstanding that the bourgers had made a composition with the English (who
were the greatest number, being eight hundred strong) to give them certain
months pay: but that condition was not performed. And although the general
(for that the sack had continued certain days) would gladly have taken some
order therein, yet he could by no means do it. This town was so miserably
sacked and spoiled, as no town in all the Netherlands had suffered the like
during all the civil wars: for that the English men (who had no measure in
their doings) spoiled the churches and religious houses, without any pity and
compassion; for the which the rest of the

After that, the chief commanders, as monsieur Timpel, and the lord of Famars
(then made governor) fell out with colonel Norris, and would gladly after the
sack have gotten the English men out of the town, but they being the
strongest, had gotten the keys into their hands, and for a months space did
what they would putting the bourgers to ransom, and still spoiling their
houses, sparing not the bells nor the great dyall, which was many times
forbidden to be touched: they took likewise the stones that lay upon the dead,
and carried many hundreds of them into England by ship. At the last the Estates
having great occasion to use soldiers (for that it was generally thought that
for want of those soldiers la Noue had bin overthrown and taken by
Inglemunster) they persuaded Sir John Norris to leave Macklin, Timpel, that
(although they were strangers there) he would not march out first: for which
cause they were forced to set some bourgers of Antuerpe, and of the town, in
the market place, and else where, to guard it until that at the sound of a
bell they both went out at several ports, the which was not without some
trouble; which happened by misunderstanding, by reason of the commanders high
minds, which was the cause that the Englishmen with much hurt and loss were
driven out of the town the sixth of May. Monsieur de Famars was left there for
governor, who sought by all the means that he could to restore the town of
Macklin to his former estate, and to repeople it again.

Henry of Bourbon, prince of Conde, having with great difficulty retired
himself out of Imbise, Roses company at the guard: but by reason of the
continual rain all that night, the footmen could not advance so fast, but the
day begun to approach. The seigniour of la Motte lighted from his horse, and
going over the ditch came to the foot of the rampar, and approaching near the
rauelin, he tried to pull down the pallisadoe, and to make passage for

A poor country man being without, came to give an alarm to the town, but
la Motte slew him presently, wherewith being discovered, he was shot with a
harguebuse in the arm. Then the alarm growing very hot, all the six
companies of the colonel Mortague, 1580
whence a canon was discharged through a squadron of the marquesses horse
joining unto a mill: who seeing that for want of footmen he could not do any
thing, retired. And soon after his footmen arrived so weary and wet, as they
could have no great courage to fight. The marquis in his retreat (cursing his
misfortune) burnt all where he past in the territories of Gant.

I wonder at some writers, both Flemish and French, which say, That the marquis
was entered a good way into the town: the which is false, for if it had been
so, he would have kept us (for I John Petit.
was there at that time) holding that great place which they call Eckerghem,
from coming near the rampar, and his horsemen might have given his footmen
leisure enough to have entered in like manner. We must notwithstanding confess
the truth, that without Rose, called Chastelet, for the bad order which was at
the guard, was put in prison, and grievously tortured, yet there was no treason
found in him, but very great negligence.

After the retreat of the marquis, the prince of Conde parted the same day to
go unto Antuerpe, being conuoyed by the cornet of the seigniour of Rihouen,
and the voluntaries of Gant: but he was not half a league out of the town,
when as there was a false alarm given, which made him return back unto the
town, least they should say he had led away their horsemen: but hearing that
it was nothing, he continued his journey to Antuerpe,

Monsieur de la Noue being general of the Estates forces in Flanders, had
gathered a small army together, and staying for the Englishmen that came out
of Macklyn to join with him, in Inglemunster besieged by la Noue.
the month of May he besieged Inglemunster, which is a small castle, which the
malcontents had taken, lying upon a river called Mander: where having planted
his siege, and given charge to batter the same, leaving the lord of Marquette
to command in his place, he was put in mind of an enterprise to be done
against Ryssel, which he resolved to attempt, and for that Marquis de
Richeborgh, or Ronbay, with fifteen cornets of Albanoys horsemen, and certain
footmen, made toward him, he retired back again to his camp before
Inglemunster: and being on the other side of the river of Leye, he was forced
to go somewhat further downward, whereas the Mander falls into the Leye,
and that night lodged in a village called Wackene, the burgraue of Gant still
following him: and while la Noue passed the Leye at Cortricke, he took a new
way to Inglemunster, which la Noue perceiving, he made all the have he could
to join with his camp, but by reason that his men were weary, he was forced
to stay all night at Wackene, which was two miles from Inglemunster, where his
campelay: yet fearing least the enemy (having de la Noue notwithstanding would
have done.

The burgraue of Gant knowing that the Estates forces lay that night at
Wackene, made toward the camp which lay before Inglemunster, with all his
troops, and fell upon them. La Noue perceiving that, and having sent for his
men to come from Wackene with all speed, defended himself as well as he
could, although he had not above five or six hundred men, gave back. Certain
French companies, that had not above ten or twelve men in a company 1580
defended themselves in such sort, as they escaped without any hurt, the rest
were all slain and spoiled. La Noue himself, thinking it a shame to abandon
the artillery, and being yet in good hope that it would be better when the
rest of his men came (which he still attended) Monsieur la Noue taken prisoner
before Inglemunster.
from Wackene, fought valiantly, and did what was possible for him to do,
until that he was furiously charged, and taken prisoner, having sent his
son Tiligny to hasten his men forwards, by the which means he, with the
most part of the horse and footmen escaped. The lord of Marquette was likewise
taken, to whom the greatest blame of that overthrow was imputed, because he
caused not the bridge to be broken down, as he was commanded, but trusted
unto others. He lay long after prisoner in Henault, till at the last, after
certain

Monsieur de la Noue being the burgraue of Gants prisoner, prince de Espinoy
brother to the margraue, wrote from Dornicke in his behalf unto those of
Flanders, who upon the eleventh of May wrote their letters unto the burgraue, to
entreat him to use la Noue well, who by his letters from Cortricke the twelfth
of May, promised no less; and yet notwithstanding he gave him unto the king,
at which time the regiments of Hesse, Egmont, and Capres, mutined, and would
have had the earl of Egmont discharged for la Noue: for which action the
burgraue was much blamed, as knowing well that he should not be set at
liberty for any ransom or exchange whatsoever, during the wares, besides the
want of so brave a soldier, whereof the Estates had great need, and yet he
was allied to the burgraue, who had la Noues steward, who being brought before
him, he stabbed him with his own hands, when as all the fury was past, which
an Albanoys soldier refused to do, commanding his men to do the like to all
the rest.

The ordnance, munition, and eighteen Ensigns (whereof most of the men were
as then absent) were all taken, wherewith he rod triumphantly into Cortricke,
and with him monsieur la Noue his prisoner, whom he sent to Berghen in
Henault, unto the prince of Parma. The number that were slain was not great,
so as the Estates had more miss of such a captain,

About this time William van Horn, baron de Hesse, son to William lord of
Gaesboeeke, of the house of Horn, brother to the earl of Vtkercken, practiced
in the behalf of the Estates, and the duke of Aniou (with whom the States were
in a manner agreed) to reduce certain places under the Estates command, or
else to do them some other service. With whom consented also Iong Warrous lord
of Thian, governor of Cassel, who likewise thought to deliver Cassel unto the
Estates: but their practices were discovered, and Thian flying escaped de
Montigny taken The lord of Hesse belieaded.
prisoner, and not long after, his process being made, by command from the
prince of Parma (who by that means knew how to set the noblemen of the
Netherlands together by the ears) was beheaded at Quesnoy in Henault, upon the
eight of November, being a lusty young gentleman, but wavering and
inconstantly minded. The lord of Haussy likewise of the same conspiracy,
being sommoned to appear, was forced to fly, and came to his house at
Liedekerke by Brussels, which he delivered into the hands of the Estates: but
afterward by means of his wife, being found wavering and inconstant, and much
suspected by the Estates, he was by them committed to prison, yet by means of
Oliver vanden Temple, governor of Brussels (who had married the lady of
Weerdenborgh, his wives sister) he was released

The eight of June in the morning, the garrisons of Herentales, Brussels, and
Macklyn, with their captains, and colonel la Guard, with a Spanish captain
called Alonso, secretly and suddenly climed over the walls of Die, upon the
marsh side; and being gotten up slew the 1580
faithfully) with the horsemen. Within were two companies of Wallons, that made
great resistance, but three companies of Dutch men (among the which one was a
company of the Die won by the States, with Sichem and Arschot.
earl of Lodrons regiment, that had served at least fourteen years in the
country) which valiantly resisted, and diverse times caused their enemies to
retire; but at the last they were most of them slain, in the same place where
they fought, without once retiring a foot, fighting to the last man, which is
not often seen. On the Estates sides also there were certain captains
slain, and many men hurt. Sichem and Arschot were likewise taken by the
Estates: Halen was for saken by the enemy, but perceiving that the Estates
proceeded no further, they returned thither again.

The like enterprise the malcontents of Henault (not long before) purposed
against Brussels, thinking to take it upon Saint John Baptists day, being
moved thereunto by a captain of the bourgers, called Otto de Barker, Jacques
le Court, a proctor, who had dealt with the earl of Lalaine, the baron de
Montignie, and the bourgraue of Gant, having delivered them the print of one of
the keys of the town gates, so as they came thither with good troops of
horse and foot: but the foresaid parties having made it known unto the prince
of Orange, monsieur Aldegonde, and monsieur Temple the governor, they made
great preparation for them with shot, secretly placed upon the high way, and
other places, and within the town there were diverse soldiers, secretly lodged
in the houses, not far from the said gate, monsieur de S. Aldegonde standing
ready at the portcullis to let it fall when they should think good: but for

About the same time they of Brussels, with diverse horse and footmen having
victualed Niuelle, Niuelle victualed by the States, but not long after taken by
the prince of Parma.
as they returned back again, met with certain cornets of Albanoys horsemen
(which are a kind of people, that when the Turk won Grecia, being driven from
thence, entered into

In the month of August, the duchess of Parma and Plaisance, the old regent,
mother to the prince of Parma, came into the countries of the Netherlands,
being sent thither by the king of Spain, to accomplish the treaty made with
the united provinces: or for that it was thought that her son was not
sufficient enough to take so great a charge upon him, and to govern so many
young headed noblemen, the mother was thought fitter for the place, as he
behaved himself very wisely and impartially, between the Spaniards,
Italians, and Netherlanders, 1580
procure the good will both of friends and foes, in such sort as he did the
king exceeding great service, more than all the rest of the forepassed
governors, with their Spanish cruelty and pride ever did.

I said before, That the general Estates had resolved to choose a new
sovereign prince to govern The duke of Aniou received for sovereign lord of
the Netherlands.
them, and that they found none more fit for them than Francis of Valois, duke
of Aniou, Alanzon, etc. the only brother to the French king: Whereupon the
Estates sat in consultation all Summer, and at the last, in July, they
concluded with full consent of the provinces, towns, and members of the united
provinces, to yield the country unto him upon certain conditions. Whereupon
the deputies of the provinces of Brabant, Flanders, Holland, Zeeland, Macklyn,
Friseland, and the territories associat, being assembled in Antuerpe, upon
Aldegonde, the seignior of Dohain, doctor Hessels, Francis seigniour of
Lauenborgh, Jacques Tayart, pentioner of Gant, Woel Caron, seignior of
Schoonewall, bourgmaster of the Vrie, or Franc of Bruges, and Jasper van
Vosberghen, bailife of Campeuere, to treat with the said duke: which they
effected upon the 29 of September. The articles were concluded upon at Plesis
le Towers, the contents whereof (being 27 in number) were as follows.

1 First, That the Estates of the united provinces had chosen and appointed the
duke of Aniou Articles between the Netherlands and the duke of Aniou.
for their prince and sovereign lord, with the names, dignities, and titles of
Duke, Earl, Marquis, etc. and with such sovereignty as their forepassed
princes in former times had, with

2 That his lawful issue, males, should succeed him in the said country of
the Netherlands, and that if he happened to have more than one son, the
Estates of the Netherlands should be at their liberty to choose which of them
they would have to be their sovereign lord.

3 That if his heir were under years, the Estates should appoint him a
governor, and keep

4 That he should possess and enjoy the demaines and revenues thereof upon
certain conditions, and without raising of them, unless it were by consent of
the Estates, according to their privileges, and that if they were too much
ouer-burthened, the Estates should find means to appoint a convenient
entertainment for him.

5 That the said duke should hold and maintain all their old privileges and
customs, and namely the union which was made at Vtrecht, so as it were not
prejudicial to the said

6 That he should ratify and confirm all the decrees made by the arch duke
Mathias, and Estates, as well in general as particular.

7 That the general Estates should be suffered to assemble once in a year at
the least, and at all other times when they shall think good.

8 That he should be resident in the Netherlands, unless it were upon some
great occasion, and that if he stayed long out of the country, that he
should appoint one of the natural borne Netherlanders to govern in his place,
such a one as should be pleasing to the Estates, and that with their consent.

9 That he should have a counsel of Netherlanders, such as the provinces
thereof should

10 That the principal officers in the Netherlands, should be natural borne
subjects, and others of meaner offices, as it should please him, with
condition, that the gentlemen 1580


11 When any officers were to be chosen for the government of the provinces,
and forts, and in the chief offices of the Netherlands, the said provinces
should nominat three persons unto him, whereof he should choose one.

12 That he should promise to uphold and maintain the reformed religion, and
the religious peace in the Netherlands, in such sort as it then was holden, or
as it should be ordained and appointed by the States of every particular
province, and namely in the provinces of Brabant, Guelderland, Flanders,
Vtrecht, Macklyn, Friseland, Ouerissel, and the territories of Drenth and
Twenth, without any alteration to be made by him.

13 That Holland and Zeeland should remain as they then were, touching
religion and otherwise, always provided, that touching the money, mint,
contribution, and the privileges

14 That he should not permit nor suffer any man to be molested nor troubled
for his conscience, under pretense and color of religion, receiving both the
religions under his protection.

15 That he should procure the French king to aid him and his heirs with his
forces and power, thereby to strengthen him, and the contracted provinces his
subjects, against their enemies, whether it be the king of Spain or any of his
adherents, and that the said king should

16 After that the said duke should be in possession of the Netherlands, he
should work such means, that the said provinces should be united with France,
and they to make war together, by common consent, against all those that would
invade any of the said countries: provided always, that the Netherlands should
not be incorporated with France, but still remain as they were, with their
privileges, customs, rights, contracts, and laws.

17 That for more assurance against the common enemy, and others that should
seek to contradict their said contract, as also for the upholding and
increasing of the good agreement,

18 That he should bind himself to make war, and to maintain the country
by such means, as he should have from the king his brother, and of his own
patrimony, whereunto the Estates should yearly contribute two millions, and
four hundred thousand guldernes,

19 Touching the commander general over the forces of the Netherlands, the
said duke should take order therein, by consent of the Estates, and should
appoint a general over the French forces, such as should be well thought on by
the Estates.

20 That he should not place any Frenchmen, nor other strangers in garrison in
the towns and strong places of the Netherlands, without the consent of the
provinces wherein such places should be, and touching the natural borne
subjects, he should place them by advice of the aforesaid counsel.

21 But for better and necessary relief of the soldiers, the provinces
should ordain and

22 That all foreign soldiers, both French and others, should be bound to
depart out of the country, whenever the general Estates should desire the
same of the said duke.

23 That he should make no alliance with the king of Spain, either by marriage,
or otherwise, 1580
but by advice, consent, and approbation of the said provinces, nor yet make
any other alliance or contract to the prejudice or hinderance of the
Netherlands, or this treaty.

24 Provided always, That the other disunited provinces, towns and places,
that would subject themselves unto him, and join with the contracted
Netherlands, should at all times be received and accepted into that contract.

25 And touching those that should be compelled thereunto by force, the said
duke should dispose of them, by consent of the general Estates, as it should
be thought convenient, whether they were of the disunited provinces, or others
within the said Netherlands.

26 That he and his successors should take the accustomed oath usual to be
made in every

27 Lastly, That whereas the archduke Mathias had been requested to come into
the Netherlands, and had acquitted and behaved himself in good sort, according
to his promise; the said duke and the Estates should consult together, by what
means they should satisfy and content the said archduke.

These articles were in this sort passed and signed on both parts, although
with reference, to

At which time there was certain counters made in memory thereof, on the one
side having a Lion with a collar about the neck, bound to a pillar, whereon
stood the Image of a conqueror, which collar a mouse knawed in sunder, with
this inscription, Rosis Leonem loris mus liberas, that is, The Lion being
bound, is made free by knawing of the mouse: on the other side stood the Pope
and the king of Spain, who (with promise of a holy peace) sought to put the
collar again about the Lions neck, with this inscription, Liber reuinciri Leo
pernegat, that is, The Lion being at liberty, will not be bound again. And at
Gant there were counters made, whereon there was a ring shutting with two
hands, wherein was written Iehoua, and round about it, pro Christo, Lege and
Grege, that is, for Christ, the Law, and the people: on Religione and Iusticia
reduce, vocato ex Gallia pacata duce Andegariensi, Belgicae libertatis vindice,
that is, Religion and Justice restored, the duke of Aniou being called out of
France, for the defendor or revenger of the freedom of the Netherlands.

The archduke Mathias, brother to the Emperor, governor of the Netherlands,
finding himself to be abandoned by part of the provinces, as namely the
Wallons, who had sent for him out of Germany, and were now revolted from him,
and perceiving that the peace of Cologne took no effect, as also that no
manner of aid nor assistance was procured neither from the emperor, his
brethren, kindred, nor friends, nor yet from the princes of Germany,
notwithstanding both his private and public admonitions made unto his friends
of the house of Austria, whereby the general Estates were compelled to seek
aid elsewhere, he thought it from their miseries, he said he would not
prescribe them any law or rule therein, nor yet be against 1580
yoke, and doubtful change or alteration, forgetting the Romish empire, and
other great alliances, but to consider of his noble house of Austria (and his
great love showed unto them) The archduke Mathias takes his leave of the
Estates.
whereof he was a member, praying them openly to tell him, what they pretended
touching him and his house, that he might determine thereon accordingly: saying
further unto them, That their promise (touching the charges of his government)
had not been performed. Lastly, he showed them his good will and great desire
to do them good, offering them all the service he could.

Touching this declaration, the Estates thought it convenient to give the said
archduke all good contentment, with an honorable reward, as also to pay him
that which had been promised

And for that in the mean time many and great complaints were made touching
the disorders amongst the soldiers, the archduke Mathias and the Estates set
down certain new orders Orders made by the Estates for martial discipline and
other things.
concerning better government to be observed in martial discipline.

In Antuerpe they made new orders touching the watch of the town, it being
divided into eight colonies and regiments, each colonie having under it ten
companies, besides six companies of the Guild or brotherhood of the town,
being in all 86 companies: no man was freed from that watch, but the magistrates
and other officers, and the merchants of other nations, as Easterlings,
Englishmen, and Portugals, according to their privileges; all other nations
were forced to contribute to that watch, at the discretion of the colonels, as
also the old men that were above threescore years of age. There were likewise
diverse articles (which were very necessary to be used in that watch) published
to be observed, upon pain of great punishments. They also built up diverse
guard houses, where the ordinary guard used to contitinue night and day, which
are called corpse de guard, and in every corner of the streets they corpse de
guard stood written, Excludere facilius, quam expellere: which is, It is easier
to shut out the enemy, than to drive him out. Upon the market place, Saepius
laesa patientia, that is, Our patience has been often wronged. Upon the mere
bridge, Agere aut pati, that is, Either it must be prevented, or suffered: and
upon the Oeuer, Si in bello securitas, that is, If there be security in

And touching their seafaring, for that it is one of the principallest and
profitablest commodities of the country, they made an order, That no ships
should go to sea, unless they were well provided, armed, and manned, every
one according to their burden, thereby to be freed from all danger of pirates,
and that every province and town should have their ships of war ready;
whereby they have much increased their shipping and seafaring, which the
Englishmen, 1580
that then again they sailed out of Holland, Zeeland, and Antuerpe, into
Spain and Portugal, and there traffiqued freely, using secret and discreet
dealing, so that as then it seemed, as if there had been no war between
Spain and them, but only with the Spaniards that were in the Netherlands,
being for the most part well used and entertained by the inhabitants of Spain
and Portugal, and at that time also certain Spanish ships (such as durst)
came into Zeeland, and were welcome unto them, having free liberty to sail
both out and in, but they durst not long continue, for fear of sea rouers, and
other ships of war. The cause why the Netherlanders were so much made of,
and welcomed into Spain, was, for that Spain consists much of trade of
merchandise, as well as the Netherlands, thereby to vent their

They of Zeeland at that time (in remembrance of their great care and
watchfulness to be had) caused certain counters to be made, on the one side
having their arms, which is a lion rising out of the waves of the sea, with
this inscription, Vos terra, at ego excubo Ponto 1580, that is, Watch, or take
you care for the land, for I keep watch upon the sea: On the other side stood
a man, planting of young trees, and behind him hung his hat upon a lance,
signifying freedom, with this inscription, Si non nobis, saltem posteris, If
they serve not for us, yet they shall serve for our posterity.

The merchants of the Netherlands (for the furtherance of their trade of
merchandise, which as then they used in England) according to the contracts and
intercourses made in

They of Steenwicke observing the earl of Reneberghs proceedings, after that
he had gotten Groaning wholly at his devotion, having a care of their
preservation, they sent for some of the States men, the better to defend
themselves: so as the 21 of July captain Herman Olthof entered with his
company, who used all diligence to repair the walls and rampars, and to provide

This year in October, the prince of Orange had an enterprise upon the town of
Maestricht, which he thought to surprise by scalado, but his men being come
unto the town ditch, they were discovered, and so returned as they came
without any effect.

The five and twentieth of the same month, the prince of Espinoy (governor of
Tournay) 1580
his lieutenant: but when he had taken it, having no means to furnish it with
all things necessary for a siege, knowing that the malcontents were not
far off, he presently abandoned Conde surprised.
it.

About this time the lord of Anholt, and Martin Schenck, that held the castle
of Blyenbeeke, took a ship laden full of silks, and other costly wares, that
was coming down the Rhine, and held it as good prize, which they divided
amongst the soldiers, and yet most of the goods belonged to Italians.

The earl of Renenbergh being master of the field in Friseland (as I said
before) and having besieged Swool, intending to take it, as he lay before it,
he thought good to send for his John Streuf van Emmericke: the captains were
Jacob van Brouckhorst and Batenburgh, son to Anholt, with two companies, and
Balthazar van Rossum, Boeck^holt, Ties^inghen, Wurtselman, Redenueldt, with two
other companies, that were very strong: and for that Anholt served amongst
those companies, and had revolted from those of Guelderland, captain Hegeman
issuing out of Nimmeghen took the town of Anholt for the Estates, which he
sacked, notwithstanding that it belonged to the empire.

The earl of Renenbergh being fortified by this new regiment, thought easily
to have taken Deutichum, being neither strong, nor well provided of garrison:
but finding more resistance there, than he expected, as also for that the
Englishment of Doesburgh and Michels regiment did much annoy him, he left it,
and put a garrison into Grolle, and so upon the eighteenth of October went
before Steenwicke, a weak town, and wherein there was but one company of
soldiers, being altogether unprovided of necessaries (which town concerned

This siege of Steenwicke I will particularly set down, yet as briefly as I
can, because it was a notable attempt, and is very profitable for them to read,
that are accustomed to follow the wars.

To besiege Steenwicke, the earl of Renenbergh had eight and twenty companies
of soldiers, whereof fourteen companies were of the Friseland regiment,
whose lieutenant Steenwick besieged by the earl of Renenbergh.
colonel (called Hans Mon) was slain in a skirmish, in whose place succeeded
John Baptista Taxis; nine companies of the new Guelders regiment, for that the
lord of Anholt stayed with two companies at Anholt and Bredeford; and five
companies more of the earls own

In Steenwicke lay captain Olthof with his company, captain Cornput having
charge to go thither with his company: but some of Steenwicke being of the
Spanish faction (notwithstanding this charge from their friends and allies)
would not suffer him to enter: for which cause he entered by force, being let in
by Olthof his company: but before he went in, he caused his soldiers to
swear (after certain speeches used unto them, and the better to effect the
Estates business) That none of them should once speak a word of yielding up
the town, or deal in any sort with the enemy, before that he himself first
spoke or by Plaet and Stupers lieutenant, called John van Berenbroeke, scout of
Guelders, into Steenwicke, 1580
a piece of service whereby they might get some credit, issued out on both
sides of the town, and burned down many houses that lay too near it, and got
good store of powder and munition by ship into the same.

The garrison was about six hundred men strong, besides the bourgers, that were
about three hundred, amongst the which, fifty were such as might well be
trusted: they had no governor in the town, nor almost any ordnance, neither
any horsemen, only twelve or fourteen horses belonging to the captains and
commanders, whereof they had greatest want, to assail the enemy, as it
appeared by the service they did. The governors place was supplied by all the
captains together, the bourgomaster being joined with them, who made diverse
orders,

As soon as the earl of Renenbergh had entrenched himself before the town,
and had made bridges of boats over the river of Aa, they of the town were
desirous to send presently to the Estates for to be relieved; which captain
Cornput would not consent unto, saying, That they should write only touching
the estate of the town, and the enemies camp, without speaking of any
relief, and that especially for two causes, the one, that the Estates might
conceive no bad opinion of their valor, the other, that the bourgers and
soldiers should have no doubt of themselves, and their security. This
notwithstanding, upon the three and twentieth of October they wrote a letter,
which they sent in the night time to Campen, by a bourger called Mathias Kys,
wherein they charged the Estates with slacknesse, and wrote expressly, That it
Olthof, Plaet, and Coen Dierickson, a bourger, and an old soldier, but yet
selfe-willed and intractable; the bourgomaster likewise set his hand to the
letter, and at the last they got captain Berenbrocke to sign it likewise, but
Cornput would by no means do it, saying, That it was not only a dishonorable
thing, but worthy punishment, to bewray unto the Estates their so small
experience and judgment, seeing that as then they had not any need of relief;
and that princes and lords built and made forts, and put garrisons therein, to
defend them from their enemies, and to keep the^ from doing any further hurt
in the country, and not to yield, and give the^ over at the first summons, but
to give them time with all conueniencie to assemble their forces, and so with
better means and ground of reason to work their delivery; saying, that their
improuident and Cornput wrote the contrary unto the Estates, saying, That as
yet they had no need, and that they were sufficiently provided of all things
for 6 months, and yet that they should prepare to relieve them with all
convenient speed, in regard of the impatience of the bourgers and soldiers,
more than for any other cause. For which letter the said captain Cornput was
much hated of many of the bourgers, but at the last he got Berenbrocke and
diverse others to concur and hold with him.

About this time, two of the Estates companies of John van Escheda and Roeloef
van Linghen, Aert van Gemmen, Snater, and others out of his camp, to charge
them by night, by whom (after some small resistance) they were forced, and the
fort taken, in regard that it was not very strong. There Escheda was taken
prisoner, and his ensign torn in pieces, but Rodolph van Laughen escaped with
some others, but his ensign was taken, and 1580
the village, and so left it. The ensign they brought with them to the camp,
and there drew it at a horse tail round about Steenwicke, with great triumph,
and music playing before it.

The earl of Renenberghs soldiers that lay before the town, in despite that
they within the town had burned a myll which stood without, determined by
night to burn the palisado before the Gasthouse gate, and for that cause they
made many musket shot at the centinell of the town, to force him to retire,
and so (with straw and a barrel full of Tar and brimstone, which they placed
there) they set it on fire, and so left it, without any hurt unto themselves,
only one man was slain: which they within the town perceiving, and knowing
it to be Cornputs soldiers offering himself, was let down from the wall,
who carrying a leather bucket in his mouth, swum over the ditch, and then
taking water up with the same, went easily to the fire, and pulling away the
barrel of tar, quenched the fire by often casting water upon it. Which the
enemy perceiving, shot at him as thick as A resolute exploit of a soldier.
hail, and yet (not without great wonder) none of them hit him, and although
the fire burned very bright, nevertheless he went easily to the place, calling
them villains and thieves, and said, I am Arent van Groeningen, a brewers
son: and so having performed his work, he swam over again, and when he had
gotten up on the walls, he was rewarded by captain Cornput with a handful of
dollars.

The same evening there came a high Dutch soldier to the palisado before the
wall gate,

The seven and twentieth of October, the earl of Renenbergh himself came into
the camp, with charge from the prince of Parma, not to leave the siege, before
he had taken the Cornput showed them by many reasons, that they might assure
themselves better, and with less labor, if they would first make a secret way
without the ditches, upon the counterscarpe, whereby the ditches would be so
much the wider, and all sallies and retreats thereby much furthered; as also
the breaking of the ye, if it should chance to freeze, and all assaults made
by the enemy, might thereby be hindered, with diverse other advantages: which
way being made up, they might easily make bulwarks Coen Dierickeson, upon whom
they much depended) would not hearken thereunto, but got captain Plaet with his
soldiers to join with them.

In the mean time they of Friseland sent four companies of foot, and some
horsemen into The exploit of the earl of Renenberghs men.
Iouw Botma, and the company of the town of Bolsweert. Which they hearing of,
left the place, leaving only Ferno and Steyn van Malsens companies (with
certain horsemen) to keep the place, who defended themselves as well as they
could, but they were forced, whereas John van Fer^ and his youngest brother
were slain. From thence the earls soldiers went to Sloeten, 1580
which was but slenderly fortified, for which cause the two companies that were
in it, left it, but they were pursued as far as Balck, where one of their
captains (called Martena) was taken prisoner: Peter Andreas Greitman van
Volega, with his company, lying in the Lemmer, which nevertheless was
insconced, left it, and went to Enchuysen. The earl of Renenberghes forces
being increased, went from thence to Staueren, and made the castle up again
(which they of Friseland, without any forecast, threw down, before they had
fortified the town) and built a sconce at Macklin, running every day before
Harlinghen, Franycker, and Bolswort, and forcing the pesants to pay
contribution: and although they were of opinion, to let the water ouerflow the
champian country of Friseland, it was not as then to be done, Cornput spoke
against it, saying, That the gate so filled up with earth, being battered,
would fall down, and so the enemy might the easilier climb up, and have
means to mine, and that the loope holes of the gates, were good defenses for
the town, Cornput with the other captains (to make the soldiers willing to
work) agreed, that bills should be given them, to pay them six pence a day
for their work, after the town should be relieved, but the bourgomaster
opposed himself: yet at last, being compelled by necessity, and finding that
the counterscarpes could not be missed, in regard that it was hard frozen, and
that they must be forced to break the ice, upon the seventeenth day of
November they began Cornput and Berenbroek wrote to the contrary, and willed
them not to be too hasty, but to work wisely and securely: Cornput also sent
them his ciphers, and also a means how to speak one unto another with
lanthorns and firepans, and by day with broad clothes.

The Estates to make some show of relieuing the town, sent captain Stuper
with his company to Swart Sluys, and six companies of Hegemens regiment, to
lie in a cloister by Vollenhoue called S. John's camp, which upon the
seventeenth of November were set upon by the earl of Renenberghes forces,
where, for that the cloister has no ditches (although they defended themselves
valiantly) they were slain, taken prisoners, and put to flight, where three
John van Vianen, Gedeon van Roderen, and Hans Wichmans were taken prisoners,
whereby Stuper was forced to leave Swart Sluys. These were the fruits of the
impatient letters written and sent out of the town.

The eighteenth of November, the earl of Renenbergh began to batter the
Ga^house Hegemans soldiers, and shot down all the 1580
tops or defenses of the walls, and after that, the houses being discovered,
they shot (...) bullets with wild fire into the town, which presently set the
houses on fire, and the sooner, for that many of the houses were thatched, and
diverse of them full of straw, haie, and turfe, whereby the fire was grown
great, before they perceived it: they imagining, that the fire had been made
by treason within the town: but at the last, when they perceived from whence
it came, the soldiers ran all in arms unto the walls, the bourgers in the
Steenwicke ^red with shot
mean time doing their best to quench the fire, and to save their goods; but
by reason that the wind was great, there was at the least threescore and ten
houses burned, and certain barnes with hay, straw, ri^, and barley, and (to
say the truth) a twelfth part of the town.

This was the second time that has been heard of, that such fire was shot with
burning bullets into a town, for that it was done by Stephanus Battor, king of
Poleland, against Dan^ke, but in another manner it has been oftentimes done.

After this fire, the earl of Renenbergh sent two trumpets, to summon the
town to yield, offering them all the grace and favor he could: but captain
Plaet answered boldly, whereby at that time he did especial good service to
the town; for which cause the bourgers began to murmr, and yet at the last
got Plaet to agree with them, and thought to have had a Cornput refused,
saying, That he would not agree to deliver up a town which was not theirs
(for that a young maid which begins to parle, is half gotten with child)
and that he would not yield neither for life nor death: Berenbroeke and
Lazarus Austria (Olthof his lieutenant) said the like: so as after many words
and much dispute it was agreed, with hands and promises thereunto made and
given, That they would not yield up the town, as long as there was any
victuals within it to be had. But the next day (being the 20 of November) the
bourgers fell into a mutiny, and assembled together upon the market place, and
with them diverse of the soldiers: which captain Cornput hearing of, he
caused a great number of the soldiers to arm themselves, and he himself
being armed under his clothes, went with Berenbroeke Cornput answered, That
time is not yet come, and when it does, then will we first eat such a knave as
thou and thy fellows are, before we will yield. With which words and many
more, they were all driven home again, and all good order and discipline
observed by such as were of good government.

They without shot diverse times more fire into the town, but they within the
town took an order for the same, that in every street and house, both night
and day, the bourgers way, and then having woollen gloves (which they first wet
in the water) they took up 1580
do no hurt.

In these and many other actions, the month of November was spent: mean time
the wavering and mutinous minds of some of them within continued still; for
that captain Plaet was wholly of their faction, whereas Cornput and
Berenbroeke opposed themselves, whom they sought to bring in hatred with the
towns men, who for that cause were compelled to set their hands to the letters
which they did write unto the Estates, to be relieved, and were likewise
forced to grant, That a stamp, with the arms of the town (which is an
anchor) should be set upon their money, which should be a token, that the same
was raised half as high again as it was. The captains would willingly have
had new money mynted as it went in Hasselt (the better to content the
soldiers) but the magistrate was against it,

In the beginning of December it began to rain, and want of money made the
soldiers in the earl of Renenberghs camp to be weary of camping, whereby
they within the town made many valiant sallies upon the enemy, which proved
very successful, and for that cause they opened the gates again, which they
had mured and rampared up, and captain Plaet, and others, that were against
the making of any loope-holes upon the counterscarpes,

In the mean time the prince of Orange and the Estates took counsel how they
might relieve Steenwicke, although they saw their forces to be small, and they
very unwilling, for want of pay, for that the provinces, and especially
Guelderland and Oueryssell (whom nevertheless it most concerned) did not then
show themselves as they ought to have done: for which cause, some were of
opinion, That it was in vain to spend money or men about the relieuing of so
weak a place. Others were of the contrary mind, and said, That it was
requisite The Estates resolution for Steenwicke.
to be relieved, as being a key of Friseland, Vollenhoue, and Drenth, which
with the marshes held the country round about enclosed, and that the enemy
having gotten it, might thereby cut off Friseland from the other provinces, and
trouble the seas, having already John Norris (an Englishman) was appointed
general thereof, who coming with his forces to Swart Sluys, set upon a new
raised company of the enemies (their captain being Otto van Saut) and killed
the most part of them, and upon the fifteenth of December set fire on their
fort. From thence he went to Meppel, with twenty three companies of footmen,
which were not above eighteen hundred men, and a few horse, leaving but three
companies in Swart Sluys: for which cause, the earl of Renenbergh sent eleven
companies of foot, and six cornets of horsemen thither, to pass over the ice,
and so to John Norris had time enough to come to relieve them, who drove the
enemy from thence, so as many of them were slain, and diverse drowned on the
ice, and amongst the rest, Arent van Gemeghen, a selfe-willed captain. There
Sir John Norris got two of the enemies ensigns, and arms for five hundred
men* one of the ensigns he sent into Steenwicke, with about forty soldiers,
that carried about 7^0 pounds of gunne-powder in leather bags upon their
shoulders. In a certain skirmish made by them of the town, captain Plaet
being slain, Berenbroeke was made captain in his place, by commandment from
the Estates, but chiefly by recommendation from captain Cornput, Michael Hage
being made lieutenant of Stuper his company in his room, and with those
commissions there was sixteen hundred gulderns in gold sent to John Norris
fell upon the enemies camp behind through the marshes: whereupon they of the
town also issued forth valiantly, and caused the enemy to fly, breaking
some of his ordnance in pieces with hammers.

During this siege, in December, the earl of Renenbergh had certain
enterprises upon Lodowicke van Monthort, the Drossart, 1580
he caused forty soldiers that went out of the castle of Blyenbeek, belonging
unto Schenck, which were conducted by Sergeant Foncheco and the Drossarts
son, to get into the castle of Hattum by night: mean time the Drossart
himself made the Estates soldiers (being but forty in number) all drunk,
and shut them up in a chamber, whilst they of Blyenbeeke entered. With those
soldiers the Drossart the same night came down and took captain Haen, that
was but a traveler through the town, and two other gentlemen out of their
beds, and carried them prisoners into the castle. Which the bourgers
understanding, and some of the soldiers that kept watch in the town, they
supposed, that their enemy within the castle had b^ene stronger than he was.
They of Swool being advertised thereof, sent captain Jacob van Mechelen
thither with certain soldiers, at which time also they of Deuenter and Elborgh
sent aid, and so they began to batter the castle of Hattum with six pieces from
the town, and presently made a breach therein (although the wall were four
and twenty foot thick) so that upon the eighteenth of December they were
forced to yield upon composition, by entreatie of captain Hegeman, which was,
that the soldiers should depart with their lives, and the Drossart and his
son should remain prisoners, who afterward had his process made by the
Estates of Guelderland, and so both he and his son were b^headed and
quartered, because they had sworn to be true unto the Estates.

The third of January, Sonoy (by commission from the Estates) came out of
North-Holland to Blockziel, with ships of war, and diverse soldiers, and
all kind of provision fit John Norris wished them to send him a man of some
experience in the wars, to speak with him about the relieuing of the town,
they sent Coen Dierickeson unto him, with an instruction, where (amongst other
things) it was set down, that he should set upon the enemy, or that if he
would not attempt it rashly, he should secretly send them a thousand men into
the town, and they would set upon the enemy themselves: against the which
Cornput and Berenbroeke opposed, saying, That the dividing of an army (which
was neither great nor strong of men) was not likely to do any good, or to
relieve them, the enemy

The like tumults and uproar was amongst them in the enemies camp, who were
kept night and day in continual alarmes, in exceeding cold weather, and with
want of money, for the which they often called: so that at the last the earl
of Renenbergh was forced to absent himself for a while, until he had gotten
some money for them, wherewith he contented his soldiers, with many fair
promises. The like contention he had with Schencks

Upon the nineteenth of January the earl of Renenbergh sent a trumpet with a
letter, signed by Martin Schenck and John Struef, wherein they used all manner
of persuasions, to move the town to yield; but they had an answer to the
contrary by word of mouth. Every day they did what they could to annoy one
another, and upon Shroue-tuesday they without the town having often asked them
within, if they had almost eaten up all their horses, they within mounted
soldiers upon all the horses they could get (being about threescore) with
lances, and when as they had therewith braued upon the walls, they went
secretly out of one of the gates, and gave an alarm unto the camp, and so
went in again at another port, Cornput had like to have lost his life) for
that he wrote him a letter, the contents whereof were these.

Honorable and worthy gentleman, for that by reason of the present frost, you
can do no 1581
your finger, because you have been forced to lay the same to pawn, to pay
the soldiers, and besides that, have not wherewith to set your teeth on work,
or to cleanse your maw, and yet should have something to busy your self
withal, therewith to pass away the (...); therefore we send you the letter
here enclosed, to please your humor, dated in the kings camp before
Steenwicke the fifteenth of January. In the letter there was a book printed in
French, made by Assonuille, or some other, whereof the title was* The prince of
Orange his letters interpreted, which he sent to the duke of Alanson, with many
annotations in the margent, which the prince in his Apology makes answer
unto. By this letter, certain of captain Cornput his enemies in the town,
thought, that the enemy had sent some reasonable conditions Cornput made as
good an answer, and also sent some Annotations upon the marginall notes of the
printed counterfeit. Letters.

Besides this, to pass away the time, captain Thomas (an Albanois captain)
sent to Sir John Norris, to challenge him to fight hand to hand with him,
either with lance, pike, sword, A challenge sent to Sir John Norris, answered
by captain Williams.
or curtleax: whereunto captain Williams, his lieutenant colonel, made answer,
that he would fight with him at all the said weapons: which upon certain
conditions was undertaken: and having given sureties on both sides, and both
the armies standing in order of battle, they two

The seventeenth of January, upon the importunacie of them of the town unto
Sir John Norris (as also by the daily intercession of Coen Dierickson, that was
with him at Griethorn, saying, That for want of victuals they within the town
could not hold out four days) he determined to do some enterprise upon
Steenwicker Woldt, being in all (with his English regiment, the regiment of the
earl of Nassau, and that of Michiel Caulier, and some companies of Hegeman and
Stuper) not above two thousand men: which he certified unto those of the town,
who with the half of their men issued forth when it was dark, whereby John
Norris (for his part) did nothing, for that he came into a field full of trees,
the which was enclosed with a ditch, not far from the town. Which the earl
of Renenbergh perceiving, brought certain field-peeces thither, and first
having made his prayer, he gave a terrible assault against the same, but he was
valiantly repulsed, so that he thought it best for him (that evening) to
return back again unto his camp, thinking to find him there the next day:
but Sir John Norris perceiving in what danger he was, in regard that he had
neither victuals no^ horsemen, and that he might (perchance) have been
overthrown, if the enemy had enclosed him, was much moved against Coen
Dierickson, that had made him believe, that the town was in so great
necessity, and therefore thought good to go unto Blockziel, Sonoy his
fortifications; where he understood by certain persons, that the town was
sufficiently provided (with all things necessary) for a while: for which cause
he determined to stay for the Friseland aid, which he likewise certified unto
the town. The earl of Renenbergh once again summoned the town to yield,
writing them a comfortable letter, which captain Cornput answered with many
annotations, and caused it to be sent him again; which letter was openly read
before the camp, in great despite to the earl of Renenbergh. After that,
upon the four and twentieth of January, the earl of Renenbergh
understanding, that Sir John Norris with all his forces lay in the cloister,
called S. John's camp, he went thither with a great force, where he besieged
him round about, and battering the place, thought to take it, before he should
have aid out of Friseland: John Norris presently had great need of victuals,
whereby he was constrained and enforced to eat his horses, although Sonoy sent
him some victuals from Blockziel, whereas two of his companies overthrew two of
the enemies, which were of the like number.

Wighbolt van Eusum, lord of Nyenvenoort, having made a contract with the
Estates, to levy 1581
enforced upon the enemy, the Estates wrote unto him, to help to relieve
Steenwicke, who to that end came with six companies of his own, and six
Friseland companies, under the conduct of Adrian Meningh (lieutenant colonel to
Merode) to Blockziel, with wagons and victuals, being in all fifteen hundred
men: which the earl of Renenbergh understanding, he went secretly away in the
night time. At his departure from the cloister, he left the wounded, dead men,
and his prisoners, and great store of victuals behind him, having besieged the
cloister three days, and burned the village of Griethorn. After that, there
grew a great mutiny amongst his soldiers, which within certain days was
pacified with some money, each soldier having received 21 styuers.

The last of January Sir John Norris came to Oldermarckt, a mile from
Steenwicke, with Cornputs gate, because he had always given them counsel to
make it there, that they might receive their victuals therein from Sir John
Norris.

The fourth of February three Wood-cockes (others say Partridges) came flying
into the market place of Steenwicke, and were there taken by the soldiers, and
eaten. Which being An A^gure at Steenwicke.
told to captain Cornput, he said presently: God sent the unbelieving
Israelites such kind of Cornput (which the common bourgers made more question
of than the rest) was taken in evil part, as if that he would prescribe so
long a time for their deliverance: which he seemed to have spoken, only to
lessen the great longing and desire that the bourgers had thereunto,
nevertheless it appears, that God spoke by his mouth, although he knew it
not himself; for it was true, for that even the same day three weeks after,
the town was sufficiently victualled by Sir John Norris.

The same day Sir John Norris, the earl of Nassau, Merode, Nienort, Michiel
Caulier, Iselstein, Hegeman, and Stuper, with six and forty companies of
footmen, being about three thousand Renenberghs soldiers upon the 31 of
January.

To resist them, the earl of Renenberghs soldiers put themselves in order of
battle, and at the last (after they had stood so until the next day after
noone) they went with their ordnance to assail Sir John Norris camp behind,
not thinking to find the Wagon sconce, and gave Hendrike Suater (their leader)
was slain, they of the town in the mean time issuing out into the enemies
camp, did them great hurt, and got good store of booty.

The sixth or seventh of February there was a search made in every house within
the town, to know what provision of victuals they had, and they found corn and
other victuals sufficient to serve them two months, as well amongst the rich
as the poor, who thought they should not have bin so narrowly searched, as the
rich men, each man being allowed 6 pound of bread a week: for which cause
captain Cornput showed the forestallers thereof in what danger they had brought
both the country and the town, for that the soldiers fearing want of
victuals, were like to have fallen into a mutiny, and bin discouraged, and
thereby made the enemy to

Every day they skirmished, and the earl of Renenbergh still made more sconces
between John Norris camp and the town, which they first began under the
defense of certain wagons 1581
laden with dung, which they placed there by night, and so made their trenches
behind them: All the heaps of turfe the earl of Renenbergh caused to be
burnt, that the way might be discovered, yet for all their great light, they
could not intercept one letter or messenger that came out of the town, the
which was very strange. At the last captain Cornput caused certain Bullets
shot with letters in them.
bullets to be made, of two pound weight apeece, thereby to prevent the danger
of their messengers: which bullets were shot into Sir John Norris camp. These
bullets had two holes, the one to thrust in the letter, the other to put in the
fire work, for that by the smoke thereof they might the better be found.

Upon the fourteenth of February, Sir John Norris sent them of the town word,
that they should make three bridges over the river of Aa, and he would give the
adventure to relieve Cornput used great diligence, to cause certain sconces to
be made without the town, and it seemed as though he would have had sconces
made clean through from the town, to Sir John Norris camp: but all he
desired was not done, notwithstanding they within made sconces without the
town, in the West part, with great toil, hewing the hard frozen earth with
hatchets and pickaxes, and made a bridge over the Aa, and so lay in the field
without the town; but after signs given on both sides* touching the beginning
of the enterprise, Sir John Norris in seeking to effect it, found great
difficulty, which was, that the wagons could not pass over the hard knobs of
^osen earth, which lay in the marshes;

The seventeenth of February the great frost began to thaw, which did much
comfort them of the town, who were in good hope they should not now have so
much cause to fear their enemies horsemen.

The 18 of February Sir John Norris began to make a trench of a thousand paces
without his camp, along by the old Aa, which was done with great labor and
toil, for want of pioners, and necessary provision. This trench was battered
and assailed by the earl of Renenberghes soldiers, but to no end.

The twentieth of February, a bourger and four soldiers about noone time,
went out of the town, and past between the enemies sentinels and the
trenches, yet were not hurt, although Steenwick victualed by Sir John Norris.
they were shot at, and pursued from all places round about them; whereby Sir
John Norris soldiers were showed the way how they should relieve the town:
and upon the one and twentieth of February Sir John Norris by the same way
sent certain soldiers with those five persons, laden with an hundred and
fifty cheeses, three hundred and fifty loaves of bread, with powder and match
bound together: who having thrown it or laid it all upon the bridge, went
presently back again: for the preventing whereof, the earl of Renenberghes
men came thither, but it was too late. The diligence and resolution of these
five men, was rewarded by the captains with certain pieces of gold.

The next night Sir John Norris made another trench of two hundred seventy two
paces long, which drew somewhat nearer the town, whereby his trenches and the
town trenches were but eight hundred ninety six paces one from the other, the
earl of Renenberghes sconceslying between them, distant from the town seven
hundred seventy six paces, the enemy seeking to draw their ordnance through
certain places of the Aa, where it might stand better and do more service, but
it sunk, so as they could hardly get it out again. And the same night they
made another defense of dung wagons, over against the new bridge, thinking to
make a new sconce, which they of the town sought by all the means they could
to hinder them from effecting it.

They of the town going on with their trenches, upon the two and twentieth of
February John Norris began to skirmish in diverse places, provoking the enemy
to issue forth, whereupon they placed themselves in order of battle. In the
mean time they within the town, passing over the new bridge, carried away all
the enemies dung wagons into the town, wherewith the skirmish grew hot on all
sides, the ordnance thundering on both parts. They of the town also fell upon
the enemy in diverse 1581
trenches they always got safely, and with advantage in again, in regard that
it thawed so fast, that the horsemen could not pass alouer the way. This
continued for a while with great fury, whereby it seemed they would fall to a
general battle. The enemies began to be weary, and to be hungry, which
began about noone time, and so they drew backward, especially the footmen, who
after their old manner, in a thousand diverse names cried out for money, so that
the horsemen could make no longer resistance, but withdrew themselves after the
loss of many of them.

Three hours after noone, when they had scarce rested themselves, they of the
town perceiving Sir John Norris soldiers to issue out of their trenches, came
out with diverse hurdles, John Norris trenches than the town: whereby men might
perceive the diligence of those that were in extremity, and such as were
willing to help themselves: Which done, diverse of Sir John Norris horsemen,
and a great number of peasants horses came foreward, all laden with corn,
meal and powder, wherewith they went unto the bridge, and casting it down
upon straw that lay there, ran to fetch more. Many footmen also brought bread
and cheeses. While this was doing, the sconces that lay in the way were
assailed by captain Cornput and certain soldiers, in the which they threw
great store of straw, and burning pitched ropes, shooting bravely into them,
with two companies of soldiers that fought like Lions: but they of the next
sconces shot lustily at them, yet the townes-men gave it not over, having
gotten the ordnance,

The earl of Renenbergh being moved at this furious assayling of his sconces,
and for that it began to thaw very fast, finding his men also unwilling to lie
any longer, and the town twice Steenwick relieved, and the siege broken up
victualed before his face, he determined to raise his siege, causing his
ordnance and other provision to be secretly gathered together in the night
time, abandoning all his sconces: he assembled his men in West-Wicke, which
neither they within the town, nor Sir John Norris did John Norris coming to
the town, went after him, but yet found it not convenient to charge him.

They within the town entered into the enemies forsaken camp, where they found
many beasts, flesh, wine, and beer: and the four and twentieth of February
all the victuals that Sir John Norris had brought with him, was carried into
the town: And by that means the town was delivered from the siege, upon the
last day of the three weeks, as captain Cornput had foretold it, after they
had been besieged four months; and then was all the hidden corn and other
victuals brought forth, the bourgers complaining of their great impatience,

The soldiers that had so long defended Steenwicke, thought they should have
had some reward given by the Estates; but captain Cornput and Olthof, after
long attendance, could Stuper and Berenbroeke, to whom there was not much due,
were well paid. But it was to be supposed, that want of money was the cause of
it. Captain Cornput, with the rest of the valiant captains, bourgers, and
soldiers, got great honor, praise, and glory, amongst all wise men, in
regard of their industry, constancy, resolution, diligence, carfulness,
labor, and dangers, considering with 1581
wanted a governor, ordnance, and horsemen. During this siege Sonoy with a few
soldiers, had besieged both the houses of Vollenhove, wherein the earl of
Renenbergh had garrison, which were soon yielded unto him.

The Englishmen, Wallons, and Iselsteins soldiers, were sent unto the Kuynder,
and there besieged the church, which within few days upon composition; was
yielded unto them. The companies of the Friseland regiment, under the lord of
Merode, went before Lemmer and Sloten, which being battered, yielded up, and
after that, the Englishmen and Wallons were divided into several garrisons.

The lord of Nienoort went presently into the territories thereabouts, whereas
they of Groaning Renoy and Vercken into a church, who were forced to yield, upon
safeguard of life and goods, because their captains were absent.

Oyenbrugh, whose revolt was ascribed unto the earl of Renenbergh, at a
skirmish before Loppersum, was shot in the leg, whereof he died in Groaning. The
earl of Renenbergh himself, with a company of soldiers, went into Zeeland,
and took the house of Boxburgh, fortified

Having related what was done in the camp before Steenwicke, and in other
places thereabouts, I will now return and show what was done in the later part
of the year 1580.

The king of Spain having settled it in his imagination, that the prince of
Orange was the The king of Spaines res^lution to h^ the pr^ of Oran^ (...)
ther^.
only man that crossed his designs in the Netherlands, and that he could not
reduce Holland, Zeeland, and their associats under his obedience (for as the
secretary Escouedo had written unto him, he must first begin with the islands)
he thought, that so long as the said prince should live, he should never see
an end of those troubles. Wherefore seeing he could not attain unto it by
arms in the time of the duke of Alua, and of Dom Louys de Requesens, nor by
the policy and practices of Dom John, whereas the towns of Holland and
Zeeland in general, were

Philip by the grace of God, King of Castile, Duke of Bourgoigne, Brabant etc.
He The edict of the prince of Oranges proscription.
shows first, how graciously and favorably the late deceased emperor
Charles the fifth, of famous memory, his lord and father, had dealt with
William van Nassau to procure him the succession of Rene of Chalons, prince of
Orange, his cousin: and although he were a stranger, had advanced and
furthered him in all he could: as also the king himself, having made him
knight of the order of the golden Fleece, and governor of Holland, Zeeland,
Vtrecht, and Bourgoigne, colonel of a regiment of horsemen, and a counselor
of Estate: declaring further all other the favors that had been done him: And
to the contrary how unthankful he had been, in moving and procuring the
confederat gentlemen to present a petition unto him, bringing in of the
reformed religion, with the exercise of the same, and the casting edict,
carrying himself in most tyrannous manner, ill entreating all the chief
nobility 1581
multitude, the good being chased away. And for that all this confusion and
misery, which his subjects, he said, suffered, are found to proceed from the
counsel, persuasion, and instigation of that wicked hypocrite, by his turbulent
spirit, who put all his felicity in the trouble of his subjects: For which
causes being (as he said) just, reasonable, and according unto justice, using
in that regard the authority which he had over him, by virtue of the oaths of
fealty and obedience, which he had often made unto him, for all his perverse
and wicked acts, being the sole author, head and contriuer of those troubles,
and the chief disturber of all his Estates; he declared him a rebel,
heretic, hypocrite, like to Cain and Judas, having his conscience obdurat, a
villain, head of the Netherland tumults, a plague to Christendom, and an
enemy to all mankind: And as such a one did proscribe and banish him for ever
William of Nassau, prince of Orange, either alive, or dead, or else to bereave
him of his life, that he would give unto him or to his heirs, either in
money, land, or annual rent, twenty five thousand crowns of gold, and
therewithal forgive him all crimes and offenses whatsoever he shall have
formerly committed and done: yea if he were no gentleman, to make him a
gentleman for his valor: Promising reward and advancement to all them that
should assist him in the execution thereof, according to their estates,
degrees, and qualities.

He likewise declared all those that were his associats and adherents, to be
banished persons,

This banishment and proscription the prince of Parma commanded to be
published throughout all the towns of the king of Spaines obedience, by his
letters written to the governors and the Provincial counsels.

This ignominious proscription which the king of Spain made against the person
of The prince of Oranges Apology to the proscription.
William of Nassau, prince of Orange, did not much advance his affairs, as we
may see by the progress of the history. Many men of great quality, that were
Neuters, and good

Touching the point of ingratitude, wherewith he does charge him, for his
advancement His answer for the point of ingratitude.
to the succession of his cousin Rene of Chalon, prince of Orange, he said,
That privileges of Burgoigne, called the French county, whereas they may
freely give their lands Philip detained them from him, wherein 1581
he had been wronged to the value of two millions of gulderns.

He also complained of the sentence given against him for the seigniory of
Chasteaubellin, the arrerages whereof amounted to 3 hundred and fifty thousand
gulderns. And touching the principality of Orange, he said, That no man had
any thing to say thereunto, for that he held it of no prince whatsoever, but
was his own freely, without any superior sovereign: and that in regard of
that principality he had no need of any princes friendship and favor, but of
the king of France.

Then he showed what services his predecessors of the house of Nassau had done
to the The services done by the house of Nassau to the house of Austria.
house of Austria. First, cont Engelbert his great uncle, with the baron of
Roemont, won the Maximilian, with many other great and notable services.

Then followed his uncle Henry of Nassau, who in a manner had planted the
imperial diadem upon the emperor Charles his head, he being absent in
Spain, and the princes electors making often motion to send for the king of
France, to make him emperor; wherein he was such an iustrument, as Charles
inioyed that dignity: whereof there could no tokens of thankfulness be showed
on Spaines behalf, as other kings and princes had done, and were yet to be
seen by some pieces of ordnance which the king of Hongarie had given to his
ancestors, as a testimony of their valor and service against the Turk, the
which were forcibly taken out of their house in Breda, by the duke of Alua.

After him followed prince Rene, who restored the loss which the emperor
Chales the fifth

Saying moreover, that prince Philibert of Chalon, had alone in a manner gotten
him the duchy of Milan, and the kingdom of Naples, and with the duke of Bourbon
assured him Rome, keeping the pope prisoner.

And whereas he proclaimed him to be a villain, and a traitor, he desired him
to tell what villains, and who they were, at whose commandment the cardinal
Granuelle should have poisoned the emperor Maximilian the second: and that he
knew what the said emperor had said unto him, and how that he after that time
had so much respected the king and the Spaniards,

Touching the governments, honors, and titles, which had been given him by
the emperor and the king, he said, they had been exceeding chargeable unto
him, having spent above an hundred and fifty thousand florins, without any
recompense; and that being general of the army, he received but three
hundred gulderns the month, which was not sufficient for them that pitched his
tents.

Touching the order of the Golden Fleece, he faith, That he had been chosen by
the chapter Touching the order of the golden fleece.
of the said order, and that he was most beholding to the brothers of that
order for the same. Saying moreover, That the king himself was fallen from
that dignity, in that he had broken the oath which he had taken, by the death
of the earls of Egmont and Horn, the marquess Philip duke of Burgoignes
time, by John lord of Luxembourg.

And for that he was of the counsel of state, he said, That he had often
refused it, but that the Of the co^sel of state.
cardinal of Granuelle and others, had labored to have him called, only to
assist them with his authority with the people.

And whereas his marriage with the lady Charlotte of Bourbon was objected unto
him as Touching his marriage.
dishonorable, in respect of her profession: he answers, That the duke of
Montpenser her father

cepted. He complained of the reuolting of the malcontent Wallons, who had
taken upon 1581
the foreign soldiers and the enemy should have been driven out of the
country, and the The inconstancy of the commanders of the Malcontents.
town of Mastricht relieved. He likewise complained of the revolted noblemen
and gentlemen, who being descended of noble houses and ancient families, should
discover their lightness and inconstancy: First, serving the duke of Alua,
and the great Commander, like mercenarie slaves, and making war against him,
after that they reconciled themselves unto him, and became enemies to the
Spaniards. When Dom John came into the country they followed him, served him,
and practiced the princes ruin. Dom John having failed of his enterprise at
Antuerpe, they forsake him, and call in the prince, whom presently they abandon
again, and without any counsel or advice send in all have for the arch duke
Mathias, whom they presently

Whereas they objected, That he had made himself to be chosen by force and
tumult governor of Brabant, he showed, that he had refused it, and that in
regard of the lieutenant generals place, he would not accept thereof, without
the consent of the commanders that were in the army, which they sent him
signed under their hands: The government of Flanders he also refused,
notwithstanding the instance that was made unto him by the four members of the
country.

And whereas this proscription found the union of Vtrecht of very hard
disgestion, he said, There was no better remedy against the disunion of the
malcontents, than this union, and no surer antidote against the poison of
discord, than concord: Confessing, that he had procured, advanced, and sought
to entertain it. As touching the receipt of money, he said, he never meddled
therewith. And the rest of the accusations, as the chasing away of the
nobility, hypocrisy, distrust, and the offers that were made him, being of
less importance, he refuted. At the last he came to the sentence of
banishment, saying, That al those storms of thunder and lightning, did not
amaze him, and that if any Spaniard or other affected to them, of what quality
or condition soever, had said, or should say, as this infamous proscription had
published, that he is a traitor and a villain, had spoken falsely, and against
the truth: And although the use of Judas money to deliver him unto them, that
they might crucify him: For which cause he said, he would bear that
misfortune the more patiently, if it so fell out. Wherefore he gave the States
to understand, that their peace and quiet depended upon his death: for that so
long as he was among them, their wars should never have end, and therefore
he wished that his death might free them from the miseries which his life
procured, the which should be a sweet and acceptable death unto him. That for
their cause he had suffered his lands and goods to them, for their welfare.
But if they thought good still to use him, and his experience, won 1581
himself in theirs and the Netherlands service, wherein he desired their
resolution.

Whereunto the general Estates upon the seventeenth of December, made answer,
as follows. The States answer to the prince of Orang^s Apology made to the
king of Spain.
The general Estates having not long since seen a certain proscript made and
published by the enemy, against your Excellencies person, whereby they seek
to charge you with some slanderous and unworthy crimes, thereby to bring you
into hatred, as if by unlawful means and practices your Excellency should
have sought the dignities and governments which you now enjoy: and withal
abandoning your person as a prey to them that would bereave you of your life,
and thereby deprive you of your honor: Having in like sort seen the answer
made thereunto by your Excellency, we find, That for as much as concerns
the

This answer being printed in diverse tongues, was sent to all the princes of
Europe, to justify himself of the accusations laid upon him in the said
proscription, and to show who had bin the first motive and the cause of the
troubles in the Netherlands.

This year died Frederick Schencke of Tautenbergh, bishop of Vtrecht, being
president of the chamber at Spiers, who in the year 1559 succeeded Jordan van
Egmont, in the said bishopric, and was the 61 bishop of Vtrecht: Which
bishops had governed that country 884 anno 696 till anno 1580. This Frederick
was a man of great learning, as does appear by his writings.

The eight and twentieth of December died Gerard of Grosbeke cardinal, bishop
and prince of Liege, who (contrary to the disposition of the Liegeois) had
openly defended the Spanish faction. Some thought he died of grief, for that
the country would not yield to the contribution which he demanded. The
Estates would have had some prince advanced, who had been better affected to
their party, and above all the archduke Mathias, who was then in the
Netherlands, whereunto they recommended him, but the partisans of Spain
carried it by voices for Ernest, son to the duke of Bauaria, bishop of
Fresingen, who had before labored to have the bishopric and electorship of
Cologne, the which he had, together Ernest is at this day one of the greatest
prelates in Christendom.

In November past, colonel Balfour, general of the Scots that were under the
States service, being in garrison at Bruges in Flanders, went forth with a
troop of horse, and set upon in the village of Wassenare (in Franc of Bruges)
certain light horsemen of the prince of Parmaes, the which he defeated: but
succors coming, Balfour, who had but threescore horse, after that he had
fought valiantly, was defeated and slain, but not without great slaughter of
the Spaniards. His body was carried to Bruges, and honorably interred. He
was much lamented for the good services which he had done in Flanders: neither
died he poor. His wife was brought in bed soon after in the same town.

In the beginning of May, the deputies of the provinces of the Netherlands,
that were sent into France to the duke of Aniou, returned back again, having
made choice of him for their sovereign Lord, although some articles of the
contract were not fully agreed upon, as that the king for his brothers sake
should make war against the king of Spain, which the Estates did much desire,
with some others. But the duke found many in France, that did cross his 1581
a declaration, and putting it in print, he sent it to all the courts of
parliament of France, showing his firm and constant resolution, touching the
defense and freeing of the Netherlands from troubles, showing, how honorable it
was, and what profit it might bring to the kingdom and crown of France.

About this time there was an enterprise discovered in Brussels, by a miller,
which carried letters, who being put to the rack, and tortured, accused the
seigniour of Haussy, and his wife, of certain practices, for the which they
were committed to close prison, with the lady of Waerdenburch, sister to the
said lady, and others: who were soon after released, except the said lord of
Haussy, who continued for a time in prison, with doctor Cornet. But afterward
by the means of the seigniour of Timpel, governor of the town, who married

And not long after there was an uproar begun and made by means of a preaching
monk (that had been banished out of Gant) called Anthony Ruyskenueldt, who
serving there in a certain parish, by means of his preaching he drew diverse
adherents unto him, who labored to frustrat and disannull the good resolution
which the Estates had taken for their protection and defense, some of them
having before consented to the enterprise made by the earl of Egmont, and of
others, as of doctor Ioos Butkens, Andreas Anderlech, the lord and lady of
Haussie, and John Cob an English man, who not long before had bin hanged and
quartered in the said Anth. Ruyskenueldt; for which cause, by full consent of
the towns men and members of the same, they caused the said Ruyskenueldt and
some of his adherents to depart out of the town: determining further, to shut
up the cloisters and the churches, that no more such violences should be used
by such tumults, as also that by authority of the magistrates, all the images
in every place of the town, should be broken down, and that the best part of
them should be sold with most advantage, toward the charges of the town, and
the relief of the poor. The exercise of the Romish religion, restrained in
Brussels.
said town, for the peace, union, and security of the said town, not to
permit, nor allow of the exercise of the Romish religion, in any church or
chapel of the same; and that therefore it should wholly be suspended and
forbidden, until that other order should be taken in the causes concerning the
said town and the country, and that therein they should follow the necessity of
the time, as they of the aforesaid Romish religion, certain years past, upon
small occasions, had forbidden the exercise of the reformed religion, and namely
in an. 1566, and many times after, and for many other causes, which the
aforesaid magistrates thought not convenient as then to be declared. The said
magistrates therefore command, that every man shall govern what religion soever
they were, into their safeguard and protection, except three or four that 1581
man were found to have proceeded against any part of the said ordinance,
whereby the common peace of the said town, as also the authority of the said
magistrates might be hindered or disturbed, they should be punished as common
breakers of the peace, and enemies to the welfare of the town. And that noman
might pretend ignorance therein, the said magistrates had appointed the same to
be published. Dated in Brussels the first of May, in the year 1581.

In the end of May captain James of Rensy (having first acquainted them of
Ypre in Flanders with his enterprise) surprised the castle of Douxlieu, upon
the river of Lys, near to Esteres, belonging to the seigniour of Vendeuille,
whereof he was made governor by the four la Motte went to besiege it with
four pieces of ordnance, and the place was yielded unto him upon hard terms,
the said Rensy going forth (not without great fear) after that he had seen
seven or eight of his soldiers hanged, who before had held the Spanish party,
he himself doubting that he should not have so well escaped.

The 7 of June M. John Scheyf knight, chancellor of Brabant, died in Antuerpe,
having a little before his death resigned his place to the seignior of
Lysueldt, counselor of State. He left a little book, in form of an Apology,
which he had written for his justification, against the slanderous and infamous
letters written against him by the cardinal Granuelle.

In the same month they of Gant had an enterprise upon Lille, thinking (with
the help of some intelligence which they had) to surprise it early in a
morning with bridges and ladders: but they were discovered too soon, and all
their design turned into smoke: for the which one John Drumez, a notable
merchant of the said town, was accused, with some others: Drumez being found
guilty by his own confession, was beheaded, others were hanged, and some less
guilty were banished.

About the same time there was beheaded at Mons in Henault, M. John Gilles,
register of the king of Spaines Exchequer, a reverent old man, having a little
before resigned his place to Cronendal his son in law. He was accused to
have written letters to them of Brussels, aduertising them of some design
which the prince of Parma might have upon their

The war was managed somewhat strangely at that time in Brabant, for want of
discipline and good pay: whereupon the Scottish men did mutine at Viluoerden,
chasing away their colonel Stuart, so as they had much ado to pacify and
content them. The like happened in the fort of Villebrouk, the which they could
by no means appease, so as in the end they were forced to bring the canon from
Antuerpe. The like fell out at Berghen upon Soom, so as for want of money the
Estates and the prince of Orange had so small authority and commandment over
the men of war, as it was a pity to see. And although the king of Spaines
soldiers were not much better paid, yet was he better obeyed, for that he
endured the insolences and oppressions which they committed in all places
where they came, as well in the

In May some troops of base Flaunders, under the command of colonel Moriant,
borne at S. Omer, having an enterprise upon some places of Arthoys, demanded
passage by prevailed to defend a turnpike or a paltrie barricadoe, against five
or six hundred men, which 1581
the village of Wattou (their design upon Arthois being discovered by their
long stay at Menreuille) where they thought to force some soldiers of the
malcontents, which had fortified themselves in a church, hearing that
succors both of horse and foot came unto them, they abandoned it, marching
toward Dixmuyden, where they were pursued and overtaken, before they could
recover the town, so as they were charged and put to rout, and some were burnt
in a barn, whither they had retired themselves with their horses: so the
burners were themselves burnt.

The malcontents in June seized upon the castle of Baerle in Campeigne, which
Baerle taken and recovered.
they caused to be fortified by the neighbor villages, they lodged in the
mean time at

After that, the Estates of Brabant sent the seigniour of la Guard, a French
colonel, with his cornet of horse, and four or five hundred foot to seize
upon the castles of Hoochstraten, and Tournhout, the one he took by
composition, the other by force, which made them of Baerle quit the place and
burn it. La Guard marched from thence toward Tillebourg, and Lhoon opt sandt,
which he took in like sort with Osterhout, and other forts thereabouts, hoping
to make some good attempt upon Eindouen, and Boisleduc. He began now to
advance, Schenck, with his horsemen, where there were some skirmishes: but
Hautepenne and Schenck returned to Boislleduc, to attend a design, which they
had upon Breda, as follows.

Charles of Gaure, knight, baron of Fresin, afterward earl of Beaurieu,
brother to the seigniour of Iuchy, governor of Cambray, had been general of
the Vitailes, and of the counsel of the general Estates; who for some
intelligence he had with the Spaniards, was put in prison. First he was sent
to the Ramekins in Zeeland, and afterward was brought to the castle of Breda:
In the end being tired with his long imprisonment, he began to devise some
means for his delivery, and seeing his guard not to be very great, nor yet
the whole garrison of the castle, with the which in time he was grown
familiar, by little and little he corrupted The castle of Breda surprised
guard, when as Hautepenne and Schencke failed not to come before the castle,
to the very place appointed. Then these soldiers drew the rest of their
companions to play at dice within their Corpse de guard, whilst that one of them
went to see if the troops were arrived, and to show Godfrey Montis the
bourgmaster was hurt, yet he found means to get to horseback, and so to
escape, and so did the governor Stakenbroeck, lea^ing his wife and daughter in
the castle, who were unworthily entreated, which caused him to die soon after
for grief. The town was spoiled. The States men heard not of this surprise
until the next day, when it was too late, and all was won.

Thus the baron of Fresin procured his own liberty, and the seigniour of
Hautepenne got the town and castle of Breda at an easy rate, from whence
soon after he made an enterprise upon the towns of Gheertruyden-bergh, and
Heusden, but yet he failed in both.

A while after, they of Brabant (to have their revenge) laid an ambush upon
Boisleduc, 1581
was Doctor Iunius, bourgomaster of Antuerpe: but finding some difficulty for
want of horsemen, it proved fruitless: yet for that they would return with
some exploit, having taken upon the way a soldier of the garrison of Eindouen,
a little town of Campaigne, he went thither and took the town, in the which
he took the captain of the castle, whom he threatened to kill, and in the
view of his soldiers offered him some violence, so as by that means he forced
them to yield him the castle, in the which there were two companies of foot and
a cornet of horse, which for the most part were stripped. This done, he marched
to Helmont, which he took also, but he could not get the castle: the earl of
Hohenlo arrived there also with some troops, who took certain forts about
Boisleduc: this done, they of la Guard a Frenchman, and Stuart a Scottishman,
sent into Flanders, to keep the malcontents occupied, whilst that the duke
of Aniou should be busied about the victualling of the town and citadel of
Cambray: so as that quarter of Brabant in Campaigne was unfurnished of
soldiers for the States, whereby Eindouen recovered by the Spaniard.
the Seignior of Hautepenne and the earl of Mansfield had good means to go
and besiege Eindouen without any contradiction, the which they took again
with small toil, the town and castle being not fully victualled as it was
intended.

In the month of May, the thirteen occupations and the six sworn companies
of Antuerpe fearing some uproar amongst the people, and that they would attempt
something against their Images, desired the magistrates, that they might take
away the costly tables or pictures,

Whereas the bourgomasters and Schepen of Antuerpe, with the advice of the
colonels, Orders made in Antuerpe.
captains, and deanes of the six sworn guilds or companies of the town, for
the quietness and safety of the same (the care whereof, by the common
counsel of the town, is committed unto the said magistrates etc.) have found
it fit and convenient, by provision, to forbid the exercise of the Romish
Religion. Wherefore in the name of the Scout, bourgomasters, and Schepen
aforesaid, it is commanded, That no man whatsoever he be, shall take upon him,
within the liberties of the said town, to say any mass either publickely or
privately, neither Gr^ian, and the chapel of the hospital of the virgin
Mary, in the Churchyard street: and for the executing of the same, there should
be six peaceable spiritual persons chosen, which should be sworn unto the
magistrates, to follow and observe that Ordnance, without failing any other of
our united places, although that upon some especial occasion they were come
1581
out of the liberties of the town, and Marquisite of the same, and not return
again, unless it were with express liberty and consent of the aforesaid
magistrates, and others, appointed to take knowledge thereof, upon the pain
aforesaid. Also, that all others (unless it be the English nation) that within
the space of four years last past had come out of any of the united towns,
or other foreign places, to inhabit in the said town of Antuerpe, should
depart out of the same, unless that within fourteen days then next ensuing
(according to the distance of the places) they brought lawful and commendable
testimonials or certificats (in their behalfes) made by the magistrates or
consistories, from whence they last came: which they shall show first to the
captain and weekemasters, in the quarters where they shall dwell:

The Prince of Parma (this year) thought to have made a certain enterprise
upon Flessingue, An enterprise against Flessingue, pretended ^y the prince of
Parma, but not effect^d.
which was practiced by Dom Bernardin de Mendosa, ambassador for the king of
Spain in England, who by means of certain of his Netherland servants, and one
Bouch^ert an aduocat, had secretly dealt with certain Netherland sea
captains, who promised to employ themselves to deliver him the town of
Flessingue: but secretly they made it known unto the prince of Orange (whose
instructions they followed) treating so far as Dom Bernardin de Mendosa,
paid some five or six thousand gulderns to the said captains, one of the
said Mendosa in London. The practice was, That those captains lying with their
ships of war (whereof they had command) before the head of Flessingue,
should suffer certain ships laden with malcontents to go into the town,
that under color of some other action should lie ready thereabouts. The day
being appointed, they of Flessingue secretly reenforced their garrison, thereby
to welcome their enemies, and made themselves ready, with all advantage: mean
time the prince of Orange sent his secretary Christopher Huges into England,
to get the captains son, either by fair or foul means, out of Dom
Bernardin de Mendosa his hands (which the aforesaid captain by the princes
advice had delivered to the ambassador in hostage, for the assurance of his
promise) the which he should work about the same time that the enterprise was
to be effected, Huges being in London, found means (by the help of one of
the princes halberdiers, as the boy stood at the ambassadors gate) to take him
away, and presently conveyed him from thence, notwithstanding that the
ambassador and his men began to make great stir about it, but the boy could
no where be found. And although the delivering of the boy fell out well, yet
the prince of Parma his men came not thither at the day appointed, fearing
least their enterprise had bin discovered, by the imprisonment of the lady of
Haussy, who about that time was committed prisoner in Brussels, whom they knew
to be acquainted therewith, and feared that she might reveal it.

This year, about the same time that this enterprise aforesaid should have
been attempted Maximilian of Bourgoigne, lord of Beueren, were sold by a
decree of the Provincial court of Holland and Zeeland, for the payment of his
debts, he being dead without issue, and were bought by the prince of Orange
for 44600 gulderns, which the town of Antuerpe would willingly have bought,
but the bargain was the rather granted to the prince of 1581
son Maurice.

Many other exploits were done about this time in the Netherlands, as in
Friseland, where the prince of Orange had been in the month of April, being
come from Amsterdam (whereas the general Estates were to assemble about the
accepting of the duke of Aniou for their soueraign lord) and in the way had
visited Harlingen and Leuerden, and appointed Sonoy with two companies of
soldiers to lodge in the town of Staueren, against the castle wherein Reinard
Dekema lay, and held it for the earl of Renenbergh with some 170 men; where
Sonoy made certain mounts, with high rampars or parapets, keeping them within
the castle from coming to the walls with their musket shot, for that they had
no ordnance within the castle: Dekema having made the walls up again both high
and very thick, he could do nothing to it, before that with six pieces of
ordnance (whereof one Thomas Both was gunner) he had beat down their rampars,
and had caused the pioners to fill up the ditches, and began to undermine the
wall, so as he forced them within to parle: but Dekema refusing to accept of
the conditions, The castle of Staueren won by Sonoy*
his soldiers compelled him thereunto, and delivered him and eighteen
Friselanders more prisoners to Sonoy the rest were suffered freely to depart.
This castle had the wall next unto the town thrown down again, and
presently thereupon Sonoy caused the town to be fortified.

This town of Staueren is very ancient, and in times past was a lordship,
very rich and mighty, a great town of merchandise, and the chief in all
those Northern parts, with a very Hucusque ius Stauriae, that is, Thus far
stretches the jurisdiction of the town of Staueren, and in another place, Hic
finitur regnum Stauriae, that is, Here ends the dominion of Staueren.

Staueren in times past was so mighty, as in Anno 1345 with the aid of the
Frisons, upon the 26 of September they overcame William earl of Henault with
all his army, in Holland, hard by S. Odolf his cloister, where the said earl
with many of his men were slain, so that long after there were diverse dead men's
bones (it being two hundred years since) found unburied in that place: for
which cause, in Anno 1545, Mary queen of Hungary, the emperor Charles
sister,

In May the earl of Renenberghs soldiers came out of great Auwart down to
the Reediep, and thought to make a sconce upon the water, to exclude the lord
of Nyenuenoort from the sea: but he being advertised thereof, went to encounter
them, and having laid an ambush, he charged and defeated them, slew and took a
great number of them, and carried away some of their ensigns. After that, the
lord of Nyenuenoort having received 2 months pay for his soldiers of the
Estates of Friseland, upon condition, that he should in the Estates name
besiege great Auwart, he for that cause went and besieged it with diverse
companies of soldiers, and brought ordnance before it to batter the fort: but
the earl of Renenbergh being advertised thereof, gathered Nyenuenoort
perceiving, he was in mind to have left the siege, but the most part of his
captains were of a contrary opinion, wherein they committed a great error, for
that placing the pesants of Friseland among their squadrons of soldiers, they
for want of experience, as soon as the earl of Renenbergh came to charge,
presently, without any blows given, leaped over the ditches with their long
staves, and ran away, which put the rest into rout, every one seeking to save
himself, the earl of Renenberghs forces following them, who took Haspelinus
and Berenbroeks ensigns, captain Stuper and Vischer being taken prisoners,
but not many slain. Many of them fled into the sconce of Auwerderziel, where
the earl of Renenbergh Schelto Iarges, a wise and a valiant captain, was
slain.

The Friselanders presently after assembled the dispersed soldiers again, so
that Nynuenoort 1581
coming before it with all his power, the fort being not yet finished, nor
able to endure the canon, he was constrained by his own men to parle with the
earl, so as it was agreed that he should depart freely with bag and baggage,
and leave all his other forts. Nyenuenoort being thus overthrown, the earl of
Renenbergh was master all over the Ommelands, as far as Doccum.

In the mean time, the Estates to aid the lord of Nyenuenoort (although too
late) appointed Sir John Norris to be general over certain forces and with
him eight companies of Sonoy his regiment, with some others, who being made
stronger with the remainders of the broken companies, sought opportunity to
give the earl of Renenbergh battle, and as captain Schul, with certain
soldiers, had taken Monikerziel fort, he took that from them, and forced the
earl of Renenberghs troops to go out of the village in Gripskerke in
battle. Colonel Sonoy led the foreward, and began the charge coldly, by many
skirmishes, until the rest came on, and charged in gross, whereupon the
Renenberghers fled, and were pursued till they came to Groaning, with the loss
of certain ensigns, and seven hundred of their men, besides many which were
taken prisoners (and small loss to the victors) they took great store of
their arms, which they that fled, were forced to cast away, and yet Sir John
Norris had no horsemen with him, but only his own cornet, whereby many of the
Renenberghers saved their lives most by means of the ditches: there was also
four pieces of ordnance taken from them, and all their provision.

The 23 of July died George of Lalain, baron of Ville, earl of Renenbergh,
brother to the earl of Hoochstraten, for grief and sorrow of this defeat,
although his sickness was not without some suspicion of poison: during his
sickness, he did often grieve and lament, that he had quit the Estates party,
whereby he had drawn himself into such a laberynth, crying out often: O The
death of the earl of Renenbergh.
Groaning, Groaning, whereunto have thou brought me, cursing the day* that he had
ever seen it. The last 8 days before his death, he exclaimed also upon his
sister Cornille of Lalain, forbidding her to come in his sight, seeing that she
had seduced him, and was the cause of his perdition. This earl of Renenbergh
was son to the lord of Escornets governor of Guelderland for the emperor, who
had to wife the daughter of the earl of Renenbergh, and afterward by the
succession of his cousin became earl of Hoochstraten: as also the said George
of Lalain succeeded after Herman his uncle by the mothers side, chanon of
Cologne, to the said earldome of Renenbergh. His elder brother, earl of
Hoochstraten, was called Anthony of Lalain, a wise and valiant nobleman, who in
the year 1567 retired himself with the prince of Orange out of the
Netherla^ds, and was also banished by the duke of Alua, as we have formerly
showed. He died of a shot in the foot, in the first voyage which the prince
made with his army into these countries, leaving some children; among others,
his eldest was also earl of Hoochstraten, who of the lady N. of Egmont, widow
to the earl of Hennin, lord of Capres, left one son after his death. This
earl of Renenbergh was a courteous nobleman, and well red in Greek and Latin,
a great lover of histories and of music, wherein he spent most of his time.
He was an enemy to all tyranny (although he committed that vild act in
Groaning, the which he afterward repented Gaspar Verdugo succeeded him in the
government of Friseland and Groaning.

The Estates of Flanders sent a little army into the quarter of Ypre and
Dixmuyden, under the command of the prince of Espinoy, whom they made
general, whereof the Seignior of Villers, before governor of Bouchain, was
marshall of the camp, to make work on that as in like manner the malcontents
did, being lodged in the fort of Hauteriue, betwixt 1581
who at the same time defeated a rich conuoy of ninety wagons (with all sorts
of merchandise) going to Antuerpe, and from thence to the fair of Francfort,
being guarded but by some few foot and fifteen horse only. Of all these
wagons there were about seventy taken, the rest escaped. This unfortunate
encounter made many poor men, who went themselves to Gant and Antuerpe, to
sell their merchandise, of the which there were some taken prisoners, who
(besides all their losses) were hardly ransomed. Such encounters were made
daily on either side, whereby all traffic both in fayres and markets decayed.

At that time the Estates had their army encamped near unto the village of
Loos, in the

The Seignior of Iuchy, governor of Cambray, had been forced (but with the
consent of the Estates) to treat with the duke of Aniou, brother to the French
king, who had sent him certain French companies, led by the Seignior of
Balaigni, bastard to John of Monluc, bishop of Valence. On the other side, the
prince of Parma and the Wallon neighbor provinces,

The which being done, and the peace proclaimed in France, he assembled his
army about Chasteaudun, consisting of goodly troops both of horse and foot,
having the greatest part of the French nobility voluntaries, whom he had
invited to do him this great and notable service; with the which were the old
companies of men at arms, under the command of the lord of Bellegarde, all
amounting to four thousand horse and ten thousand foot; the said duke
marching with his artillery in the head of his army toward Cambray, Aignan
and his son Rochpot, Montgomery, and Vantadour, the Viconts of Tureine and la
Guerche, the Vidame of Amiens, the lords of Feruaques, la Chastre, S. Luc,
Dieu, la Mauvissiere, and many others, with four marshals of the camp,
whereof Feruaques was the chief.

The Queen mother sought by entreaties and all other means to call back her
son (the duke of Aniou) from this expedition, and to hinder him from
relieuing of Cambray: but he rejected all entreaties as inhumane, having
promised the Estates not to fail them in this extremity, which made him to
persist in his pretended enterprise. Some gave it

King Philip hearing of the duke of Aniou his great preparations, supposing
that such great 1581
complained by his ambassador of his brothers great preparation, to aid and
protect his rebellious subjects of the Netherlands, who were enemies of the
true Religion, and of the faith of Christ, against their natural prince,
against the Catholic faith, and against a king which was his kinsman and good
f^iend, having never given him any cause of so great a wrong; and therefore he
could not believe, that so great forces could be gathered together, without the
kings aid and consent: entreating him therefore, that seeing he had received no
wrong from him, he would also forbear to iniure a king that was his friend and
kinsman. Answer was made unto the ambassador, That the French king had never
wronged, nor yet thought to wrong a king which was his friend and allie,
neither was it fit for his greatness, who carries

With all this goodly train (as aforesaid) the duke approached near to Cambray
the sixteenth of August, on which day certain young noblemen of his army being
too far advanced, were charged by the marquess of Roubay, Vicont of Gant,
general of the prince of Parma his horse, who put them to rout, such as
escaped running speedily to the body of their army. At which encounter the
Vicont of Tureine and the earl of Vancadour were taken prisoners. The prince
of Parma (who was also near unto Cambray with all his forces) making show that
he would hinder the victualling thereof, presented himself in battle the
seventeenth day with all his army, where he stood six hours in the face of
the French, as if he would have fought with them, whereunto the said marquess
of Roubay did much persuade and importune him. The duke had no other conceit,
but that he came to give him battle,

The next day (being the eighteenth of the month) the duke of Aniou marching
still in good order, approached near unto the town: where, having caused all
the victuals and munition (which he had brought in great quantity) to enter,
after that he had Cambray victualled.
forced the Spanish army to rise, he victualled it to the full, and entered
himself in person, where he was triumphantly received with great joy of all
the people, and acknowledged protector of Cambray and Cambresis, held simply of
the empire, the which in old time were

The twentieth of the month he took a solemn oath in the Cathedral Church,
and afterward in the Towne-house, to govern and maintain the said city and
country, and the citizens, bourgers and inhabitants thereof, in their ancient
liberties, freedoms, and rights, after which there was gold and silver cast
among the people. The one and twentieth day he 1581
to fight with the Spaniards, who retired further into the country. Then he
returned to besiege castle Cambresis, which yielded by composition, having
endured 219 canon shot. There went forth three companies with their arms, and
their matches out. At this siege, the Vicont of Touar was slain, and the
Seignior of Balaigne shot in the calfe of the leg.

The duke of Aniou being come thus far, he was earnestly entreated by the
general Estates and the prince of Orange to pass on, and to enter into the
Netherlands, having a part Castle Cambresis taken by the duke.
of their army in Flanders, under the command of the prince of Espinoy, and
the regiments of la Guard and Stuart, all which should go and join with him:
but Winter approaching,

The General Estates of the united Provinces of Gueldres, Holland, Zeeland,
Zutphen, Friseland, Oueryssel and Groeningen, having declared Prince PHILIP of
Austria, second of that name, King of Spain, fallen from the Seigniorie of the
said Provinces, by reason of his extraordinary and too violent government
against their privileges and freedoms, solemnly sworn by him, have by the
way of right and arms taken upon them all the government of the politic
Estate, and of the Religion in the said Provinces, in the year 1581.

THE GENERAL ESTATES 1581
of the united Provinces.
The wicked counsel of the young King Roboam,
The most unlawful lust that proud Tarquins mind o'recame,
And of those two young kings the great peruersitie,
Was the only cause that did bereave them of their royalty.
Of twelve Tribes, only one to Roboam remained,
And Tarquin driven out of Rome, the people straight obtained
The government, and the chief sovereignty
Of Rome, and to the Senate did commit the authority.
The cruelty of the Inquisitors of Spain,
That long in the united lands did civil wars maintain,
In the end was the only means and cause, that after we
The Spanish yoke long time had borne, obtained our liberty.

THE XII. BOOK. 1581

The Argument.
THe general Estates of the united Provinces of Gueldres, Holland, Zeeland,
Zutphen, Vtrecht, Friseland, Oueryssel, and Groeningen, took upon them the
government of the said Provinces, after they had declared the King of Spain to
be fallen from the Seigniorie thereof by a solemn Edict, having abiured him,
broken his seals, absolved the subjects of their oath, and made them take a new
(...), for the preservation of their country, and obedience to the said
Estates. The prince of Parma besieges Tournay, which in the end yields. The
prince of Orange desires to quit the place of Lieutenant general, after the
departure of the archduke Mathias, and is entreated to continue it, whereupon
he gives some admonitions to the Estates, but to small purpose. The duke of
Aniou comes into the Netherlands, is created duke of Brabant. A bargain made
by the king of Spain to kill the prince of Orange, who was shot, and in great
danger of his life, and the murderer slain. The siege of Oudenarde yielded to
the Spaniard. Alost taken by scalado for the duke of Aniou. Death of the
princess of Orange. The duke created earl of Flanders. An attempt against the
duke and the prince of Orange at Bruges, for the which one was executed at
Paris. The dukes army charged near unto Gant by the prince of Parma, but it
retires safe near unto Antuerpe. Lochen besieged by the Spaniard, relieved by
the earl of Hohenlo in the Estates name. The strangers called back into the
Netherlands by the disunited forces. The French king refuses to succor the
duke his brother, who assures himself of Dunkerke. Being ill advised, he
seeks to seize upon the town of Antuerpe, where his chief nobility was
slain: the like was attempted in diverse other towns, whereof the prince of
Parma seeks to make his profit, and the duke grows odious, and yet the prince
of Orange labors to reconcile all, the which he did by the means of the
Seignior of Bellieure, sent by the king of France. The duke yielding unto the
Estates the towns which he had seized on, returns into France. Another
project to murder the prince of Orange, by ^e Pedro Dordogne, and another at
Flessingue, by Hans Hanson. The marshall of Biron retireth with the duke of A^u
his troops. The prince leaving Antuerpe, comes into Holland, where there is
some speech to (...) earl of Holland, but without effect. Imbise called home by
them of Gant, he plotteth his own ruin, and is beheaded at Gant as a traytar,
after that he had sought to yield it, with Denremonde, to the Spaniard. Ypre
yielded by necessity to the Spaniard, and Bruges by the prince of Chymay his
practices. Lillo besieged in vain by the Spaniard. The prince of Orange
murdered at Delft. Prince Maurice succeeds his father in the government: the
town of Antuerpe blocked up: the river stopped: Gant and Denremonde yielded.
The endeavors of them of Antuerpe: the resolution of the Estates upon the
demand of a new prince: they send deputies to the French king, who excuses
himself upon the civil wars. Nymmeghen, Doesbourg, Brussels, Macklyn, and
other places yielded to the Spaniard. The Estates men defeated at Coestein, and
near to Amerongen: in the end Antuerpe is yielded. During this siege, the
Estates sent their deputies to the queen of England, who accepts their
protection, and sends her lieutenant for their preservation.

IN the alterations which happen sometimes in an Estate betwixt the Sovereign
prince and a people that is free and privileged, there are ordinarily two
points, which make them to aim at two diverse ends: The one is, when as the
prince seeks to have a full subjection and obedience of the people, and the
people contrariwise require, that the prince should maintain them in their
freedoms and liberties, which he has promised and sworn solemnly unto them
before his reception to the principality. Thereupon quarrels grow: the prince
will hold a hard hand, and will seek by force to be obeyed; and the subjects
rising against the prince, oftentimes with dangerous tumults, rejecting his
authority, seek to embrace their full liberty.

In these first motions there happens sometimes communications and
conferences, at 1581
betwixt the prince and his people. And then if any one of the parties grows
obstinate, and will not yield although he seem to be most in fault, it
follows of necessity, that they must come to more violent remedies, that is
to say, to arms. The power of the prince is great, when he is supported by
other princes, which join with him for the consequence of the example, else it
is but small: but that of the people (which is the body, whereof the prince was
the head) stirred up by conscience (especially if the question of Religion be
touched) the members ordained for their function, doing jointly their duties,
is far greater. Thereupon they wound, they kill, they burn, they ruin, and
grow desperately mad: but what is the event? God (who is an enemy of all
tyranny and disobedience) judges

So the general Estates of the united provinces, seeing, that king Philip
would not in any sort (through his wilfulness) yield unto their humble suite
and petitions: and notwithstanding all the offers they could make to purchase a
good, firm, and an assured peace, (notwithstanding all the intercessions both
of the Emperor, the French king, the Queen

The General Estates of the united provinces of the Netherlands, to all those
that these presents shall see, read, or hear, greeting. As it is well known
unto all men, that a prince The Edict ^f the general Estates, declaring the
king of Spain to be fallen from the seigniorie of the Netherlands.
and lord of a country is ordained by God, to be sovereign and head over his
subjects, is ordained for his subjects (without the which he cannot be a
prince) to govern them according unto equity and reason, to take care for
them, and to love them even as a father does his children, or a shepherd his
sheep, who puts both his body and life in danger, to defend and preserve
them. If the prince therefore fails herein, and in steed of preserving his
subjects, does outrage and oppress them, depriueth them of their privileges
and ancient customs, commands them, and will be served as without any
offense, being done with deliberation and the authority of the Estates of the
1581
lord, to defend them: especially, when as the subjects by humble suit,
entreaty, and admonitions, could never mollify their princes heart, nor
divert him from his enterprises and tyrannous designs: so as they have no
other means left them to defend and preserve their ancient liberty, their
wives, children and posterity, for the which (according to the laws of
nature) they are bound to expose both life and goods; as for the like
occasions, we have seen it to fall out often in diverse countries, whereof the
examples are yet fresh in memory: The which ought especially to be of force in
these countries, the which have always been and ought to be governed,
according unto the oath taken by their princes, when they receive them,
conformable to their privileges and ancient customs, having Charles the
fifth (his father) of famous memory (from whom all these countries were
transported unto him) forgetting the services, which as well his father as
himself had received of these countries, and the inhabitants thereof, by the
which especially the king of Spain had obtained such glorious and memorable
victories against his enemies, as his name and power was renowned and feared
throughout all the world; forgetting also the admonitions which his said
imperial Majesty had heretofore given him: but contrariwise, and to put them
in possession of their new bishoprics and incorporated abbeyes, to effect 1581
canons of the counsel of Trent, the which in diverse points do contradict the
privileges of the country. The which being come to the knowledge of the
commons, has given just occasion of so great an alteration among them, and
greatly diminished the love and great affection, the which (as good subjects)
they had always borne unto the king and to his predecessors. For they called
chiefly into consideration, that the king not only pretended to tyrannize
over their persons and goods, but also upon their consciences, whereon they
held themselves not to be answerable, nor bound to give account to any one but
to God only. For this cause, and for the pity they had of the poor people,
the chief of the nobility in the country did in the year 1566 exhibit
certain admonitions, by way of a petition, beseeching Alana to the duchess of
Parma) to have means under some pretext to overthrow all the privileges of
the country, and to govern them rigorously by the Spaniards (as they did the
Indi^ and other countries, which had been newly conquered by them) he by the
instruction and counsel of the said Spaniards (showing therein the small
affection which he bare unto his subjects captain, and soon after of
governor general of the country, the which was quite contrary 1581
suddenly put garrisons into the chief towns and forts of the country, and
then he built citadels in the richest and strongest towns, to keep them in
subjection. And by commandment from the king (as they said) he friendly
called unto him, as well by letters, as otherwise, the chief noblemen of the
country, pretending, that he had need of their counsel and assistance, for
the service of the king, and the good of the country: after the which he caused
them to be apprehended, who (having given credit to his letters) were come unto
him, whom, contrary to the privileges, he caused to be carried prisoners out
of Brabant, where they had bin apprehended, causing their process to be
informed before him and his counsel (although they were no competent judges;)
and before any due proofs were made, and the noblemen that were accused, fully
heard in their defenses, they were condemned to have committed rebellion, and
sword, in such sort, as the most barbarous and cruel enemies could not have
done more, 1581
of the world, who had their merchandise, debts, and money there. And although
the said Spaniards by a decree of the counsel of Estate (to whom the king by
the death of the great Commander, had conferred the general government of the
country) were in the presence of Ieronimo de Rhoda, proclaimed enemies to the
country: yet the said Rhoda of his own private authority (as it is to be
presumed, by virtue of some secret instruction which he had from Spain) took
upon him to be the head of the said Spaniards, and their adherents, so as
without respect of the counsel of Estate, he usurped the kings name and
authority, counterfeited his seal, and carried himself as a governor and
the kings lieutenant in these countries. The which moved the Estates at the
same instant to agree with the prince of Orange, Rhoda, and to the other
captains, authors of all the mischief, That the king not only did not blame
that action, but did allow thereof, and commend it, promising to recompense
them, especially the said Rhoda, as having done him a singular service: The
which at his return into Spain, and to all other ministers of the oppressions
that were used in these countries, he did show by effect. At the same time, the
king thinking the better to blind the eyes of his subjects, sent into Dom John
of Austria, his bastard brother, as being of his blood: who (making show unto
the Estates, that he did allow of the pacification of Gant* promised to send
away the Spaniards, to punish the authors of all insolences and disorders,
which had happened in the country, and to take an order for the general
peace, and the restoring of their ancient liberties) sought to divide the
Estates, and to subdue one country after another. By the permission and
providence of God, who is an enemy to all oppression, he was discovered by
the intercepting of certain letters, where he was commanded by the king to
govern himself in these countries, according to the instructions that should
be given him by Rhoda: And to cover this practice the king had forbidden Dom
John to see or speak one unto another, commanding him to carry himself unto
the chief noblemen, Dom John, notwithstanding that he had solemnly sworn in
the presence of all the Estates of the country, to observe the said
pacification of Gant, yet contrary thereunto he sought by means of their
colonels (whom he had already at his devotion) and great promises, to win the
German soldiers, who were then in garrison, and had the guard of the chief
towns and forts of the country, whereof by that means he made himself master,
holding himself assured of those places they held, and so by that means to
force them that would not join with him, to make war against the prince of
Orange and them of Holland and Zeeland, and so to raise a more bloody and
intestine war, than had been before. But as all Dom John's practices being
discovered, before he could effect what he had designed, he could not bring
his conceptions and enterprises, to the end that he pretended: Yet he revived
a new war, the which continues unto this day, in stead of rest and an assured
peace, whereof he did so much vaunt at his coming. Which reasons have given
us great occasion to forsake the 1581
countries, and to take them into his protection: And the rather, for that
these countries have endured such oppressions, received such wrongs, and have
been forsaken and abandoned by their prince for the space of twenty years
and more, during the which the inhabitants have been entreated not as
subjects, but as enemies, their natural prince and lord seeking to ruin them
by arms. Moreover, after the death of Dom John, having sent the baron of
Selles, who (under color of propounding some means of an accord) declared
sufficiently, That the king would not auow the pacification made at Gant (which
Dom John notwithstanding had sworn to maintain) setting daily down more hard
conditions: Yet for that we would discharge our selves of our duties, we have
not omitted to make humble suit by writing, employing moreover the favor of
the greatest princes of Christendom, seeking by all

We therefore give all men to understand, That having duly considered all
these things, and being pressed by extreme necessity, We have by a general
resolution and consent, declared, and do declare by these presents, the king of
Spain, ipsoiure, to be fallen from the seigniorie, principality,
jurisdiction, and inheritance of these said countries: And that we are
resolved, never to acknowledge him any more, in any matter concerning the
prince, jurisdictions, or demeanes of these Netherlands, nor to use hereafter,
neither yet to suffer any other to use his name as Sovereign Lord thereof.
According to the which we declare all officers, private noblemen, vassals, and
other inhabitants of these countries, of what condition or quality Mathias,
has resigned into our hands the government general of these countries, the
which has been accepted by us. We enjoin and command all judges, officers,
and all others, to whom it shall appertain, That hereafter they leave and
forbear to use any more, the name, titles, great seal, or signet of the king
of Spain: And in stead thereof, counselors, shall be named, called, and
really established in the exercise of their charges, and 1581


We also command the president and them of the privy counsel, the chancellor
and counsel of Brabant, the governor, chancellor, and counsel of Gueldres and
the county of Zutphen, the president and counsel in Flanders, the president
and counsel in Holland, the governor, (...) and counsel in Friseland, the
president and counsel at Vtrecht, the bailife at Tour^ ^d Tournesis, the
receiuors or chief officers of Beoosterscheldt and Bewesterscheldt in (...),
the scout of Macklyn, and all other judges and officers whom it shall concern,
their lieu^ants, and every of them, presently without any delay, to publish
this our decree in all I. Van Asseliers.

According unto this declaration of the Estates, there was a new form of an
oath drawn,

I swear, That hereafter I shall not follow nor yield obedience to Philip king
of Spain, nor acknowledge him for my prince and lord, whom I do renownce by
these presents, and 1581 The form of the oath of abiuration of the king of
Spain.
him: whereof finding my self presently delivered, I swear a new, and bind my
self to the united provinces, and namely to them of Brabant, Gueldre, Holland,
Zeeland, and their allies, and to the sovereign magistrates that are appointed,
to be faithful and loyal unto them, to yield them all obedience, aid, and
comfort, with all my power and means, against the king of Spain and his
adherents, and against all the enemies of the country. Promising as a good
vassal of the country, to carry my self faithfully and loyally, with show
of all obedience to my superiors: So help me the Almighty God.

This decree being thus proclaimed, all the seals, counter seals, and secret
signets of the king of Spain, were broken and cancelled with solemnity, by
all the consuls of the said provinces, Raalda, hearing this abiuration,
propounded in open counsel at Leuwarden, and the renewing of the oath (whether
it were through a sudden amazement, or for the affection which he bare to the
king of Spain) was so moved and troubled, as he fell presently into a
conuulsion, and died suddenly. They were then in great doubt, that this would
cause the king to arrest all the ships and merchandise of the Netherlanders,
that were then in Spain: but the great and extreme necessity of corn which
they had at that time in Spain, was the cause that nothing was attempted
against them.

Mathias Archduke of Austria, having (as we have said) willingly resigned up
the government The departure of the archduke Mathias out of the Netherlands.
of the Netherlands, parted from Antuerpe the nine and twentieth of October, to
retire

At the same time the prince of Espinoy, governor of Tournay and Tournesis,
sent to surprise S. Guislain surprised by the prince of Espynoy.
the town of Guislain in Henault, three leagues from Mons. Captain Turquean
had the charge of this exploit, whereof he discharged himself happily, so as
this town was reduced under the States command, to the great grief of the
earl of Lalaine, great bailife of Henault: but soon after it was recovered
again by the prince of Parma, where the said Turqueau was taken prisoner, who
was afterward so tortured, to make him confess the secrets of the city of
Tournay, and of the prince of Espinoy, as he died thereof, being in a manner
torn in pieces, against all law of arms.

The prince of Espinoy being called (as we have said before) by the four
members of Flanders to command their army, going out of Tournay, he had
carried with him the best part of the garrison of the said town, to march
toward East-Flanders. The prince of Parma, by the advice of the marquess of
Roubay, brother to the said Espinoy, taking hold of this occasion, and
considering how much the town of Tournay did import him, for the freeing of
the 1581
he made show as if he would follow the prince of Espinoy, and his troops, to
make frustrat a certain enterprise which he had upon Graueling: but turning
head suddenly, he went to besiege Tournay, the which was unfurnished both of
governor and garrison, except the castle, where the princess was remaining
with the seignior of Estrailles, the princes lieutenant, and Tournay besieged
by the prince of Parma.
some few soldiers of the ordinary garrison. The siege being laid, the camp
intrencht, and artillery planted, in great number, and in diverse places, both
the town and the castle were battered together with six and thirty pieces, and
many mines and counter-mines were made of either side, after many sufficient
breaches, diverse furious assaults being given, the which were valiantly repulst
by the besieged, in the which they slew a great number of the enemy: the
Gaspar of Robles, lord of Billy, were hurt. At these assaults, among diverse
remarkable things, the Spaniards having blown up a mine, there were certain
maidens laboring at the rampar, buried in the ruins up to the shoulders; the
lord of Montigny coming to the assaults, and spying them, taking pity of
them, he commanded they should be taken Preston, a Scottish man, who having
forced the Germans quarter in the Spanish camp, beat some horsemen, among the
which was the prince of Chimays band of ordnance, of the which they carried
away some thirty. But these succors did not so much fortify the besieged, as
it did them harm in wasting of their provision, and to discourage the burgers
(among the which those of the reformed religion were the most resolute) by the
report which they made unto them, that they might not expect any succors from
the duke of Aniou, who was gone into England, and his troops dispersed,
although that the princes of Orange and Espinoy did hope well, that they would
join with their forces which they had in Flanders, and

In the end the Protestant citizens, upon whom alone depended the whole burden
of the defense of the town (the Catholics being persuaded by frie^ Gery, not
to defend themselves against the kings men) and withal Arthur bastard of
Meleun, seignior of Fresne, lieutenant of the town, growing cold, every man
did the like, neither did the bourgers perform their accustomed endeavors. The
princess and the seignior of Estraylles dispairing of all succors, they
resolved to capitulat with the prince of Parma, after some conferences held
betwixt her, the marquess of Roubay her brother in law, and the marquess of
Renty, called Emanuel of Lalaine, Tournay yielded by composition.
them a good composition: The conditions were,

That the princess might retire where she pleased, with all her family and
household servants, mouable goods, and baggage.

That the garrison should depart with their colors flying, arms, bag and
baggage, whither they pleased.

That the towns men to redeem themselves from spoil, should pay two hundred
thousand florins.

That the Protestants that would retire themselves, and go live in any place
that were neuter, should enjoy their goods, causing it to be received by
Catholic persons.

That all prisoners taken during the siege, of either part, should be set at
liberty without any 1581


That king Philip should take the town into his protection, and pardon all
that had carried arms against him.

That they of Tournay should be held faithful subjects, and acknowledge king
Philip for their natural prince, who should not alter nor change any of their
privileges.

That the artillery and munition should be delivered untouched, to the said
prince of Parma.

And thus the town was yielded the 29 of November 1581.

The princess was much solicited by her brother and brother in law, to remain
still in Tournay, or at their house of Antoin, and to persuade the prince her
husband to leave the Estates,

The town being yielded on S. Andrews day (whom the Burguignons hold for
their patron) and all things set in good order, Maximillian of Morillon, vicar
to the cardinal of Granuelle, in his archbishopricke of Macklin, was made
bishop of Tournay, in the place of the seignior of Oyenbrugghe (who retired
also with the princess, for that he had been placed there

About the end of this year captain Sale, governor of the town of Bourbourg
in West Flanders, for the Spaniard, having intelligence with captain Bouffart
of the States party, promised to the prince of Orange and the said States, to
deliver them the town, to make his peace with them, and to purchase his
reconciliation. Captain Bouffart with some French men of the regiment of
monsieur de Villeneufue, were sent for the execution of this exploit, who with
part of his men past over the town ditch, in a certain place where there was
least water: the rest which should have followed him, loosing their way by the
darkness of the night, remained Bouffart thinking that he had been followed,
and seconded by the rest, marched on, and entered the town, where the seignior
of la Motte pardieu, governor of Graueling, was at that time. At his entry
(which was not without bruit) Sale and his followers went to join with him*
giving an hot alarm: la Motte and his people coming to encounter them, there
was a cruel fight, whereas Bouffart for want of being followed, was slain,
and all they that entered with him, were either slain or prisoners. Sale was
also slain, desiring rather to die, than to be taken prisoner. And so this
enterprise failed.

On the fifth of December the seignior of Bersele (son to the lord of
Gaesbeke, brother to the seignior of Heze) marquess of Berghen, in the right
of his wife, who was daughter to the lord of Petershem, of the house of Merode,
having until that time carried himself a Neuter, the town, they caused four
hundred men to approach, whereof a part entered into the town, 1581
time was half deaf, besides the fogge was so great, as they could not
discern three paces off, the which did wonderfully favor their enterprise:
But two hundred of those undertakers being entered without discovery, by chance
a soldier of the town guard, walking up and down, met them, and knew them, so
as he presently cried to arms, the which stayed the rest that would have have
entered, finding also some other stop. Yet those that were entered marched in
good order through the town, unto the market place, bending toward the port
of Woude, which they thought to break open by force, and to'draw in the horse
which were there attending. The French garrison which was within the town, of
la Gards regiment, was at the first much amazed with this sudden surprise: but
colonel Allein and captain Durant arriving, they took courage, and charged the
enemy with such fury, as they had no means nor leisure to break Paulo
Boboca: captain la Riuiere was slain, and there were not many escaped, but
were hurt. See how by this enterprise which succeeded not the marquess of
Berghen declared himself an enemy to the States, and so he carried himself
until his death, which was two or three years after.

In the mean time the affairs of Flanders were nothing pleasing to the prince
of Orange, for the repairing whereof he was much troubled, and yet prevailed
little, parting in December from Gant, he returned to Antuerpe, where on the
twentieth day of the month the general The prince of Oranges desire to be
discharged of his place.
retreat of the archduke Mathias (whose lieutenant he had been in the
government of the Netherlands) he was in like sort discharged of the said
office, and therefore they should otherwise advise for their affairs.
Whereupon he was intrea^d by the Estates, to continue his charge until the
end of January following, when as they attended the coming of the duke of
Aniou. Whereupon he made answer, That seeing for his honor, for the good of
the country, The States answer to the princes dema^d
and for their service, they found it convenient it should be so, he would in
the mean time put them in mind of things which had happened the years past,
for want of their good government. And although (said he) that the enemy
being master of the field, had in a manner done what he would, which they could
not hinder, yet (God be thanked) he had not won all: seeing nor obedience, how
is it possible to settle any good order in military discipline, in the
revenues, 1582
that such a counsel can have any authority or respect, when as they cannot
dispose of a penie, as neither he nor that high counsel never yet could. To
conclude (said he) behold the fault and the inconvenience, which had hitherto
detained them, and wherein they continued, the which (as he had formerly
prophesied unto them) would be the cause of their ruin, if God by his mercy
did not prevent it. He therefore entreated them to consider well of that point,
and to call them that understood it, to the end the blame might not be laid
upon him. But if they would take a good course, and foresee it in time, they
should find by the effects (as he is bound) that he would not spare any thing
that is in his power. Wherein they should strive the more, seeing that his
government extends but to the end of January; and that for the present there
was no other to govern but himself, and to order all things with all
convenient speed.

This speech of the prince, although it were truly and sincerely delivered, yet
wrought it small effect: some provinces being of opinion, the war should be
referred to the prince and the counsel of State, others said, that they must
stay their resolution until the coming of the duke of Aniou. For the hastening
whereof the seignior of S. Aldegonde, and doctor Iunius, bourgmaster of
Antuerpe, were sent into England. The princes of Orange and Espinoy, with the
other chief noblemen of the country, going to attend him at Middlebourg in
Zeeland, there to receive him.

In the mean time the towns of Doccum, Sloten, Staueren, with the Nyeuwe-zyel
in the country of Friseland, being fortified for the Estates, the seigniour of
Merode, governor of Nienwenoort, a knight, to fortify the Borough of
Oldenborne, and to lodge there with six companies of foot. Colonel Verdugo,
governor of Groningue for the king of Spain, went therefore the 24 of
January, thinking to dislodge him: but seeing himself so roughly entertained
by the sallies of them of the garrison, and hearing of the preparation which
the Estates made to succor it, he retired, not without loss: for the knight
Nienwenoort, fell upon his rereward, the which he defeated, his men carrying
away a great spoil, and many prisoners. Some time after the places of
Brouckhorst and Keppel yielded to the Spaniard: Colonel Norris, who was then
in Friseland, besieged them, but he prevailed nothing.

The duke of Aniou (as we have said) gone the first of November into England,
being accompanied The duke of Aniou comes out of England into Zeeland.
by the prince Daulphin, son to the duke of Montpenser, the earls of Laual
(son to the lord d' Andelot) S. Aignan and Chasteauroux, the seigniours d'
Espruneaux, Feruaques, Bacqueuille, Cheualier Breton, Theligny, and others,
whither also came the seignior of Inchy, governor of Cambray. He was
entertained with great pomp and state by the Queen, where having spent three
months in great pleasure and delight, he departed from London the first of
February, being accompanied by the Queen, who conducted him toward Dover.
And the eight day following, after leave taken, and that the Queen had
recommended the affairs of the Netherlands unto him, counselling him to
govern them mildly, and aduising him above al to win the hearts of the people
and of the nobility, and to use their counsel: Charles Howard, admiral of
England, and the baron of Honsdon, all three Knights of the Garter, and of her
Majesty's counsel. To whom she gave charge to say unto the prince of Orange,
and other noblemen, and the Estates of the Netherlands, That the service they
should do unto the said Duke, she would hold it, and repute it as done unto
her own person. There were also many other English noblemen in his company,
as the lord Willoughby, Sheffeld, Windsore, and many knights, as Sir Philip
Sidney, Shurley, Parrat, Drury, and the sons of the lord Howard, with diverse
other knights and gentlemen of account, with a goodly train of servants richly
appointed, with the which the Duke arrived at Flessingue to go to land, whereas
the prince of Orange embracing his thigh, said, That he held himself 1582
John Petit.
did observe at his landing (being then present, and an household servant to the
prince of Orange) that the duke going out of the boat to step on land, tript a
little with the right foot, and might have fallen into the water, if he had not
been held. Some discoursed afterward of this small mishap, and took it for
an ill presage.

Being entered into the town of Flessingue (when he could not in a manner see
any thing for

FRANCIS DE VALOIS, DVKE OF ANiou, 1582
of Brabant, etc. Earl of Flanders, etc. Protector of the Belgicke Liberty.
FRANCISCVS VALESIVS D G DVX ALENSON ET BRABANT COMES FLANDRIAE PROTECT BELGICAE


By royal race I was the son of valiant Henry
The second, king of France, and did behold with woeful eye
The massacre that in my youth in Paris once was made,
Whereat I was in heart sore grieved, and great compassion had.
The wars in France once finished, I did then undertake
To aid the Netherlands, that me their sovereign prince did make;
Where perverse counsel of such men as enui'd my estate,
Seduced me, and made my actions prove unfortunate:
For seeking Antuerpe to subdue, in their defense
They did become my mortal foes, and drove me out from thence.
So, deadly hated of them all, in France I then retired,
Whereas in Chastean Thirry death my vital days expired.
THE twenty ninth of February the Duke of Aniou (to make his joyful 1582
Theodore of Lysfeldt, chancellor of Brabant. As in like sort the chief
noblemen, gentlemen, and The Duke of Aniou created Duke of Brabant.
others there present, his vassals, by reason of the said duchy and marquisit,
took their oath, and did him homage, all with great joy of the people, and of
all the assistants. Then was he attired by the princes of Orange and Espinoy,
with the dukes robe of crimson velvet, surred with Ermins; the prince of Orange
saying, Let us make fast this button, that the robe may not be pulled away.
Then was the hat put on his head, the prince Daulphin saying to the prince of
Orange, Brother set it fast on, that it fly not off. All was performed with
great pomp and ceremonies, the which continued almost two hours, there being
all that day above twenty thousand John vanden Work, made (by commandment of
the magistrate) a speech unto the people, showing, That the Duke would in like
sort take a particular oath, for the marquisite of the holy empire, and that
they should pray unto God, that by such solemn acts, redounding to his honor
and gloire, the country might flourish in all happiness and prosperity. This
Oration being ended, the Duke took the said oath in the hands of the seignior
of Stralen, Amptman of the town, who in sign of acknowledgement and
obedience, presented him a golden key, the which the duke returned him back
again, and commanded him to keep it safely.

These solemnities being finished, the heralds with their coats of arms of
Brabant, Lembourg, and Lothier, bare headed, began to cry, God save the Duke
of Brabant, and the trumpets sounding, they cast among the people many handfuls
of gold and silver. On the one side of the coins was his picture with his name
and titles, and on the other his device, drawn from the virtue of the Sun,
with these words, Fo^et and discutit, that is, He does nourish and chase away.
This done, the Duke going from the scaffold with the princes and noblemen, that
did accompany him, went to horseback, being mounted upon a goodly Neapolitan
courser, and so went toward the town. Before him there marched in goodly
order, first the sergeant majors the officers of the town house, the trumpets
of the town, merchant strangers, Dutch and Easterlings, all in white, and well
mounted, the English in black velvet, the colonels and captains Lamoral of
Egmont, as baron of Gaesbeke: then his guard of Switsers, being followed by
many gentlemen of the country, French and English: after whom came the Duke in
his ornaments, having before him, first the Markgraue of Antuerpe, bare headed,
carrying his long rod, the mark of justice: then the baron of Merode, seignior
of Petershem, who that day supplied the place of marshall of Brabant, carrying
a naked sword: the town. At the port there were six gentlemen, carrying a
canopie of cloth of gold, richly 1582
his palace.

At his entry he found a triumphant chariot of the union, on the which was set
a fair virgin, The dukes entry into Antuerpe.
richly adorned, representing the virgin of Antuerpe: and at every corner of a
street, where he should pass, scaffolds were made, whereon they did figure
diverse histories and morals, fit for the reception of a new prince, to serve
him as an example and president; the which for the most part were interpreted
unto him, with many arches, colosses, pyramides, and other shows of triumph.
All which solemnities and ceremonies continued until night, the canon still
thundering from the rampars. In the end he was conducted with this royal
train unto his palace, in the abbey of S. Michael, where supper attended him,
being also prepared for all the

Thursday following (being the two and twentieth day of the month) the duke
went unto the towne-house, before the which there was a great scaffold erected,
and richly appointed, where (according to the accustomed solemnities and
ceremonies) he took a particular oath The dukes oath to the town of Antuerpe.
to the town of Antuerpe, in the bourgomasters hands, with an oration to the
people, pronounced by the pentioner. Then the Amptman did read with a loud
voice in the vulgar tongue to the bourgomasters, sherifes, officers, counsel
of the town, and to all the people, the oath which they made unto the duke, so
as lifting up their hands, they did swear fealty and obedience unto him;
which done, they cast gold and silver abroad as before: after which the duke,
with all the noblemen, French, English and Netherlanders, went and dined in the

The duke being thus invested in the duchy of Brabant, and the Marquisite of
the holy empire, the Romish Catholics of the town of Antuerpe did importune
him to have free and public exercise of their Religion, relying upon the
dukes profession of the same Religion: to whom in the end there was granted
(by the advice of the prince of Orange and the counsel of Estate) that they
might assist at Mass, Euensong, and other ceremonies in the temple of S.
Michaels abbey, when as the duke should be present, upon condition, that they
should take the oath which was propounded unto them. On the other side, the
prince of Orange presented unto him the deputies of the consistories of the
Protestant Religion, who came to congratulate his happy coming to this new
Estate and duchy of Brabant, offering Francis the first, they besought him to
have learning and learned men in recommendation, and then they ended their
speech, with a prayer unto God, That he would give him the courage of David,
the wisdom of Solomon, and the zeal of Ezechias. Whereupon the duke
answered, That he was glad and very well pleased to see their concord and
unity; that he did hope so to govern them, as they should never be frustrate
of that good expectation which they had of him, wherein he would imitate the
steps of his predecessors; and so thanking them for the love and affection
they seemed to bear him, he received them and all

After the conquest of the town of Tournay, the prince of Parma suffered his
army to rest some time in the towns and places which he had recovered from
the Estates, where they made themselves to be served and observed after the
Spanish manner. And in the mean time he held a counsel with the Estates of
Arthois and Henault, not only concerning the government general (which the
duchess his mother, being returned to Namur, pretended, as we have said) but
chiefly to cause his Spanish, Italian, high Dutch, and Bourguignon forces to
return, who (according to the treaty of their reconciliation) were gone out
of the succeeded, and that the unreconciled provinces had now shown themselves
greater enemies 1582
than necessary for their good and the kings service to have those strange
soldiers called back. Whereunto in the end the Estates of Arthois and Henault
yielded, for the which an Act was made, which Damp John Sarasin, abbot of S.
Vaast in Arras, carried into Spain, having his brother N. Sarasin (a tailor by
profession) with him, whom the king (for the love of the said abbot) made a
knight, and afterward (by means of the church goods, and the help of my lord
abbot) he attained to great wealth, and among other things he purchased the
Seigniorie of Alennes: by means whereof, and of his knighthood, this tailor
(by the recommendation of his brother) obtained letters of Estate, to be
admitted with the chief noblemen in the assembly of the Estates of the county
of Arthois: and so might

This abbot (when as all men would seem to make show to be well affected unto
their country, against Dom John of Austria) did write a bitter inuectiue
against the tyrannous and cruel government of the Spaniards. He was learned
and well spoken, a right Courtier, and exceeding ambitious, in the end he
became archbishop of Cambray, in which he dyed, in the year 1598. According
unto the dispatch of this abbot, touching the accord which was made with them
of Arthois and Henault, the king did presently levy

A little before, and also at the same season, the king honored some noblemen
(his vassales) of those countries with goodly titles, but more honorable than
profitable. Robert of Melun, lord of Richebourg, and, by his wife, Vicont of
Gant (although that in the time of Dom John he had been a great enemy unto
him) and governor of Arthois, was created marquess of Roubay, the which being
heretofore but a baronie, which his mother (the princess of Espinoy) had given
him: Oudard of Bournonuille, Seignior of Capres, governor of the town and
city of Atras, had his baronie of Hennin Lietard translated John of S. Omer,
Seignior of Morbeque, governor of Air, was made earl of Morbeque; but he
dyed before his letters patents came, and his sons afterward neglected it:
N. of Longueual, lord of Vaux, sometimes governor of Arras, was a little
before his death made earl of Bucquoy: Maximilian of Villain, Siegniour of
Rassinghem, governor of Lille, Douay, and Orchies, had his Seigniorie erected
into an earldom: and afterward, Valentine of Pardieu, Seignior of la Morte,
governor of Graueling, of a poor gentleman was made earl of Eckelbeque, the
which he had bought of a Frenchman: The king of Spain would also have the
marriage to be made and solemnized of the daughter and only heir of the
deceased marquess of Renty, brother to the duke of Arschot, with Emanuel of
Lalain, lord of Montigny so as the king

The duke of Aniou being newly created duke of Brabant, came into the assembly
of the general Estates of the united provinces, in the town of Antuerpe, with
the prince of Orange, to settle some good order for all that did concern the
well governing of the country, and to have an assured assignation of two
hundred florins a month for the entertainment of his army, besides those
troops which the Estates entertained in their frontier garrisons and other
places: Those of Brabant had upon their charge the garrisons of Liere, Macklyn,
Brussels, Herental, Die, Villeuorde, Hoochstraten, Westerlo, part of that of
Berghen upon Soome; those of the forts of Lillo, Willebrouck, and S.
Marguerite, forces, had been sufficient to chase the Spaniards and all
strangers out of the country: 1582
reuolts.

At that time the Estates men being yet in Menin, defeated a great conuoy,
near unto a village called Warcoin in Tournesis, conducted by two hundred
Albanois horse, where they had a rich booty, and many good prisoners. They of
Friseland in the beginning of this year, by favor of the ice, surprised the
town of Meppel, and the castle of Brouchorst, which they took by force.

At that time there was a certain Spanish merchant living in Antuerpe, called
Gaspar de Anastro; who seeing his affairs to decline, and that he was likely
to become bankerupt, if he were not presently relieved with money by some other
means than merchandise, his credit Valentine of Pardieu Seignior of la Motte,
governor of Graueling) to put this proiected murder in execution, he first
addressed himself to a servant of his, who kept his accounts, and (with tears
in his eyes) showed him into what danger he was like to fall, and to become
bankerupt, if he were not helped with money, the which (he said) there was no
means to prevent, but in getting the reward promised in the proscription for
the murder: he therefore entreated him (as he knew his secrets) to undertake
this act. The young man pitied his estate, and would A plot laid to kill the
prince of Orange.
he said, that there was not any one more fit for such an exploit, than Joan
Iauvreg^i (whom he called Ioanille) Anastro his boy, who might be easily
persuaded and advised to undertake and perform it, being a most wicked
villain, and resolute to do any mischief whatsoever. Ioanille being called,
they break it unto him, and he undertakes it resolutely, without any pausing
or further excuse: having concluded when, how, and after what manner it should
be effected, this merchant Anastro leaving his people engaged, retired himself
out of Antuerpe, and went to Graueling to la Motte, to assure the fact. Being
upon the way, he writ to Ioanille, That he should not fail to put two rounds,
and Ioanille doubting that the prease would be too great, and that he should
not approach so near unto the prince his person, as was needful to do the
deed, he thought it more convenient to execute it at dinner, in the prince his
own house, he being at the table. This boy being thus desperately resolved, a
certain Iacobin Friar (called Peter Timmerman) came to confess him in Anastro
his house, fortifying him in his resolution with many sweet words, yet
persuading him and making him believe, that he should go invisible, having
given him some caracters in paper, and Ioanille enters into the dyning
chamber, who (being attyred almost like a Frenchman) they took him to be
servant to some of those French noblemen: he sought to approach near unto the
prince his person, but he was so environed himself before a window in the
hall, close by the door of his withdrawing chamber. The 1582
the Spaniards had practiced in the Netherlands, the which were wrought in the
tapistrie; and having his face turned on the left side, this murderer
discharged his little pistol, thinking to hit him in the hinder part of the
head: but the prince turning at the same instant, the bullet entered in at the
throat under his right chap, being so near, as the fire entered The murderer
shoots the prince.
with the bullet into the wound, burning his ruff and his beard; it brake him
one tooth, and pierced the iugular vein, and yet his tongue was nothing
perished, the bullet came out at the left cheek, hard by his nose.

This blow being given (wherewith they were all terrified) one of the
halberdiers could not contain himself, but he thrust him through with his
halberd, and then a page The murderer slain.
he was poluted and defiled, was washed off, and then he was bound upright
upon a scaffold which went upon wheels, and carried from street to street, to
see who did know him. He was in the end known, and with that which they found
written about him, they were fully assured, that he was Anastro his servant:
without doubt, the tumult was great in Antuerpe, before that he was known; for
that (being attyred like a Frenchman) they did imagine, that the Frenchmen
which were new come, had caused it to be done; neither could the bourgers be
pacified, until that he was known, and that Anastro his house was forced by
the bourgers, and the Cassier, the keeper of his book, his servant, the Monk,
and in the end he that made the pistol, were all prisoners, but soon after
released, except the keeper of his book and the Monk, who (after some days
that the body of the murderer had been publickely quartered, and hanged at
the town gates) were also hanged and quartered, like unto the murderer. It
was to be feared, if the prince had been slain, and the murderer not so
soon known, that both the duke of Aniou and all the Frenchmen, yea, and all
the Romish Catholics which were in the town, had been in great danger,
notwithstanding the great endeavor of the magistrate to pacify the tumult: for
the people being much moved, cried out nothing else, but, Behold the marriage
of Paris, let us spoil these murderers. The duke of Aniou was much perplexed
and troubled in his court, being environed by the bourgers and the sworn
companies, who were all in arms. I have since heard him confess, That he was
never more devout, nor never apprehended death more. He commanded his
followers to lay down * John Petit.
their arms, and sent to entreat the prince of Orange to take him into his
protection, who writ unto the colonels of the town, excusing the duke,
assuring them, that neither he nor any of his had any hand in that action; but
contrariwise, that he was a mild and sober prince, who sought nothing else but
their good and safeties. In the end, the tumult being somewhat pacified, the
duke went to visit him, and did also grieve at his misfortune.

The prince of Parma on the other side, supposing that the prince of Orange was
slain, and meaning to make his profit of this accident, writ presently to
Brussels, Macklyn, Gant, Bruges, and Antuerpe, letters full of sweet words,
sending them word, That the prince of Orange (who was the sole author of all
the troubles) being dead, the king of Spain would use on their behalfes all
mildness and clemency, and would forget all that was past, if they would
return, and yield themselves under his obedience, for the which (he said) he
had full commission from his Majesty: wherefore they should be well advised,
whilst that the gate of grace and mercy was open for them, and not to suffer
it to be shut again, and to loose so good an occasion as was then offered
unto them.

The duke and the prince of Orange were not ignorant of the prince of Parma his
practices: wherefore letters were written in their name, and in the name of the
General Estates of the united Provinces, unto the governors and magistrates
of the towns of Brabant, Flanders, and other places, to contain them in their
duties: and there was a new 1582
would remain free in the exercise of their Religion, the which was only
allowed in the duke his court: which oath did in effect contain the abiuration
of the king of Spain, and fidelity unto the duke of Aniou, as duke of
Brabant, and that the penalty of a hundred crowns, imposed upon them which
should go unto the Mass, should be taken away.

The prince of Parma hearing of this oath which the Romish Catholics had
taken, who would more willingly have seen him command in those parts, than
the duke of Aniou, made and sent forth a proclamation in the king his name,
not to discourage them, nor to make them despair of grace and favor: by the
which he did pardon the

Some three thousand foot and six hundred French horse of the dukes, hearing
that the earl of Barlamont, governor of Namur was absent, came in the night
with ladders made of A vain enterprise upon the castle of Namur.
rope blackt, to scale the castle of Namur, where at that time the duchess,
mother to the prince of Parma, was. But they could not carry their enterprise
so secretly, but they were discovered, and enforced to retire, leaving their
ladders behind them, with some part of their baggage.

The Seignior of Sainseual, with captain la Croix and le Brave, going out of
Cambray Lens surprised and lost again.


The prince of Orange being hurt, as we have said, the esclarre of the cautere
which the fire had made in his wound falling, the iugular vein opened, and
fell a bleeding in such

Colonel Martin Schenck of Nydeck, a gentleman of good quality, and a soldier
of great enterprises, having been upon the fourth of April surprised in the
town of Xenten in the country of Cleues, by the Seignior of Hoochsasse,
governor of the town of Gueldre for the Estates (whither he was led prisoner,
and there detained long) in the end, discontented with his long imprisonment,
and seeing himself abandoned by the king of Spain, who made no means to free
him (no more than the earl of Egmont, the baron of Selles, and other noblemen
his subjects that were prisoners) he grew into such a grief and despite, as
to be delivered of this captivity, he left his party, and having treated
with the earl of Moeurs, delivering his strong castle of Blyenbecke, and other
places

The prince of Parma meaning to besiege Audenarde (which is one of the
strongest towns 1582
along the town with his army, the bourgers having six companies there in
garrison, sent forth three to charge his rereward. But the prince turning
head, defeated them, and then Audenarde besieged by the prince of Parma.
casting about with his army, he invested the town, being weakened by the
loss of these three companies: he planted five and twenty pieces of Ordnance,
and took the castle of Gaure, a league from the town, that they might not be
relieved that way, nor his camp intercepted of their victuals: he also
surprised by practice the castle of Castens, of another side, that he might
assure his camp on all parts. Then he battered the town twelve hours
together, without ceasing, and made a sufficient breach: but the waters grew so
high, as he could not give an assault (notwithstanding that he had bridges to
pass the water of the

The duke of Aniou and Brabant being desirous to raise the prince of Parma from
this siege, sent for all his garrisons both of horse and foot, and for colonel
Norris, with his regiment of English: so as it was supposed, that if the town
could have held out but a little longer, there would have been a battle
given; but it yielded by composition, in a manner like to that of Tournay: the
prince of Parma, for that he would not be forced to raise his siege, nor
Audenarde yielded to the Spaniard by composition.
to hazard a battle, granted them all they would desire, for else they had
not escaped so lightly. The conditions were, That the bourgers to redeem their
town from spoil, should pay thirty thousand florins within six weeks: All
such as would depart and leave the town,

The duke to recompense this loss, caused an enterprise to be made the two and
twentieth Alost surprised by the Estates.
of the same month, upon the town of Alost, by Oliver vanden Timpel, Seignior
of Corbeke, governor of Brussels, Charles of Lieuin, Seignior of Famas,
governor of Macklyn, and the Seignior of Thiant, governor of Nieuwenhouen in
Flanders. These commanders gave a scalado to the strongest part of the town,
whilst that the garrison of Lydekerke gave an alarm corpse de guard in pieces)
to draw in the horsemen, without the which, those that were already entered and
had won the town, had been in all show the weaker: but the horsemen being
entered, they had an assured victory, and became masters of the town, the which
was sacked, where the Seignior of Thiant was appointed governor, the rest
returning to their governments. A little before this surprise, there were above
four hundred churchmen retired into Alost, whereof some of the most busy
took arms at this surprise, and were there slain; others who had remained
quiet in their lodgings, were taken prisoners, and ransomed. Many saved
themselves by leaping over the wall. The lord

The prince of Parma seeing Alost thus taken from him, for a revenge, sent his
men to sursurprise the castle of Gaesbeke, belonging to the house of Egmont,
two leagues from Brussels: 1582 The castle of Gaesbeke surprised by the
Spaniard.
who said they were of the garrison of Alost, and that they had a good booty,
which they would willingly put in safety: they giving credit unto their words,
and seeing their cassocks, opened the gate, whereon they seized, and giving
entry to the rest of their men, became masters of the place.

Some other of the prince of Parma his soldiers thinking to do the like unto
the town of Dyest (belonging unto the prince of Orange) as the duke of Aniou
his men had to Alost, they scaled the town, entered as far as the market
place, and fought valiantly against the garrison, part whereof went presently
to the gates, the which they defended, and kept out the horsemen: so as they
that fought in the market, seeing their horsemen, did not second

The second of May there was a general fast commanded by the duke and the
general Estates throughout all the united provinces, to give God thanks for
the prince of Orange his health, and that they had obtained a good prince, in
making choice of the duke, who did defend and maintain them against the
Spanish tyranny.

The lady Charlotte of Bourbon, wife to the prince of Orange, having first
conceived an exceeding grief for her husbands hurt, and afterward by his
recovery an incredible joy, being delivered of child, she fell into a
continual burning fever, whereof she dyed the fifth of May, leaving unto the
prince six daughters, who had all great marriages. She was buried in

The eight of June following, there also dyed in the same town the lady Mary
of Lalain, wife to Peter of Melun, prince of Espinoy, Seneschall of Henault
etc. and was buried in the Quier of the Church of S. Michaels abbey in the same
town, without the Romish ceremonies.

About that time the Seignior of Hautepenne, son to the earl of Barlamont,
made a rode with six hundred horse about Antuerpe, from whence he carried a
great booty in prisoners, cattle, and other goods. Captain Alonzo (a
Spaniard, who served the duke) a brave soldier, being in garrison in Liere, w^
^forth with his troop of horse, and charged them, but he was hurt and taken,
yet he w^ p^ntly rescued and carried back into Liere, Arschot attempted in
^aine.
horse and foot: but being entered a good way into the town, they were
repulsed, with the loss of thirty men. All this Summer was spent in
enterprises on either side, but few succeeded: yet the garrisons of Dyest and
Herental surprised Tillemont in Brabant for the Estates; in the which there
were three companies for the prince of Parma lodged in a cloister, which they
defeated in their retrenchment: then they sacked the town, and abandoned it.

The prince of Parma keeping then his court at Tournay, went to Namur, to
receive the Dom John of Manriques de Lara brought unto him. The duke of Aniou
and Brabant about that time made certain proclamations for his greater
assurance, and brake quarter with the men of war, commanding them not to
take any enemy to ransom. He also brake the licenses (which are certain
customs and tols imposed upon all merchandise passing from one country to
another) not suffering that any thing should be transported either by water or
land unto the enemy, and generally not to traffic, nor to have any
correspondencie with them, by exchange, or otherwise, in what sort soever.

The foureteenth of July, the duke (being accompanied by the princes of Orange
and Espinoy, and all their train) departed from Antuerpe to go into Zeeland:
from whence on the sixteenth of the same quality, did attend him thither, and
then returned home. The duke entering into 1582
conducted through the streets with all the honor they could devise, having
triumphant arches, lively representations made upon scaffolds, artificial
figures painted, statues, pyramides, porches, with such like, and diverse kinds
of flames and artificial fires flying in the air: whereby they made show how
pleasing and acceptable his coming and entry was unto them, receiving him for
their prince and lord, as earl of Flanders.

The duke being in this town of Bruges, there was a great treason discovered,
invented by a Spaniard (or a Spaniards son) called Nicholas Salcedo, of one
Francisco Baza, an Italian, An attempt against the duke of Anious and the
prince of Oranges persons discovered.
of a horseman of Fernando of Gonzagues company, and of one Nicholas Hugot,
called La Board, a Frenchman, who were corrupted and set on by the prince of
Parma, or his counsel, Salcedo, and by that which happened to Francisco Baza.
This Salcedo had been at the dukes request saved from the gallows at Rouan,
being accused of coining: being after that retired for a time into Spain, he
returned into Lorraine, where he came into the dukes service at the victualling
of Cambray, and so followed him continually unto Antuerpe, thinking to be there
employed, and to have some charge: but he was always held in jealousy by the
prince of Orange. And as the said Salcedo was very familiar with the Seignior
Amoral (afterward earl of Egmont) whom the prince loved not only for the
good remembrance of his father, but for that the Countess his mother had
recommended Amoral made profession of the Protestants Religion, and received
the Communion: these reasons made the prince to ask him once in secret, what
great acquaintance and familiarity he had with the said Salcedo? He answered
him, That he had none but for the love of Alchimie: whereupon the prince
replied, That he feared some worse matter, aduising him to beware of him, and
not to converse any more with him, wishing him withal, not to discover any
thing of this advertisement to Salcedo. Yet notwithstanding, this young
nobleman, whether it were of lightness (or for that it is the nature of man to
affect that most which is most forbidden ^im) at his first encounter with
Salcedo he discovered all unto him. Upon certain aduertisements and strong
presumptions, Salcedo Francisco Baza was without the court attending for him,
and seeing that he came not, in the end he asked for him, and so was in like
manner laid hold on. La Board fearing or discovering something, saved himself.
Salcedo and Baza being examined upon the aduertisements and circumstances which
they had to confirm the presumptions of their fact, they did confess and
sign it, that their design was to have murdered or poisoned the duke and
prince in what sort soever. The young lord Amoral was in like sort examined,
who confessed presently, that he had bewrayed unto Salcedo all that the prince
had said unto him, touching the conversation and familiarity he had with him.
And although he excused himself of that wherewith Salcedo had accused him, yet
was he for a time detained prisoner, and after (at the duke of Anious retreat
out of the Netherlands into France) delivered. Francisco Baza hearing on the
nine and twentieth of July, that being found guilty by his own confession,
they would put him to some cruel death, the next day he slew himself
Fra^cisco Baza kills himself.
in the prison with a knife, whereupon he was drawn to the gibbet, and there
hanged; but afterward (by a new judgment) he was quartered, the which were
hanged upon gibbets, with a writing, that he had attempted to murder or poison
the duke and the prince, at the persuasion, and by the express commandment
of the prince of Parma. Salcedo was at the request of the French king and the
Queen his mother sent unto Paris, after the reuiew of his process and his
consession, to have received four thousand ducats of the king of Spain,
having also revealed some other secrets concerning the person of the king, and
of the duke his brother, wherewith some great men in France were touched, the
five and twentieth ^edo (...) in (...) with (...).
with four horses, and dismembered alive, his quarters were hanged upon
gibbets, and his head planted upon a pole.

The duke and the princes of Orange and Espinoy departed from Bruges to Gant,
the The duke of Aniou invested earl of Flanders.
with great ceremonies, and joy of the people, and acknowledged for earl of
Flanders, 1582
after that he had taken the oath, and received an oath of the deputies of the
four members of the earldom. Then having (according to the custom) renewed
the magistrate, he went from thence to Dendermonde, where the like reception
was made unto him, according to the capacity of the town, and from thence he
returned to Antuerpe. What happened unto his army all the time that he
remained and continued in Flanders, we will presently show.

The first of August the town of Liere in Brabant, three leagues distant from
Antuerpe, Liere betrayed to the Spaniard.
betwixt Macklyn, Antuerpe and Dyest (a good town, and of great importance for
all that Sempil) in garrison in this town, who complained often of the small
entertainment he received from the Estates, and that the Seignior of Heetuelt
(governor of the town) was not a means to have his company paid, making
this his pretext, to treat with the Spaniard, to deliver up the town for a
certain sum of money, which they promised him. For the effecting whereof, the
first of August he came unto the governor, and told him, That he knew where
there was a good booty, desiring leave to go forth, the which he granted:
being abroad, he returned about 2 of the clock after midnight, crying unto the
guard to open the gate, and that he had brought a booty of oxen, kine, sheep,
and wagons with stuff, and that he knew the enemy followed to rescue it, if
it were not Sempil understanding this, entered by the wicket, and having his men
in guard at the port, he overthrew the captain, being a bourger, who carried a
bunch of keys, the which he wrested from him. The porter seeing this, thinking
to go up and to let down the portcullis, he was overtaken upon the stayres,
and there slain; and so with the help of his men he opened the great gate,
and let in the Spaniards, being about six hundred horse, which the Seignior of
Hautepenne had gathered ^ether out of the near garrisons: being entered, they
slew all they found armed (the goue^nour saving himself speedily in his shirt
in a Alonzo the Spaniard was found there in his bed, being wounded at the
encounter before mentioned; and for that he was a Spaniard, and did serve
against the king, the Spaniards hung him up by one foot, and so put him to
death, then they quartered him, and hung his quarters upon gibbets without the
town: which the horsemen of Antuerpe did afterward take down and bury
honorably in our ladies church, with military ceremonies, for his valor, and
the good services which he had done unto the estates and the prince of Orange,
although he were a Spaniard.

The news of the taking of Liere did much trouble and alter them of Antuerpe,
the ports thereof remaining and continuing shut for a time, being doubtful
what to resolve: Bernard to be fortified (being taken before, and afterward
abandoned by the Spaniards) a goodly place, seated upon the river of Escaut,
being a league from Antuerpe.

During this time, the duke of Aniou and Brabant had caused his army to pass
under the leading of the earl of Rochepot into West-Flanders, about Graueling
and Dunkerke: the Spaniard thinking to do him an affront, came to take view of
him, and was beaten, near unto Wynoxberghe, a league from Dunkerke, where he
lost some of his horsemen, and the baron of Balanson (afterward earl of
Varax, brother to the marquess of Warenbon, a high Bourguignon) Norris, and
carried to Antuerpe. The duke went thither to join with the troops of the
Seignior of la Pierre, and the Reisters which the earl of Mansfeldt brought:
who passing along the frontiers of Picardie, through the country of Arthois,
coasting along the river of Authies, they spoiled all, and took diverse
castles, as Labroy, Aussi-le Chasteau, and others: which troops by the dukes
1582
commanded to come into Flanders, whereby there was a good opportunity lost in
the country of Arthois.

The duke having stayed some time with his army in that part of Flanders,
retired the seven and twentieth of August toward Gant, where the prince of
Parma followed him with all his forces, meaning to fight with him, and to
defeat him if he could, finding himself much stronger than the duke, who at
that time had not above four thousand men, the which went to lodge in a
village near unto Gant.

The next day after their coming to the place, the Corpse de guard of the dukes
army discovered the forerunners of the Spanish camp, which came to charge
them. The Seignior of la Pierre, marshall of the camp, being advertised
thereof, put all the troops

In the head of the army was the English regiment of colonel Norris, being
seconded by the Reisters of Cont Mansfeldt: after came a French regiment of
colonel Boucks, having on his wing colonel Norris, with three companies of
English horse, and four others of light horse, Frenchmen: all these made the
foreward. After marched three companies of French horsemen, and the regiment of
Fouquerolles, with all the Dutch and Scottish companies, which made the
battle. For there reward, there was the regiment of horse of Saintseual, with
a regiment of English, in the which there were many pykes, and some companies
of foot of Saintseual that were gathered together.

The troops being thus ordered, and the Spaniard marching, the two marshals of
the dukes Fouquerolles and Bouck: so as being seconded by some horse of the
foreward, they charged so fitly, as the Spaniard increasing still as his
troops arrived, they were kept at a stand: and when as they would have passed
this high broad way, whereas the ambush lay, they were entertained with such
store of shot, as notwithstanding that the army was fresh and full of
resolution, yet they lost many men, without any great hurt unto the Lieuins
gate) he caused the four companies, which marched in the foreward with
colonel Norris horse, and some English pikes, to return to the charge, who
did so well (especially the English) as they stayed the Spaniard again, who
was now come very near unto the town. This made the retreat the more easy
for the dukes men; who coming to the rampar with the princes of Orange and
Espinoy, were of opinion that the army should retire under the walls, whereas
the 2 curtains might gaul the enemy, if he should approach any nearer. But the
skirmish being renewed

The prince of Parma being now arrived with the body of his army, seeing the
dukes 1582
the last charge which was given. Whilst that matters passed in this manner,
the duke commanded, that the horse should retire without disorder or
confusion, except three cornets which should remain in guard near unto the
foot, that by this means they might have time to refresh themselves, and to
lodge. The which was not done without good consideration, seeing there was no
more question (as it seemed) of fighting: yet the prince of Parma seeing the
dukes horsemen retired, came again to charge the footmen, whom he drove under
the town wall: but he was so well received, as he lost many men, and in like
manner there were some of the dukes men both slain and hurt. Night being come,
the prince of Parma rallying his army together, and burying about two hundred
of his men near

The next day the dukes army marched toward Dendermonde, where he made his
entry in quality of earl of Flanders: and from thence he took his way to
Antuerpe with the prince of Orange, where they arrived upon the second of
September, having left the prince of Espinoy in Gant, to have a care and charge
of all things in that quarter of Flanders.

At that time colonel Verdugo, governor of that which the king of Spain held
in Friseland, besieged the town of Lochum in the county of Zutphen. Cont
William Lewis of Lochum besieged by the Spaniard.
Nassau, governor of Friseland for the Estates, with some small troops (in
despite of all Verdugo and his men retyring unto this mountain, made a stand
there to see what would follow.

Two days after, the Seignior of Allein commanding a French regiment, went to
assail one of the Spaniards forts, the which was most necessary for them:
they of the town having made a sallie, being seconded by d' Allein his
lieutenant, took a fort at the port of Moulin, where there were about four
hundred Spaniards slain. And although it were newly assaulted by a great
number of enemies, yet were they valiantly repulsed: and afterward the
besieged labored with such dexterity, as the bridge of the river, which had
been broken in that place, was repaired strongly again, and the town
victualled the same day by

The night following two other forts were forced. But the next day the Estates
horsemen going to a charge somewhat disorderly, they were easily put to rout,
with the loss of two captains, and a good number of men; some slain in
fighting, others, in cold blood; and so the Estates small army was quickly
dispersed. The Seignior d' Allein being entered into the town with his
regiment, assured it the more: in the which were also the earls, Herman,
Frederic, and Henry vanden Berghe, nephews by the mother unto the prince of
Orange (who since turned to the Spaniards party) and the chief nobility of
Guelderland.

The Spaniard being not far retired, returned suddenly again, recovered his
forts, Charles of Mansfeldt and the Seignior of Hautepenne: then they summoned
it more resolutely than before. In the mean time, the earl of Hohenlo 1582
Antuerpe) being ready to gather together some troops, to succor Lochum
again. And five days after these supplies which came to Verdugo, there went
to join with the earl of Hohenlo two thousand five hundred foot, and one
thousand five hundred horse, French and Reistres, with the three English
cornets, commanded by colonel Norris. With this equipage Hohenlo returned
cheerfully the third time to relieve the besieged. His troops were no sooner
discovered, but Cont Charles Mansfeldt left his quarter disorderly in all have,
and passed the water to be nearer to Verdugo. The earl of Hohenlo seeing this,
marched speedily with the Estates army to lodge in that quarter which
Mansfeldt had abandoned; yet they came to blows at a fort on that side the
town, in which skirmish there were many The siege of Lochu raised.
two other forts which the Spaniards held, by the favor whereof, a bridge was
presently made, by the which he might commodiously pass over with his footmen,
and draw such as were wounded and unprofitable out of the town, whereas
colonel Amaurie, being newly arrived with a regiment of Gascoines, entered first
of all, having no leisure to refresh themselves, nor to take breath. This done,
they built another fort, which favored the end of the bridge, that it might
not be taken by the Spaniards: Whereat Verdugo and Mansfeldt being much amazed,
presuming, that the town was relieved; and fearing least they should go and
charge them behind, they began to retire, and to abandon all their forts, and
so marching in battle, they went toward Grolle. The next day the Estates men
victualled Battenbourgh, colonel of a regiment of Germans, who had so much
solicited this siege of Lochum, for that his town of Anholt it is not far
off, the which was daily annoyed by the garrison of Lochum, even unto their
gates.

This siege raised, and the town thus relieved, the Estates forces went to
besiege the castle The castles of Keppel and Bronchurst yielded to the Estates.
of Keppel in the said county of Zutphen, the garrison whereof having endured
a little battery, yielded by composition, delivering the lord of the place
(who had bin unwilling to yield) into their hands. From thence they went before
the castle of Bronchurst, which did also yield by composition.

At that time there was some mutiny among the soldiers of the garrison of
Brussels, for their pay, yet they protested to keep the town for the duke of
Aniou. The prince of Parma would willingly have made his profit thereby,
aduauncing some troops about that town and Alost, as if he would besiege
them. They of Boisleduc (which is one of the four chief towns of Brabant)
being before summoned by the duke to acknowledge him for their duke and lord,
in quality of duke of Brabant, they not only refused it, but offered the
prince of Parma an hundred thousand florins to go and besiege Brussels: The
which he did not, but only burned some villages of that jurisdiction: and the
soldiers were paid to appease the mutiny.

In the end of September, the duke of Aniou sent Monsieur S. Luc, governor of
Brouage, Timpel and Seisseual with two thousand foot and five hundred horse,
and some pieces of ordnance drawn out of Antuerpe at the request of the
Brussellois, to besiege the castle of Gaesbeke, where there was a company of
the malcontents, Wallons, and half a cornet of horse. These commanders being
come, and having made some fourscore shot, they within began to pa^le, having
no hope of succors, and fearing to be taken Gaesbeke yielded to the duke of
Aniou
by assault, they yielded, and went forth with white wands in their hands. This
done, S. Luc caused the castle of Thoulouse to be summoned, the which was
yielded upon the same terms.

The earl of Rochepot (lieutenant general of the duke his army) to annoy
Liere in Brabant, went with a thousand French foot and two pieces of Ordnance
to besiege the Enchouen yielded also.
two others, yet not before the earl and the colonel la Guard had been both
hurt with shot.

The king of Spain knowing that he had a mightier enemy than before, would also
increase 1582
the duke of Montpensier and the marshall of Biron were come out of France into
Picardie, to join their army with the duke of Anious other troops, the prince
of Parma caused all his frontier places of Arthois and Henault, to be well
manned. And about the end of Summer, there came unto him out of Italy, one and
forty ensigns of Spaniards, which made five thousand men, under two colonels,
Christopher of Mondragon, and Dom Pedro de Pas, sixteen ensigns of Italians,
every one being three hundred strong, being also five thousand, under Mario
Cordoini, and Camillo de Monte, colonels, besides the Landskneckts, and high
Bourguignons, with a great mass of treasure, which the prince received out of
Spain, to pay his whole army, where there was besides these four regiments
of Spaniards and Italians, of ten thousand Robert Goudtberg, the earl of
Aremberg, the earl of Barlamont, Dom John Manriques de Lara, cont Charles of
Mansfeldt, and the seignior of Floion, brother to Barlamont, nine regiments of
Wallons, under the marquis of Renty, the earl of Egmont, Gabriel de Liques,
the earl Octauio of Mansfeldt, the earl of Manderscheit, Philip of Liques, he
that was seignior of Bours, the baron of Aubigni, and the seignior of Manui.
And above all these the regiments of Hautepenne and la Motte Pardieu, besides
the Bourguignons of the marquess of Varenbon, with the garrisons upon the
frontiers of France, and those that were near unto the united Estates, and the
regiments of the lord of Billy, Verdugo, and the baron of Anholt in Friseland,
with some companies of horse. As for his horsemen, there were thirty seven
cornets, Spaniards, and Italians, and twelve bands of ordnance,

The duke of Anious men being busy about the fortification of a bourg betwixt
Valenciennes and Cambray, the prince of Parma went and forced them to leave the
work, and to retire: then he summoned Castle Cambresis, in the which there
were an hundred and fifty Castle Cambresis yielded to the Spaniard
French soldiers, who yielded, to have their arms and baggage saved. Then
having taken suffered much hunger and want, as well by the bad government of
the victuals, as for want of 1583


The seventeenth of November colonel Verdugo surprised the town of Steenwicke
in the Steenwick surprised by the Spaniard.
country of Ouerissel, by scaladoe: for the relieuing whereof (as I have said)
the States had taken so great pains. It happened by the direction of a
peasant, who working in the town ditches, had noted one place which might be
waded through, by the which he guided Verdugoes men unto the foot of the
rampar, being duly informed before, that captain Hans Crom and Bocholt were
gone forth with most of the soldiers of the garrison of the town, about some
enterprise.

At the same time the earl of Hohenlo besieged the town of Meghen in the
country of Meghen taken by the Estates.
Gueldres, the which he won, with some other, neither could the earl of
Mansfeldt (who lay

The seventh of January after the new style (the calender being reformed this
year by the pope) the lord of Boniwet being conducted by a soldier of the
country, called Heincker Schermer (who went first up to the rampar) surprised
the town of Eindouen in Brabant, near unto Eindouen surprised for the duke of
Aniou.
Boisleduke, in the country of Campeigne, where there were fifty horsemen
Albanois spoiled, most of them having saved themselves, or yielded. From thence
the Frenchmen went before Helmont, Horst, and other places of the same quarter,
the which they also won; so as it seemed they would besiege Boisleduke, the
which was long in great fear, they of the town thinking (for that they had no
garrison) to compound with the duke, but his mind was of another prey, as we
will presently show.

The duke by the intercession of his mother (as she made show) had long
solicited the French king for succors in his affairs of the Netherlands,
against the king of Spain: but the king refused The French king refuses
succors to the duke his brother, and some advice concerning it.
him, fearing and foreseeing the danger which might happen unto his realm,
seeing he was not assured (if his brother should die) of any recompense: yet
he said, That if the Estates would acknowledge him, or else the crown of
France for heir and successor unto the duke in the Netherlands, he would then
do his best, which the Estates could not well yield unto. The Agents of Spain
being in France, near the king, and the dukes adversaries (which was the house
of Guise) made their profit of this denial, which was the cause why the prince
Daulphin and the marshall Biron, were so long before they entered the country
with their army: the which past not into Flanders, before they had devoured
all they brought out of France. still lodging upon the advantage. And if it
should so fall out, yet might the king better endure 1583
being near unto France, he might suddenly recover new forces. But if the
king rejected all these goodly occasions, and would not embrace the Netherlands
actions, that it was to be feared he should be forced thereunto, if he
would not have a new civil war in France. And the duke his brother having
no more means to resist the Spaniard, would be contemptible to them that had
called him, not only for the great charge they had been at, but also to see
themselves frustrat of the great expectation they had of him. That the said
duke, rather than they should do him any disgrace, would seek to assure
himself of some places within the country, and then would return into France,
to complain of the small succors and friendship which he had found in the
king his brother, reviving the discourse

Such advice and counsel was given unto the French king, concerning the
affairs of the Netherlands, which came all unto the knowledge of the Duke his
brother, making him to fall into diverse conceits and iealousies, as well of the
king, as of those that were chief in counsel about him, and nearest his own
person: which seemed to make him run another course, thrust on by his young
courtiers: who hearing that his forces being led by the duke of Montpensier,
and the marshall of Biron, had past by Cales, and lay about Dukerke, he sent
for them to come into Brabant.

The Duke being in Antuerpe, and hearing that his forces were arrived, he
caused his army

In the mean time, as the town of Dunkerke did import him much, to keep a
passage Dunkerke assured for the duke.
open, and free from Flanders into France: the duke to assure himself thereof
in time, having sent some French men thither, he commanded monsieur de Chamors
to seize thereon; the which he did easily, during the absence of the seigniour
of Treslon, admiral of Zeeland, and governor of the town. Chamors picked a
quarrel against the bourgers, about the division of some booty, so as they
fell to blows, and many were slain: And whilst that they of the town had
sent to make their complaint to the Duke and the Estates being in Antuerpe,
Chamors having in the mean time fortified himself with more men, chased away
the States garrison, and became master of the town the sixteenth of January.
This was the first act of ill counsel which the Duke put in practice, which
afterward lost him the Netherlands, and was the cause of his own ruin.

Without doubt the Duke (of whom for his own disposition they had expected all
good, and on whom the Estates of the country had grounded the preservation,
health, and maintenance of the people, against the oppression of the Spaniards)
had done wisely, and had made himself wonderful great, if he had given
credit to the counsel of the prince of Orange and the Estates, who had called
him to those goodly principalities and seigniories, wherewith he was so lately
invested: And that if in stead of preferring the French nobility not have any
other for matters of state, and the government of the country yet he had a
secret The Counsel of the Cabinet, composed of young giddie headed 1583
French men, most of them being pensioners to the king of Spain, or relikes of
the actors in the massacre at Paris. This secret counsel put into his head,
that neither the prince of Orange nor the States did respect him as an absolute
prince, and would willingly have seen him fully obeyed; the which the
Spaniards had so much affected, and had been the cause of the troubles and
misery which had happened and continued so long in the said countries. For the
obtaining of which obedience and absolute command, for the putting in of
governors and French captains into all towns and forts, and the excluding of
noblemen, gentlemen, and others that were borne in the country, to restore the
Romish religion, and root out the Protestants; finally to reduce these
provinces into a worse estate, than it may be they had been

In this counsel there were three sorts of humors of men, every one tending
to a cenaine Three sorts of humors in the dukes counsel
end, but diverse and contrary. The first (which we may say were the best) had
no other aim (as faithful servants are bound) but to the greatness and
settling of their masters estate, which prospering, they could not but prosper
themselves, and those were for the most part young, aspiring to advancement and
honor. The others were secret pensioners to the king of Spain, who by a
strange alteration in this new estate, sought nothing, but to work for the
Spaniard, and to send the duke home, from whence he came, and so corrupted by
gifts, presents, or

Consider then, if of these last two sorts of men, being of the dukes counsel,
an upright Anthonies day, as well in Antuerpe, as in the towns of Bruges,
Dendermonde, Alost, Dixmuyden, Nyeuport, Ooestende, Villeuorde, and other
towns: So as the French men of those garrisons, and other supplies that should
be sent unto them, should make themselves masters thereof. And as for their
project laid upon the town of Antuerpe, the which succeeded unhappily for
them, it was in this

The sixteenth of January, the eve before the execution of the French men's
design upon The relation of the enterprise of Antuerpe.
Antuerpe, doctor Peter van Alost, bourgmaster of the town, having received
some advertisement, that the same night there might be some enterprise made
against the town, went late unto the duke, to let him understand, That among so
many soldiers that were entered into the town, there might some slip in that
were not well affected to his service, who they feared would attempt something
to the prejudice of the town: and therefore they entreated the duke that he
would forsee it, and that the ^haynes might be drawn an hour sooner than of
custom: Whereunto the duke yielded, after that he had answered, That they had
no cause to distrust his troops, which were come to do him and the whole
country service: adding

The next day the duke did confer as well in person, as by his secretary Pin
(called Quinsay) with the prince of Orange, the bourgmasters, and the colonels
of the bourgers, 1583
sent expressly to that end. And as the prince told plainly and openly, That
he knew well, that they had pretended and resolved that day, to force a port,
and to draw in the whole army; the duke protested, that he had never any such
thought, and that they should have no such suspicion of his soldiers: that he
desired to know who had invented that surmise, to punish him as he had
deserved: showing what great affection he bare to the confederat provinces,
the country of Brabant, and especially to the town of Antuerpe, seeking by
all means to pacify, and to give contentment to the prince, the bourgmasters
and colonels: the which was easy for him to do, seeing that their
aduertisements had no very great ground, neither would they ever have thought
that it had been true, much less that his The foolish and cruel enterprise
of the duke of Aniou upon Antuerp
on the same day, whereby al their villainy should be discovered, if they should
delay it any longer, about one of the clock in the afternoon, the duke with
all his nobility, making in all (besides those which marched before, and which
came after) some two hundred horse, and with all his guard both Switsers and
French, went out of the town by the port of Kipdorpe, the which they had
expressly left open by commandment and charge which he

Some of his men which went before, stayed upon the bridge, as if they had
there attended his Highness: others which remained behind, ran from one street
to another, toward that gate, causing the chains to be let down, as if his
Highness should have past by all those streets.

Being past the port, and the second draw bridge, one of his gentlemen did
counterfeit as if his leg had been broken in the prease: some of the
bourgers drew near unto him, to help him, and to carry him into the town,
to the first Surgion: but he crying out and lamenting (the which he did to
win time, until the footmen of the army might approach) seeing the footmen
come, drew his sword, and took one of the bourgers of the town,

After this beginning the noblemen and gentlemen (except such as past beyond
the port) advanced with all the rest of the army, and first there entered four
cornets of horse, and seventeen ensigns of foot, crying out, The town is
won, The town is won, Live the Mass, Live the Mass: the which they did, by
that means hoping to draw all the power of the Romish Catholics, and other
the discontented rabble of the town, to hold their party: his Highness
pressing his men to enter, and saying that the town was his, and that it was

So these four cornets, and the dukes courtiers, with the seventeen companies
of foot, being entered into the town, ran over all where it pleased them; some
went along the rampar toward the emperors gate, to seize upon the artillery,
as they did: some ran toward the Meerbruge, others through the new street,
some along that straight street of Kipdorpe, and one part unto the rampars of
the Red gate, and of Saint Anthonies street, crying continually, Kill, hill,
God save the Mass, The town is won. But as soon as the bourgers understood,
that they pretended by this treason to surprise and spoil the town, going
presently with as much speed as they could out of their houses, some armed,
some without arms, and in small numbers, they went like gabions close together,
and planted themselves before this great troup of Frenchmen, keeping them from
passing any further. In the mean time the town drums 1583
some by whole companies, who marching in battle, went and charged the
French, God (to whom the honor and glory of this victory is to be
attributed) giving such courage to the bourgers, and the inhabitants, as they
made them to turn their backs in all places, and to fly in great disorder
out of the town, some casting themselves from the top of the rampar into the
ditch, to save themselves, after that they had been masters of the port above
an hour, with their colors flying, won the market place and the Mere.

In the mean time the duke caused his Switsers (being about four thousand)
and the rest of his army, to advance, to second them that were already
entered: but the bourgers having recovered the rampars, discharged their
ordnance upon his squadrons, the which stayed them suddenly, and forced them
to retire, finding that all went not well with them in the town; neither The
number of them that were slain.
four score, among the which were colonel Vyerendeel, and the captains
Balthazar Tas, Renold Michaut, and Jasper of Hoemaeker, sargeant mayor to the
seignior of Schoonhouen. The seignior of Waenroy bourgmaster, being gone forth
of the town with his highness, marching in rank with the nobility, and
hearing this brute, escaped very dangerously, and with the assistance of the
said sargeant mayor, caused the chains to be drawn, which sergeant was slain
close by him, with diverse other valiant bourgers, which died fighting, to their
immortal praise and honor.

Of the French there were found both within and without the town, upon the
rampars, and in the ditches, above fifteen hundred men, that were numbered and
buried, besides such as died afterward in the town, and the wounded and
prisoners, among the which there were many gentlemen and men of quality:
Besides there were some fourteen or fifteen hundred

After this gross error the duke retired with his noblemen, and the rest of
his army, the same night, to be out of the danger of the town canon, into the
suburbs of Berchem, lodging himself in the castle of that place, from whence
he writ unto the magistrate of Antuerpe, with a certain instruction, which he
gave unto two colonels bourgers, Landtmeter and Scholiers being accompanied by
a gentleman of his household, whereunto they of the town would

The most remarkable among the dead, were the earl of S. Aignan, the marshall
of Birons The noblemen that were slain.
eldest son, the earl of Chasteauroux son, a very young nobleman, with the
seigniours of Thiant, Seisseual, and others. Among the chief prisoners were
the seignior of Feruaques, 1583
many were of the Protestant religion, ignorant of the fact) all put under good
guard for a time in the fencers chamber, and from thence they were sent to some
bourgers, until they were known: Feruaques was carried to the towne-house,
and the common soldiers to the prison of Backers tower, and other places, from
whence they were afterward delivered without ransom, and sent by sea to
Callis, yet many died of cold, want, misery, and of the stink one of another,
the prisons being so full as they could hardly stir.

Such was the issue and end of this foolish enterprise of the duke of Aniou
upon the town of Antuerpe, thinking by means thereof to make himself more
absolute lord, than ever were any dukes his predecessors in Brabant, and to
have that full and perfect obedience, which Bernard; having been there one
night, going to Villeuoorde, he found a second mischief at his quarter of
Duffell, to the great loss of his men and baggage, by the inundation of the
country, which grew by the opening of the sluices at Macklyn: And if a country
man had not showed them a foord, at the old river which was wont to pass from
Macklyn to Brussels, the loss had been greater, and he himself had been in
danger, as the duke of Montpensier was, who, besides this misfortune, was much
grieved for the disloyalty which had been showed to the town of Antuerpe:
for the way was very narrow, Montpensier blames the duke for the attempt at
Antuerpe.
him: Montpensier did reprehend him sharply, for the error which he had
committed in Antuerpe, imputing this disaster to his perjury. To whom the duke
answered, Cousin, leave these speeches, you will kill my heart. Montpensier
replying in choler, looking with an angry eye upon the noblemen which did
accompany the duke, being the chief authors of all the mischief, said, Nay,
kill the hearts of all those traitors, that gave you that counsel. At

His Highness being upon the way to Villeuoorde, he wrote his letters to them
of Brussels The duke seeks to excu^ himself, and to accuse them of Antuerpe.
and Macklyn, laying all the fault of this inconvenience upon them of Antuerpe,
as if they had given him some occasion, saying (wherein he did contradict
himself) That it was but a mutiny of his men: whereof the contrary is most
manifest, for the same day that he thought to suppress Antuerpe, he attempted
the like in diverse other towns, as in Bruges, Alost, Dixmuyden, Nieuport,
Ooestend, and Villeuoord, and it may be in other places whereas his ministers
durst not begin.

The enterprises which the dukes men had upon Dendermonde, Dixmuyden, and
Villeuoorde Fougeres desired to have passage only through the town, to go
and join with the dukes army near Antuerpe, with six companies: Being
entered, and in battle upon the market place, Fougeres and the provost
general of the French, meaning to stay some time, and rest them there, went to
the townhouse, to have tickets for their lodging. The bourgers discovering
this practice, began to put themselves in arms, and thereupon the magistrates
commanded Fougeres not to depart from them, but to write to his men, that they
should depart presently out of the town, else he should remain their
prisoner. In the mean time they provided, that the other five companies of the
Fougeres and the provost did afterward confess, had made pitiful work in
the town.

There was the like enterprise upon the town of Wynocx-berghe, the which
succeeded, Villenenfue a French gentleman and a Protestant, causing Capraine
1583
Block only to retire with his company of horse, to be master there alone, as
he was under the Dukes authority, until he yielded it up by his consent, of
the Estates and the Prince of Orange, unto la Motte Governor of Grauelingue,
as we shall hereafter show.

I have thought good to insert here the letters which the Duke of Aniou did
write from the castle of Berchem to the Magistrate of Antuerpe, sending them by
the Colonels Landtmeter and Scholiers, with the instruction which follows.

My masters, I send unto you the Seigniours of Landtmeter and Scholiers the
bearers hereof, The Dukes letters to them o^ Antuerpe.
with an instruction which they shall present unto you on my behalf; whereunto
I attend an answer that I may resolve: the fault shall be yours, if it be not
for your good: referring my Francis, and underneath, Pin. In a postscript was
written, I have thought good to accompany these two Bourgers, with this
gentleman the bearer hereof, to let you understand my intention more at large.
Here follows the tenor of the instruction.

His Highness by his wisdom and accustomed patience, after that he had
exposed his person to hazard, lost and ruined many gentlemen and soldiers,
some in the wars, others by diseases, and the most part by misery, famine
and want, to try by all means, to let the people of these countries know how
much he desired to draw them out of all the miseries and oppressions which
they had suffered, has in the end found that he labored in vain, reserving
Laual, Marshal of Biron, the Scigniors of Rochepot, Rochefoucaut, Espruneaux,
and Mauuissiere the first steward of his household: as also and especially his
Highness papers, and the goods of the Seignior of Quinsay, his Secretary, and
his other Stewards, Treasurers, and household servants, against whom he assures
himself they have used no rigor, being innocent of that

These letters and instruction were imparted by the Magistrate of Antuerpe,
unto the general Estates and the Prince of Orange; the particular Estates of
Brabant thought it expedient to send Commissioners unto him: whereunto were
named, Doctor Elbert Leoninus, chancellor of Geldres, Meetkerke president of
the Provincial Council of Flanders, both Councellers of estate, and Bloyere
Colonel of the bourgers at Brussels, to go and treat with the Duke, who was
gone to Saint Bernards Abbey, and that according to the instructions which they
had received from the Prince of Orange, with the advice of the general
Estates.

The Duke being arrived at Duffell, he wrote unto Oliver vanden Timpel,
Seignior of Corbeke, Governor of Brussels, as follows.

Mounsieur Timpel, the indignities which I have received by them of Antuerpe,
with very small respect of my quality and person, have so transported me, as
meaning on monday last 1583
men, whereas the soldiers lying at Bourgerhout arrived, so as to my great
grief there followed The dukes letters to moni^ur Timpel.
great disorder: whereof I thought good to advertise you, and to let you
understand that this accident has nothing diminished my affection, to assist
the good with all my means and forces, who in my opinion should not grow
cold, as I am assured you will not, continuing in the oath which you have made
unto me. I will also continue for my part in my first will and affection: and
especially in regard of you, whom I have also known to be a lover of the
public good. Entreating you moreover, being at this time incommodated in my
army for want of victuals; to provide that I may have some sent me, by some
number of boats, as speedily as may be, and they shall be well satisfied and
paid. And for that I mean shortly Francis.

Many thought diversely of this enterprise of the duke of Anious: some said it
was only to Several opinions of the dukes enterprise.
force the bourgers of Antuerpe to pay his army, as the Spaniards had done in
the time of the great commander of Castilia, at the day called For a
Veillacos, whereof we have made mention. Others said that the duke being
newely come out of a realm, whereas the king commands and has absolute
authority, could not fit himself unto a country, which stands upon their
privileges and ancient statutes, desiring to rule after his own will. Some
feared that if he had become master thereof, he would have delivered them
over to the king of God save the Mass, during the exploit: being also
notorious that he had with him diverse of the chief massacrers of Paris. And as
the name of French men by reason of their insolences and excess, was hateful
both to catholics and protestants, by that cry of God save the Mass, they
thought to draw the catholics to their party, and in the end to use them as
the rest: this might have some show. But my opinion was, and I have heard it
allowed by many of good judgment, that this young council of the cabinet
believed, that the

Wherefore it is a matter to be duly weighed and considered: as I have heard
the marshall of Biron did propound all the dangers unto him, being without the
town, even at the very instant when the exploit should begin, showing him the
artillery upon the rampar, the chains in all the streets, the bourgers
become more warlike then ever, by reason of their first losses by the
Spaniards, then the dishonor, and last of all the great loss, and
irrecouerable

The prince of Parma hearing that this enterprise was thus failed, meaning to
make his benefit thereof, wrote his letters to the Bourgmasters, great
council, and colonels of the town of Antuerpe, exhorting them to
reconciliation with the king of Spain: the messenger them) mutter among
themselves, and cry, God save the King. Wherefore it was prohibited 1583
peace with the king of Spain, nor to receive any letters from the prince of
Parma, for that he had written the like to them of Gant, Bruges, and other
towns, so as some towns of Flanders and of Brabant, sent their deputies
(among the which was the abbot of S. Gheertruyde) to the prince of Parma, to
treat of their reconciliation.

The queen of England having news of this accident, sent her ambassadors to
the Estates, requiring them with all speed to reconcile themselves unto the
duke of Aniou, for that it was to be feared, that if they did not agree, the
prince of Parma being grown weak for want of victuals, would fortify
himself more than before, whereon they should be very careful.

The same news being come to Rouan, and to Paris, and made much greater than
it Ambassadors sent to the States from England and France.
was (as if the duke and all the princes and French nobility, had been slain
there) the Parisians stayed all the merchants and goods of Antuerpe, who (the
truth of the matter being known) had great difficulty to recover their goods
again, and not without some loss. The king sent the seigniour of Mirambeau,
to excuse his brothers fault, and soon after monsieur de Bellieure, a
counselor of state, with letters to them of Antuerpe, by the which he excused
(as much as he could) his brothers error, laying the blame upon his youth,
his bad counsel, and the mutiny of his soldiers: promising them, that in
reconciling themselves unto him, he would give them all favor and assistance.
The duke himself did write afterward unto the Estates, coloring somewhat his
enterprise, and promising them all service, both of his person and means,
desiring to enter into some friendly conference with them, and to

All this being well known unto the prince of Orange, one day in the
assembly of the great Counsel (which they call Breeden Raed) in the town of
Antuerpe, being required to speak his mind, touching the reconciliation with
the duke of Aniou, he delivered his opinion at large, the which was presented
also in writing unto the general Estates of the countries of the Netherlands:
where, after that he had excused himself, he said.

That the Estates should remember what he had propounded unto them, when as by
The prince of Oranges advice upon the reconciliation with the duke of Aniou.
the losses of Tournay and Maestricht, they were in a dangerous estate, the
Spaniard going confessed, That his advice was to call him to their succors.
But if they would judge thereof 158^
that by his means they had made head against the enemy, who at that time had
two mighty armies, the which by the grace of God and the dukes assistance,
were made unprofitable, the one before Cambray, the other much greater the last
Summer. Moreover, that with his succors you had raised the enemies siege from
before Lochum, on which town depends the country of Gueldres, and the county
of Zutphen and Ouerissell. That no man could deny the succors which he had
given to the reformed churches in France, having been the means to procure
them liberty of religion. Holding it most certain, that by the name and arms
of the duke of Aniou, the name and forces of Spain were obscured. But in this
present action, there were three points, whereon they must resolve. The
reconciliation with la Motte writes, and that to that end the marquess of
Roubay, and the lords of Montigny and Rassinghem, are met (whereunto it seems
some yield an ear) he conceiues as much as may be in this matter of estate,
that those men will not do any thing, without the will of the prince of Parma:
whereof they may be sufficiently persuaded by the treaty of Cologne, in the
year 1579, made betwixt some private men among the malcontents, and the said
prince of Parma: the which was no sooner past, but they sent them greater
numbers of Spaniards and Italians, than ever and distrust betwixt the two
nations, as afterward there will be small means to reconcile 1583
him, or that they under his authority, would attempt something against
religion. He said also, That he knew well, that some among them thought it not
good to agree with one that was not of their religion, for certain
considerations. Whereupon they were to consider, that the duke held many good
towns in his hands, the which in case they rejected him, he might deliver up
unto their enemies, seeing that of himself he should have no means to
preserve them: whereby many other good towns should fall into great danger,
especially the enemy being master of the field. It was in like manner to be
feared, that if they did incense the duke, they should also have the French
king for their enemy, who would be more heavy unto them than any other,
whereby they should be in danger to loose their navigations both into

This was the prince of Oranges advice upon the three points of so great
importance, entreating 1583
thing of themselves, and to take this his advise in good part, protesting,
that he would expose all his means, yea his life, for Religion, the
generality, and for the town of Antuerpe in particular.

We have said, how that Monsieur de Bellieure was come unto the Estates from
the French king, as an intercessor for the duke of Aniou his brother. The
Estates having heard his Oration, and according unto that which he propounded
and required, begun to treat with him in the dukes name, deputing Elbert
Leonin, chancellor of Gueldre, and Adolph of Meelkerke, Monsieur de Bellieure
treats with the Estates for the duke of Aniou
president of Flanders, with some others on their behalf; and for the duke
were deputed men of authority, pleasing unto the Estates, among the which was
the earl of Laual, the Seignior

During all this trouble, the Estates found small support in their neighbors
of Germany and England, but from France they had many goodly promises, which
notwithstanding tasted of some threats. They had small means of their own to
free themselves, and they feared much, that they should be exposed as a prey,
and delivered to the Spaniards, which made them to enter the more speedily into
the said conference. On the other side, the duke feared least the towns which
he had at his devotion should want victuals; being also desirous to free his
nobility from prison out of Antuerp, for S. Anthonies day, which made him
yield unto unreasonable conditions, giving hope, that hereafter by his good
carriage he would wipe away this blemish and disgrace. So in the end they made
a prouisionall treaty the 28 of March,

His Highness should willingly content himself to choose his abode at Macklyn,
yet considering that they will treat of new articles, and that the ratification
of the oath which his Highness demands, has not been presently concluded,

1 His Highness has resolved, according unto the offer which has been made
unto him by the Estates, to choose the town of Dunkerke, to reside there for
some days, during which time he desires to treat of al things concerning the
good of this estate, and to determine all difficulties that are now offered.

2 His Highness promising upon the faith and word of a prince (that being
finished) that he has no other intention, but is fully resolved to return
presently, and stay in the town of

3 Those of his guard, nor of the garrison of Dunkerke, shall not attempt any
thing against the inhabitants of the said town, nor the reformed Religion: and
his Highness shall have free exercise of the Catholic Religion in any Church
he shall please to choose within Dunkerke, even as he had in Antuerpe.

4 His Highness shall cause his French garrison to retire out of Villevoorde,
having a promise from the Estates, to fulfill all things that shall be agreed
upon: and three of the said deputies

5 His Highness shall command his army to go and lodge in the quarter of
Lempeloo, where it shall be supplied with victuals. And the next day the
Estates assuring the sum of thirty thousand crowns of gold to be put into
the hands of a Commissarie, sent to that end, to deliver them unto the said
army, it shall march to Villebroucke, whereas the commanders, colonels,
captains and leaders of the men of war shall take an oath, well and truly
to serve his Highness and the general Estates: and not to attempt any thing
against his Highness nor the Estates, neither in general, nor in particular,
but shall employ themselves for the service of his Highness and the Estates,
against their common enemies, Spaniards, Italians;

6 This done, the army shall pass into Hellegat, where it shall in like sort
be furnished 1583
and take the like oath unto his Highness. And at the same time, when as the
hostages shall arrive, and the said payments be made, his highness having
received the hostages, and the garrison of Dendermonde being with him, the
town to be left and appointed to such as are borne in the country, and
pleasing to the Estates of Flanders, and that he shall march toward Eckeloo.

7 The army having received these things, in passing at Villebrouck, at the
same instant the English, Scottish, and other soldiers which shall be retired
out of the land of Waes shall pass the river of Escaut at Ruppelmonde, to be
employed where need shall require: and from that time all shall be paid equally
out of the money that shall be appointed to that end, and be furnished with
victuals, without respecting one more than another. The exercise of the
catholic

8 Doing this above specified, and yielding up Dendermonde, hostages shall be
presently given, for the assurance of the delivery and liberty of all the
prisoners that are in Antuerpe, and other places, detained since the 17 of
January last past, together with the restitution of papers which were in a box
in his Highness cabinet, and were taken in Quinsays lodging, and the goods
carried to the towne-house, under the magistrates command, without taking of
any exception in regard thereof. And as for the moueables which are in private
houses, and Frenchmens lodgings, they shall be also restored, as much as was
found in being the tenth of this present month.

9 His Highness shall also promise, that the decrees made in France shall be
revoked, and that the prisoners, goods, and ships arrested at Dunkerke,
belonging to any person inhabiting in these provinces, shall be set at
liberty. His Highness has named for hostages, Philip of Schoonhouen,
Seignior of Wanroy, bourgmaster of Antuerpe, John of Stralen, Seignior of
Mercxen, Amptman of the said town, Roger of Leesdael, Seignior of Meulem,
first sheriff, Noel of Caron, Seignior of Schoonwael, bourgmaster of Franc,
with the three deputies that were at this present treaty, that is, Adolph of
Meetkerke, president of Flanders, Henry of Bloyere, bourgmaster of Brussels,
and William Euerardi, pentioner of Antuerpe. Always provided, that if any of
the above named cannot come, by reason of sickness, or any other impediment,
that then the Estates shall send others of the like quality, to his Highness

10 His Highness shall retain two or three hundred horse, and four or five
hundred foot, for the safety and guard of his person unto Dunkerke. And if any
of the magistrates of Gant or Bruges will come to see his Highness, when he
shall approach near unto their towns, they shall be graciously received and
conducted back when they please with all safety: and the necessary bridges of
Steeken, upon the river of Waes, and in other places, where he shall pass,
shall be repaired and made up.

11 His Highness shall carry the hostages to the nearest lodging that he shall
make to Nyeuport, whither all the prisoners (detained in Antuerpe, and
elsewhere) shall be safely brought unto him, with all the papers and moueables
above mentioned. Provided always, that the prisoners

12 And after that his Highness has caused his French garrison to retire out of
Dixmuyden, the guard whereof to be given to such as are borne in the country,
his highness shall retain the said hostages, until that the prisoners and
papers be restored: which done, they shall be released and fully delivered, and
are not to be detained for any goods remaining in private houses, where the
French had lodged, the same being not in the magistrates power, neither yet for

13 And his Highness shall continue his way unto Dunkerke, there to treat and
resolve of all things, concerning the good and greatness of his Highness, and
of these countries, whither the deputies of the Estates shall go to that end.

14 The deputies of the towns and provinces, and all other of these countries,
may go 1583
all merchants and passengers may imbarke and go out of Dunkerke, as they did
before. His Highness leaving the towns, out of which he shall retire his
French garrisons, furnished with such artillery, munition, and victuals, as is
in them, and shall be then found in being.

15 Upon the conclusion of these articles, the Estates shall advertise their
provinces, and shall do their best endeauours, that with all speed they may
send their deputies to his Highness to Dunkerke, with full power and
authority, to enter into an ample treaty, and to determine and conclude what
shall be held most convenient for the service of his Highness, and the good,
safety, and preservation of the country. And all persons shall carry
themselves

16 His Highness shall write his letters unto the French companies that are in
Winocx-Berghen, commanding them to depart out of the said town, leaving the
guard thereof to such of the country as shall be pleasing unto the Estates, and
that upon pain of disobedience, and to incur his indignation.

17 And upon the conclusion of that which shall be determined at Dunkerke, the
said Estates shall make an Act, well and truly to entertain and keep it in
all points and articles, together with the treaty general made at Bourdeaux
the 24 of January 1581, and the oath

18 According to the said treaty, all things past shall be forgotten, from the
tumult and trouble which happened the 17 of January, unto the conclusion of
this present treaty, with a defense to all persons, of what quality soever,
not to offend, revile, or use any reproaches by reason thereof; but they shall
carry themselves modestly and courteously one unto another, as it belongs to
good brethren and friends.

19 There shall be a convenient and safe place provided for the sick men of the
army, where they mayremaine until they be cured, and the Estates shall
appoint some honest persons to assist them, and to see that they be not
disquieted nor molested.

20 Thus made and concluded in Antuerpe the five and twentieth of March 1583,
his Highness has promised and sworn, faithfully to observe the contents of
these present articles, according to their form and tenor. The 26 of March
1583, signed Francis, and underneath, Pin.

These articles being allowed by the Estates, and proclaimed in Antuerpe the
second of The duke goes to Dunkerke, yielding the towns he held to the Estates.
April, after the payment above mentioned duly made, the Frenchmen went out of
Villeuoorde, under the command of the earl of Rochepot: and the hostages
being delivered, the duke departed from Denremonde the sixth of the month, and
on Easter Eve came to Dunkerke.

On the fifteenth day the French garrison went out of Dixmuyden. The government

The duke of Aniou being departed from Denremonde, before he entered into
Dunkerke, hearing that the plague was somewhat rise there, he sent to request
them of Bruges, that he might lodge in the town: but they (remembering the
surprise of Antuerpo, which was yet fresh in memory, and what the Seignior of
Fougiere had in charge from him) refused him flatly, and so he continued his
way to Dunkerke, where he stayed some time.

They say commonly, that one mischief comes not alone: for at that time, in
the city of Antuerpe, when as the blood of the Frenchmens wounds was not yet
stanched, there fell out another unfortunate accident: for the four and
twentieth of February, the place for the merchants meeting, called the Bourse,
which is an excellent building, having open galleries beneath, with pillars of
blew stone, and shoppes above for all sorts of ware, was about ten 1583
past any man's knowledge, how it came; some imputing the fault to one thing,
and some The Bourse at Antuerpe burnt.
unto another: but the French were not freed from blame, nor the prisoners
without great fear; some saying, that they had caused it to be done, to be
revenged; others spoke otherwise, and all diversely; but howsoever it came, the
loss was very great for the poor merchants. This great fire made the bourgers
of the town to doubt some treason: wherefore they continued all night in
arms, and upon their guards, with the chains of the streets drawn.

In March one Cornellis of Hooghe was beheaded and quartered at the Haghe in
Holland, tearming himself to be bastard son to the emperor Charles the
fifth: he was convicted to have treated with the king of Spain, promising
(upon hope to be aduowed for his natural

In the same month there was taken in Antuerpe, and discovered upon small
grounds, a certain Spaniard, called Pedro Dord^igno, who confessed, that he
was expressly come out of Spain, to kill the prince of Orange, and that he
had treated with the king himself: although la Motte, governor of that place.
He did counterfeit himself to be a high Germane, saying, that he was of
Croatia: he was expert in the knowledge of many tongues, having also been at
the sack of Antuerpe: he was read hayred, nothing like a Spaniard: there was
never any man of so saint a courage after his sentence, for so great an
attempt. According unto his confession, he was afterward strangled, and then
quartered, thanking the Justice for so mild a death.

The seventh of April there arrived in Zeeland the lady Louyse of Coligni,
daughter to Gaspar of Coligni, lord of Chastillon, admiral of France, who was
murdered at the massacre Louyse, the prince of Orange married for his fourth
wife the twelfth day following, in the chapel of the castle of Antuerpe, of
whom, upon the six and twentieth of February, in the year following 1584, he
had a son, called Henry Frederic, a prince well bred, and of a great hope.

The thirteenth of the same month, Hans Hanssz, a rich merchant of Flessingue,
was beheaded, who for mere hatred he bare unto the prince of Orange, sought to
kill him, and all those that should be with him, setting fire to certain
barrels of gunne-powder, in a cellar joining to the house where the prince
should lodge: and thereof he had treated with the Spanish Anthony Auquema, a
Frison) whom he trusted, thinking to have him his confederat in so execrable an
act, but God would not suffer it.

The town of Eindouen was at this time besieged by Cont Charles of Mansfeldt,
in the which, the lord of Boniuet, son to the lord of Creuecuaer, a
Frenchman, commanded, with eight hundred soldiers: but by reason of the
difficulties that were betwixt the duke of Aniou and the Estates (although they
hoped, that the marshall of Biron should go and relieve him) the lord of
Boniuet not able to hold it any longer, yielded it, upon condition to depart
with their arms and baggage, and their colors flying, whither they pleased:
Eindouen yielded to the Spaniard.
the said lord excusing it upon the want of powder, having first capitulated,
That if within not be ready in time, wherein they of Antuerpe were somewhat
restie, remembering how 1583
1579, so as nothing was done at all, and the town was lost for want of a
speedy resolution.

After the loss of Eindouen, the marshall lying with his army before the fort
of Versele in the quarter of Liere in Brabant, after that he had battered it a
little, it was yielded by composition the three and twentieth of the same
month, captain Wensel, who commanded there, and his chief officers remaining
prisoners, and the rest of the soldiers departing with their rapiers and
daggers. At this paltrie siege, the Seignior of la Guard, a French colonel,
master of the dukes artillery, was hurt by one of his own pieces, which
brake, whereof he dyed, having done great services to the prince of Orange, and
the Estates of Holland Georges church with an honorable military pomp. He
had been one of the most valiant, wise, modest, and most expert captains in
all the united provinces, a man of great counsel, learned, and well red in the
laws, and politic government. He behaved himself worthily at the
victualling of Leyden, and therefore was much lamented of the prince and
Estates.

After the taking of this paltrie castle, the marshall went to besiege the
strong castle of Woude castle yielded to the Estates.
Woude, a league from Berghen upon Soom, from whence the marquess of Berghen,
lord of that place (of the house of Gaesbeke) was dislodged some few days
before. There was

At that time they of the privy counsel of the united Provinces, whom the
duke of Aniou and Brabant had established, coming to Antuerpe, were declared
to be suspended of their offices, by an act made by the general Estates, the
which was signified unto

At the yielding up of the French prisoners, which should be made unto the duke
of Aniou, la Pierre held the contrary, seeing that all the prisoners on that
day, and their goods being in esse, should be restored by the prouisionall
accord made with the duke. By virtue whereof, the bourgers were debarred of
their pretension, and he was afterward sent away, having paid his ransom.
It was he, who (being called earl of Warax) was afterward, in the year
1597, defeated with his troops, and slain at the encounter of Turnhout.

The earl of Mansfeldt having taken Eindouen, and some castles and forts of
that quarter of Campaigne, he went to besiege the town of Die, belonging to
the prince of Orange, Die besieged.
where colonel Paul Sohey commanded, with four companies of Netherlanders,
and two of English, the which could not in all make above three hundred men:
True it is, there were about five hundred bourgers carrying arms, but very
unwilling, remembering, 1583
the town was very weak, over which certain small hills commanded, so as it
might be won without artillery: the which did much discourage the bourgers,
and made them to fear, that if they held out, the town would be sacked,
whereupon they forced the colonel to treat, the which he did, yielding the
place upon condition, that the soldiers should leave their colors, and depart
with their arms and baggage, as much as certain wagons granted to the
captains, could carry. By which agreement, such bourgers as pleased might
depart and retire themselves, and so the eight and twentieth of May the
soldiers retired to Bourgerhout, in the suburbs of Antuerpe. Colonel Sohey
was committed to prison, and the soldiers cast, except the English. But
afterward colonel Sohey justified himself, imputing it to the small number of
men, and want of horsemen, to the weakness of

From thence Mansfeldt went to besiege Westerloo in the same country of
Campaigne, Westerloo yielded to the Spaniard.
upon the river of Nethe, in a good situation. Some pesants (ill affected to
the besieged, and to the Estates) showed the earl of Mansfeldt the means how
to cut off the water that ran to the castle half a league off, the which was
done, so as the ditch became dry. Captain Vlyet, who commanded within the
place, seeing this, and that they battered it furiously, he was advised to
yield the place the fifth of June, retyring toward Antuerpe, where he was
wonderfully

The prince of Parma being at Liere, and meaning to pursue his conquests,
hearing, that there was division in the Estates camp, for that the English and
Scottish could not agree with the French, the marshall of Biron, general of
the army, being lodged at Roosendael, and the English and Scottish about a
league off, the said English and Scottish being not fully entrenched, the
Spaniard came and charged them with such fury, as a great part of them were
defeated, and the rest put to rout near unto Seuenbergh. And although the
general Biron were at Roosendael, in a strong lodging, and well fortified,
whereas the prince of Parma durst not assail him, yet rising from thence, he
set fire on his lodging, and went and encamped under

The prince of Parma knowing that he had to do with an old politic captain,
caused Zichem yielded to the Spaniard.
his army to march presently away before the town of Herental, having taken
the town and castle of Zichem in his passage, the which were yielded unto him
by composition, upon the first summons. Having planted his siege before
Herental, he sent some of his troops to the fort and abbey of Tongerloo, not
fair from thence, the which was also yielded unto him: and having continued
his siege before Herental until July, without any profit or any

There was about that time some tumult in the town of Lille, for the
establishing of a new governor, after the death of Maximilian Vilain, lord of
Rassenghem, newly created earl of Yseghem by the king of Spain, dying in his
castle of Lemme, for that they would have given them a Spaniard to be their
governor, and not one that was borne in the country, the which was contrary to
their treaty of reconciliation: but in the end the lord of Liques a Frenchman
borne was made their governor.

In the mean time the Estates affairs impaired daily, they having taken upon
them again (since the duke of Aniou his folly) the government of the united
provinces, yet could they not agree together, some enclining to the Spaniard,
others to call in the duke of Aniou again, and some were of another opinion: so
as for want of a good and speedy resolution, there was a great confusion in
their affairs. The deputies of the Estates were gone to Dunkerke, as 1583
they could reconcile all discontents: but the duke seeing that nothing was
done, and that by their irresolutions, or rather divisions, matters were
protracted, growing weary, and seeing his reputation blemished with them which
were ill affected, and that the marshall of Bron with his army prevailed
little against the Spaniards; and finding withal, that the French nation was
generally hated (the which increased daily by their means, that were affected
to the contrary party) he grew so distasted, as during the time that the
Estates should remain disputing of their affairs, he resolved to go see
France. And after that he had sent back the deputies, and the hostages, which
had been given him for assurance of the delivery of his nobility and
servants, that were prisoners in Antuerpe, he departed Lamoral of Egmont,
being freed from prison at Scluse, at his request, and the same day he landed
at Calais.

The duke of Aniou was no sooner departed from Dunkerke, but the prince of
Parma W Dunkerke besieged.
(having raised his siege from Herental) sent la Morte, governor of Graueling,
to inuest and besiege it; when the duke had left the Seignior of Chamois to
guard it, with twelve hundred soldiers strong, as he had made him believe, and
furnished with all other things necessary, but of twelve hundred he had not
full five hundred men. La Motte began his battery above the haven with four
pieces only, and two which played upon the entry of the haven, which was
crossed over with two great cables, to stop the passage into the town.
Chamois seeing himself straightly besieged, and that his supplies succeeded
not, began to faint, and without any great importunity yielded basely, retyring
himself with his troops (which he had made so great to the duke his master)
to Calais, where both he and his captains received certain taunting scoffs
from Monsieur G^dan, governor of that place.

Dunkerke being yielded to the prince of Parma, he went and encamped with his
army Nieuport yielded.
before Nieuport, the which was suddenly yielded up, without any great toil or
charge.

Upon these doubts, the prince of Orange had caused Oostend to be very well
fortified and furnished, being also a sea town upon that coast; the which the
prince of Parma went to besiege: but seeing himself so hotely received, and
finding it stronger and better furnished than he expected, he retired, and went
before Furnes and Dixmuyden, lying in the Furnes and Dixmuyden yielded to the
Spaniard.
champian country of West-Flanders, the which he took without any
resistance, yielding at the first summons. He thought to find the like at
Wynocx-berghen, being but a league from Dunkerke: but the Seignior of
Villeneufe, who was within the town with his French regiment, made such
resistance, as he thought it best to retire, and to temporize, hoping to have
it in the end. From thence he went to besiege the town of Ypre, one of the
four members of Flanders; which siege continued long: we will relate the
yielding

The united Provinces being now without a head, or protector over them, the
Spaniards embraced the opportunity and occasion, and made use thereof: For
finding but small resistance, they made themselves masters wheresoever they
came; yea some, who until that day had carried a low sail, and swom (as it
were) betwixt two streams, began then to show themselves openly on their
party. In the end they wrought so, as through the favor of Seruaes van
Steelandt, great baylife of the land of Waes and of his confederats, as of
Rowland York, an Englishman, married to the lady of Wolferdoucke, and others,
they seized upon the fort of Sas by Gant, which is the entry into the sea for
the Ganthois, whereas John of Imbise had passed the day before, returning out
of Germany, to The Sas seized on by the Spaniard.


The prince of Orange hearing, that the people of Antuerpe (at the instigation
of some 1583
the duke of Aniou had attempted against them, saying moreover, That he did
countenance him (it may be) to have done worle, and to have intended some
greater misc^. To ^uoid all disorder, seeing that the magistrate durst not
punish them that accused him so boldly and rashly, he retired himself out of
Antuerpe the two and twentieth of July, and we^ with all his family to
Flessingue in Zeeland, where he kept his court for a time, having left Philip
of Marnix, Seignior of Mont S. Aldegonde, a gentleman of deep iudgeme^, and
very fit for such a government, for the chief bourgomaster of the town of
Antuerpe.

In the mean time the earl of Hohenlo spoiling the country of Campaigne, to
famish the

Those of the garrison of Herental spoiled the town of Weert in the County of
Horn: and the prince of Parma his troops did the like unto the town of
Steenbergh in Brabant, Weert spoiled by the estates.
which was of great importance not only for the said country of Brabant, but
also for Holland and Zeeland, joining to the sea of the said provinces.
Whereupon the Estates were to be very watchful of Berghen upon Zoome, which is
but two leagues off, into the which they put two thousand foot, and four
cornets of horse: for the payment whereof, there was five and thirty thousand
florins appointed monthly, whereof they of Holland and Zeeland should pay
twenty thousand, and they of Brabant the rest. There was already

The private Estates of Zeeland (to restrain and keep in them of Dunkerke)
sent forth certain ships of war, the which they caused to lie at the
entry or port of their haven.

The duke of Aniou his men, which had remained in the united Provinces, whom
the general Estates had dismissed, and would have sent back into France,
were stayed for a time by the prince of Orange, until they had a more ample
commission. The duke of Aniou (before his departure out of the Netherlands)
sent a gentleman with letters unto the

The Seignior of Villeneufe, who was colonel of a French regiment of foot,
being in garrison in the town of S. Wynocx-bergh, was fully resolved to
defend it, if they came to besiege him: but la Motte, governor of Graueling,
seeing, that there was no more but that town only in all the quarter of
West-Flanders, holden for the Estates, for the getting whereof by force, they
must spend much time, and be at an exceeding great charge: he thought good to
try the Seignior of Villeneufe, to see if he might win him thereunto by
promise of pay, or by any other means. But he would give no ear or consent
thereunto, la Motte did threaten him; therefore he might freely (and without
fear of any public scandale or reproach) seek to make the most honorable
agreement and composition that he could, as well for his own person, as for
his men. Upon which answer, he entered into composition with the said la Motte,
promising to deliver up the town unto him, in giving him three months pay for
his whole regiment; the which was granted and paid, upon condition, that
neither he

The marshall of Biron, lieutenant general of the duke of Aniou his army, who
(as 1583
commandment (the jealousy and distrust of whom and of his men being
grown so great, as they would not receive them into any place (although that
Brussels, Macklyn, and other frontier towns, which feared the Spaniards siege,
would willingly have had some (especially of the Suitsers) in garrison. In the
end, being come unto Biervlyet, which is a town and Island in Flanders,
being refused to land in Zeeland, he was enforced to go to sea, and to
return into France the seven and twentieth of August. In the mean time, the
duke of Aniou gave it out, that he would levy new forces, to send them into
the united Provinces by the way of Luxembourg. Whereof the prince of Parma
being advertised, he sent some of his troops upon those frontiers, and upon
Flanders side, to stop the passage: but

The Estates seeing themselves now destitute and deprived of the means and
succors of the duke of Aniou, and that they had no more a head (without the
which they thought their estate could not long subsist (after diverse
deliberations and consultations upon either side) the prince of Orange was
propounded to be created Earl of Holland and Zeeland, the which rested
without any effect, through the diversity and contrariety of opinions of the
towns: although that the most were wonderfully well affected unto him therein,
knowing him to be such a one, as they could not easily recover the like, that
would more freely expose his life, goods, blood, friends and kinsmen, than he:
but fearing he was not powerful enough of himself to defend them, and that it
might breed jealousy in kings and princes that John d' Asseliers, Secretaries
of the general Estates of the united provinces, were deputed.

During this time, some Ganthois, turbulent spirits, and greedy of
innouations, rejecting the duke of Aniou, had written to the duke John
Casimire, entreating him to send them back John d' Imbise their bourgomaster,
and Peter d' Athenes, sometimes their Minister, both remaining then at
Frackenthael, whom they knew to be enemies to the duke of Aniou and the prince
of Orange, that by the means of these two (who in former times had been in
great credit with the people of Gant) they might work some alteration;
whereof Imbyse made good

In the mean time the prince of Parma having some intelligence of these
broils, the more to alter them, he took the navigations from them; and that
no victuals might enter by water, he cut off the three rivers which pass
through the town of Gant, which are the Escaut, the Lys, and the Dendre: the
which he might easily do, holding the town of Audenarde, by which the Escaut
passes, and Courtray, which the river of Lys runs through: then betwixt Gant
and Dendermond he made a palisado over the river of Dendre, building a fort on
either side of the river against the palisado. He did also seize upon a small
river which goes from Eckloo to Gant.

The bourgomaster Imbise being returned to Gant, and settled in greater credit
than before, Adolph of Meetkerke, president of the provincial council of
Flanders. Then he sent his deputies unto the prince of Parma, with the king:
among the which was Doctor Ryme, a lawyer, and other men of quality. He 1583
and the authority which he did usurp over all men, no man daring to
contradict him: for as he was a most ambitious and high minded man, he alone
would have the honor of the reconciliation. And for the well ordering and
managing of his affairs, as soon as he was returned back out of Germany,
and created bourgomaster in the town of Gant, he displaced all them that had
been chosen into any place or office of the town, during his absence,
substituting others in their places, at his appointment and devotion. Then he
disappointed them of the Protestants Religion of all magistracy, and put
Romish Catholics in their places. The greatest and chiefest cause which
moved him to send deputies unto the prince of Parma, was, that he had
intercepted certain letters written by the prince of Orange, containing a
Commission to seize upon his person, and upon all his followers

The prince of Parma having heard the deputies that were sent by Imbise, he
sent back to Gant the Seignior of Manu^, governor of Audenarde, and colonel
Segura, a Spaniard, allied to Imbise by his wife, to treat with the Ganthois.
These were very kindly entertained, and much made of by some of the people,
which held Imbises party, for whose assurance he had sent hostages to
Audenarde. A truce was concluded betwixt them and the Ganthois for twenty
days: the which were spent in sending up and down to their confederats,
especially

They of Brussels seeing the Ganthois to be wavering, and how desirous they
were to reconcile themselves unto the king of Spain, writ unto them letters
with a large discourse, persuading them to perseverance, with many allegations,
reasons, and examples, exhorting them rather to die, than to renounce their
allies, and to join again with the king. They of Antuerpe sent them letters
of the like tenor, entreating them to consider and examine with judgment the
consequence of this reconciliation, setting before their eyes the cruelties of
the Spaniards, practiced upon the poor Indians, against whom they had not (by

They of Bruges were not a little perplexed for the town of Ypre, their
neighbor, being blocked up on all sides, and desiring to relieve it, they sent
a conuoy of victuals with two hundred soldiers: but coming within two leagues
of the town, not far from Vyuerbergh, this conuoy was defeated, all the
victuals taken, the soldiers put to rout, and many slain, the Spaniards
having not lost above twelve men. The bourgers not content with this loss,
provided eighty wagons more, laden with all sorts of victuals and munition,
with an hundred and fifty baskets carried by pesants, the which was conducted
by three hundred launciers, an hundred musketeers, and five hundred
harguebusiers, most part Scottishmen. These being come within half a league of
the town, the Spaniards sallyed out of for these two losses, sought by all
means possible to provide better for their affairs, and 1583.
places unto their town, drowning the country round about, which was to be
drowned, so as the enemy could not approach; and they did the like three
leagues off, at a little town called Oostbourg. And as the town of Menin,
lying in the champian country, in the midst of all their enemies, was a
great charge unto them, they retired with their Scottish garrison that was in
it, and abandoned it, not without great joy of them of Lille and Courtray,
betwixt which two it lies: the which was done by the advice of the prince of
Chimay, governor of Flaunders, who then sought means to reconcile himself
with the king of Spain, delivering him the town of Bruges, the which he did
afterward.

At that time there was sharp and cruel war in the diocese of Cologne, for
that Gebhard Truchses, archbishop and prince Elector of Cologne, having married
one of the Countesses of Mansfeldt, would have retained still the said
archbishopricke and Electorall dignity, with liberty of Religion throughout
all his diocese, maintaining, that his marriage was not repugnant to the word
of God. But the Chanons and Chapter opposed themselves strongly against him,
and (with the assistance of the Pope, and the Emperor) deposed him, and caused
him to be excommunicate, choosing in his place Ernest of Bauiere, son to duke
Albert, then bishop of Leege and Fressinghem, with diverse other spiritual
dignities. Truchses had fortified himself in the town of Bonne, three leagues
above Cologne, where the archbishops do often keep their Court, and have
their Frederic; holding part with Ernest of Bauiere, and some other of his
brotherhood, with their kinsmen, friends, and allies, went unto the field, and
took diverse places in the new elected bishops name. Truchses having also an
army in the field, under the conduct of the earl of Moeurs and of
Nyeuwenoort, seized upon the towns of Rhinbergh, Ordenges, and other places.
Duke John Casimire came likewise to his succor with some troops, but he did
little. Augustus duke of Saxony should also have sent, but his slacknesse
discouraged the rest: so as they which held Truchses party, retired themselves
by little and little. The Bauierois besieged the town of Bonne, which (by a
mutiny of the Germane soldiers, which were there in garrison) was sold unto
him for four thousand Rycx-dallers, delivering Schenck surprised, and also
that of Nuys, with the which he did much annoy and hurt Cologne, under the
government of the earl of Moeurs, and the said colonel Schenck being marshall
of his camp.

In the end of this Summer, the town of Zutphen, Metropolitan of the County
of Zutphen, was taken by the prince of Parma, after the manner which follows:
There Taxis, and to captain du Bois, giving them Zutphen surprised by the
Spaniard.
diverse instructions, and showing them the means, how they might surprise and
take the town of Zutphen, and reduce it under the king of Spaines command and
obedience. Taxis being loath to let slip so fair an opportunity as this
(promising unto the soldier, besides his liberty, to give him a good
recompense, if the enterprise succeeded well) lodged himself, and captain
Bois, with some few of their men, in a little house, not far from the port,
where in the day time they were usually accustomed to put some of their them,
entered into the town: whereof (notwitstanding all the resistance of the
bourgers) 1583
horse and foot.

They of Deuenter (which are but two leagues from thence in the country of
Oueryssell) being much amazed at the loss of this neighbor town, to keep
the Spanish garrison that was in it (passing the river of Yssel) from spoiling
the country of Veluwe, even unto the ports of the towns of Guelderland (which
are seituated along the river of Rhin) of Vtrecht and of Amersfort, they built
a great fort with the help of the Gueldrois, right against the said town,
upon the rivers side, but soon after the waters did rise so high, as they were
forced to abandon it, and it was presently seized on, finished, and manned by
them of Zutphen. And as this town and fort did wonderfully annoye and bring a
thousand discommodities to the Taxis went and environed all these forts and
trenches with a good number of horse and Oger who commanded in the said
trenches, had advertised the particular estates of the province of Vtrecht,
above twelve days before the preparation which Taxis made to come and inuest
them, assuring them that they should be speedily besieged. But he had no other
succors but four hundred florins to make a small lendings to his men, with
the which money he was commanded to return, and to set all things in as good
order as he could, meaning within few days to send him a good

You may see what it is to embrace an occasion and opportunity in due time,
when it is offered; for when as they had good means to do it, they neglected
it, and when they desired it, they could not, and all their expense was
fruitless. So it often falls out in long and irresolute consultations,
although there be no treachery, where they resolve not speedily to prevent the
enemies diligence. Thus in the end these forts and trenches fell into Taxis
hands, being

In October the Seignior of Nyeuwenoort and Assinga Entens took in the
country of Gronigue the fort of Fermsum and Orterdam, the which they manned
with good garrisons, and built other forts about the town of Gronigue. They
also built the fort of Reed, but in vain, being forced to retire.

The earl Vanden Berghe and his wife, sister to the prince of Orange, his
children and secretary, were arrested prisoners in the town of Arnham in
Guelderland, being charged to Vanden Berghe and his children were set at
liberty, who soon after went to the Spanish party, and had charge and
government of some troops. John d'Imbise bourgmaster of Gant, Seruaes van
Steelandt great bailiffe of the land of Waes, 1583
services, to reconcile themselves to the king of Spain. Steelandt first of
all yielded up the Steelandt ^eelds the land of Waes to the Spaniard.
towns of Hulst and Axell, and all other places of the land of waes to the
Spaniard, with the fort of Sasz, which is the entry for the Ganthois unto the
sea, by the sluices which are there. And the 28 of October, he also delivered up
the castle of Ruppelmond to the prince of Parma, who by this means was master
of all the land of Waes, and of the river which runs from Dendermond to
Antuerpe, by the which he might with more ease annoy the Ganthois: besides
near unto Courtray he caused the town of Dinse to be fortified, and toward
Bruges, he had Eckloo and other places at his devotion. The said Steelandt did
also practice to deliver three ships of war which he had under his charge
into his hands, if the mariners and soldiers

They of Antuerpe being grieved for the loss of Ruppelmond, did besiege and
batter it, but they prevailed nothing; whereupon they cut certain dikes or
causies and drowned all the fields and meddowes about the villages of Burcht
and Calloo. They also built a fort at Burcht and fortified the head of Flanders
right against their town. To conclude, they spared no cost, but with one
general consent, did voluntarily furnish to the sum of 1300000 florins.

At the same instant the Earl of Hohenlo entered into Flanders with 19
companies of foot, where he built a mighty fort at Terneuse, right against
Zeeland, to assure the navigations to Antuerpe, and from thence to spoil that
which the Spaniard held in Flanders: he also cut

Those which at that time had the government of Gant, having also (as I have
said) intelligence with the Spaniard, making a show to put in a new garrison
into Alost, of such as were borne in the country, and to retire the English,
sought to deliver it to the prince of Parma, but the English would not depart
without their full pay and arrerages. They sought to have done the like at
Dendermond, whither they sent their commissioners the 27 of October, the which
were (...) Tryest, Anthony Heyman, and Ieams Somer, with charge to displace
the Seignior of Ryhouen great bailiffe of Gant, and governor of Dendermond:
but he being then at Gant and having some notice thereof, meaning to prevent
them, went to horseback, and notwithstanding Somer who was pentioner of Gant,
escaped hanging very hardly.

Afterward the said English garrison of Alost being mutined for their pay,
the Ganthois did not only refuse to give it them, but did threaten to force
them out, or else to famish them. In the mean time the prince of Parma did not
let slip this opportunity to make his profit thereby, but did solicit them
by fair words and promises to pay them; and these English companies not
accustomed to endure hunger and want, began to give ear unto him, for that
their Colonel sir John Norris and the states were somewhat slow to provide for
their pay: Alost delivered by the English to the Spaniard.
for the which they intended to give order, but it was too late: for after that
the English had Pigot Vincent, Tailor, and others, agree to deliver up the
town unto the Spaniard, giving them for their pay, which they received,
thirty thousand pistolets. And so the said town was delivered unto the
Spaniard in the beginning of December, and filled with Wallons. Most of these
Enlish went to serve the prince of Parma, in his camp before Eckloo, but
finding that he trusted them not, they ran in a manner all away.

The prince of Parma being in his army betwixt Bruges and Gant, all devices
were put in practice by them that favored the Spaniard, to advance the
reconciliation of the towns of Flanders with the king of Spain: yea by small
pamphlets printed in the name of them of the protestant religion, among the
which Imbise, Bouckle, and Borlat were at Gant, and the prince Heren at Bruges,
in the which it was discoursed that it was not with the Spaniard, that this
reconciliation was intended, but with them of Arthois, Henault, Lille, and
others already reconciled, or subdued by arms; and that therefore they should
enjoy the liberty of religion, and their privileges, according to the
pacification: wherefore they made so great a show. Whilst they were thus
busied at Gant and at Bruges to talk of 1584
where he had made a Palisado in the river of Escaut, so as they might go on
drie-foote from one bank unto another; at either end of which there was a
fort, which did stop the navigations from Dendermond to Antuerpe. In the mean
time the Ganthois had their deputies with the prince of Parma at Tournay, to
conclude their reconciliation, in hostage for whom, there was in Gant captain
Segur a a Spaniard, and Colonel Manui, who with the assistance of the Seignior
of Chapagni, treated so far with John d'Imbise, as the 24 of March, 1584, he
commanded him that charge of the ships, (whom they call deane of the ship
wrights) to furnish certain small boats, making preparation of ladders,
beams, firre-boards, plankes, hurdles, and such like, to be set upon the river
of Escaut. But as it could not be done easily, nor so Imbise that the common
people did not mean that those boats and other preparation should be carried
forth, which put them into some jealousy: whereunto he answered, that they
should let them go, for he knew well what he did, and that it was for the
great good of the town. But the people not being satisfied therewith, the
boats being stayed by them, could no^y any means go forth that night.

The next day the shirifs and council of the town being assembled in the
town house to resolve upon this matter, Imbise caused his Colonels company to
come down presently in arms, to draw the chains and to enuiron the place:
the which some one of the council espying, going out of the State-house to one
of the Sergeants, he pulled away his halberd and A tumult in Gant.
Imbise and many others of the council, whom they put from their offices, and
degraded Imbise of his estates of Colonel and bourgmaster, they cassierd his
guard, drew forth of his house the three pieces of artillery which he had in
his court before the gate, and then cast him into prison, for that the bourgers
had intercepted certain letters, which were written that day by the lord of
Montigni from Werteren to captain Segura: by the which he sent him word that
he maruailed much that the boats and all the other equipage was not yet
arrived, seeing that Rowland York was also of this enterprise, who being
apprehended, confessed it all. The Seignior of Ryhouen governor of Dendermond,
sent to the baron of Mortagne his cousin, commanding there in his absence,
willing him to seize upon Walter Seton a Scottish man, lieutenant of the horse
that were there in garrison, aduertising him of the treson that was practiced
by him, with Imbise and York, to deliver the town unto the Spaniard. The said
Seton being apprehended, and having confessed the whole conspiracy, was
hanged, and quartered, the thirtieth day of March. Then were there six
companies of supplies Charles of Vtenhouen was appointed in the place of
Imbise, to supply the place and office of bourgmaster at Gant.

The fifteenth of May some deputies of Gant being returned from Tournay with
the articles of their reconciliation propounded by the prince of Parma (which
the Flemish protestants did term to be an accord that was captious,
fraudulent, deceitful, and full of dissimulation) the catholics and those
which demanded nothing but peace, as well nobles, as the chief and best
bourgers in the town, being assembled upon the place before the State-house,
with arms, would have forced the magistrate to accept of the said accord,
crying A new tumult in Gant.
out openly, Where are they that will have no peace? we will have peace. The
protestants being persist therein unto the last gasp, rejecting all articles
and practices of peace with the Spaniard: 1584
whence about the twentieth of May they received six hundred foot, and a
hundred horse, the which did afterward conduct captain York prisoner from
Gant to Brussels, to deliver him to the guard of the Seignior Timpel. He was
happy to have found such good friends, else he had been in danger to have
run the like fortune with Walter Seton. But the prince having pardoned him,
he was after wards restored to his credit by the earl of Leicester, which fell
out unhappily for the general Estates of the united provinces, as we shall
hereafter show.

In the mean time they of Ypre being thus besieged, or rather straightly blockt
up, since the month of September, hearing that they of Gant and Bruges tended
to reconciliation with the king of Spain, which they did hope should be
general, seeing their vittailes and conuoies Anthonic Grenet Seignior of Werp
governor of Courtray, commanding then in all the forts which had blockt up
the said town.

The composition was made the twelfth of April, by the which all strange
soldiers should Ypre yielded by composition.
depart with their full arms, and those that were borne in the country with
their rapiers and

During all the practices of Imbise, and other alterations in Gant and else
where, the prince of Orange foreseeing (by the inconstancy of men's humors, and
the falling away of towns from the generality) a ruin in their affairs, if
they were not supported by some foreign potent prince; he first had advised
the general Estates to send their commissioners to the French Norris general
of the English to go into England giving him particular instructions from
himself, to impart unto the Queens Majesty, as follows.

First, the prince of Orange does entreat monsieur Norris to let her Majesty
understand on his behalf, that he is fully persuaded and resolved to continue
in the maintenance of true religion in these countries, and the liberties
thereof, unto the end of his life. And to oppose himself (according to the
means which God has given him) against the attempts of the king of Spain.

That the said prince has not been ignorant what great forces the king of
Spain has had heretofore, and what he has at this present, or may have. He
is also well acquainted with

That the said prince is not also ignorant of the small power and means which
God has given him: and he knows sufficiently by experience, the inconstancy
of humane things, the variety of men's hearts, and the great errors which are
daiely committed in these countries, and in affairs of state, and what the
inconveniences be which usually follow such confusions.

But being one the other side assured that the king of Spaines heart will
never be moved nor yield to a toleration of religion, and will never endure
that it should increase, no not out condemning of himself before God and men.

The said prince has long known the inward heart of the king of Spain, and
the 1584
grounds of all his councels of estate: And every one knowing how long he has
dealt in the affairs of this country, and of the council of estate, may
persuade himself that it is not without reason that he does attribute unto
himself this knowledge. And therefore be entreats all men of judgment,
especially those that make profession of the religion, to allow him something
which cannot be known but to such as have pierst into the bowels of the
affairs of Spain, as he has often and long time done.

But he is content that all good men, which have interest in the cause, should
consider of that which is set to the view of every man, and known to all the
world, and then judge of the king of Spaines resolutions: that is, whether the
beginning of this monarchy of

The popes have augmented the house of Aragon with the realms of Naples and
Sicile, and have made the way for the house of Spain to conquer Lombardie, and
to hold the princes of Italy subject at his devotion, some by citadels, some
by fear, and some by practices, always managed and colored by the popes: So
as if at any time the house of France

If then there were no other reason but this only, the house of Spain knowing
well of what importance the estate of Italy is, would never attempt any thing,
but as he should be instructed by the spirit of the court of Rome, with the
which no good man can have any greater familiarity, then Christ had with
Belial.

But every man knows that the great empire at the Indies, which Spain does
at this day enjoy, is due by the Spaniards unto the free gift of the Romish
Sea; and likewise the conjunction of the crowns of Aragon and Castile, to the
popes dispensation: as also the conquest

For these reasons then we must think, that neither the king of Spain, nor
any of his successors after him, will ever separate themselves from the amity
of that sea: and consequently, he will be of necessity an open enemy to the
true religion, the which can no more endure the the pope and his adherents,
than the sea does a dead carcass.

And for as much as all the dangers whereunto the said prince may be exposed
with these countries, (the which are very great, to judge according unto man)
are yet nothing in comparison of the ruin of the true religion, whereof they
that persecute it are enemies, and the said prince should be treacherous if he
should abandon it: for these considerations, he is resolved

The said prince is not ignorant what reports are spread abroad by his enemies,
in regard of that which is treated betwixt the Estates of Holland, and his
person; and that before that he would yield unto them, he had foreseen and
duly considered, both by himself, and with many men of worth and reputation:
and moreover, having condescended thereunto, he had protracted the business, to
avoid the slanders of the wicked, and the suspicion of some, who are not of
themselves badde, but may interpret the said treaty sinisterly, not knowing
the true cause and ground.

But the said prince being unwilling to make any long discourse upon this
point, wherein he should do himself wrong, for that it could not be so simply
written, but it would tend something to his praise, he is content to say, and
entreats monsieur Norris to assure her Majesty, the lords of her council, and
al good men, that if the said prince had not bin persuaded by many pregnant
reasons which have been propounded unto him by many men of quality, whose 1584
him, that it was necessary and convenient for the preservation of religion,
and to keep so many good men from unjust deaths by the cruelty of their
enemies, and that others living in simplicity and ignorance should not be
seduced by the practices of the children of this world, he had never proceeded
further; and yet matters being as they are, if they can show him a more safe
way, he protests that he is ready to follow it, and to march constantly after
him that shall guide him.

The said prince does entreat all good men so to temper their judgments, as
they give no place either to slanders or false reports, nor to opinions
grounded only upon suspicion, hoping that his word shall be sooner credited,
than a bare suspicion, the which may be as soon

Nothing then has moved the said prince to take that course which he hitherto
followed, but this holy resolution above mentioned.

And if it shall now please her Majesty to understand what means the said
prince propounds unto himself for the maintenance of so just and yet so
difficult a quarrel, to obey her Majesty, to whom he desires to continue a
most humble servant, and not to forget to advertise her as much (as he may) of
the estate of his affairs, he entreats the Seignior Norris to acquaint her
Majesty with that which follows.

That first of all the great and eternal power of God is known unto him, not
only by his holy doctrine where he has learned it, but also by many
experiences which he has made,

And although that this resolution he settled in his heart, and that he referres
himself to his holy providence, yet he knows the will of God is, that with
his blessing we should use the means which are given and distributed unto us
by that singular providence of God. Wherefore

This is the cause why he does first seek so to unite the hearts of all these
provinces, as with one resolution and will, they may repulse the violence of
their enemies: he has hitherto felt many contradictions, for diverse towns, and
many private persons, some through want of courage, and others through manifest
treachery, have chosen the enemies party, choosing rather not the delights of
Egypt, but the cruel yoke of Pharaoh (which they will feel (too late) to

And as her Majesty and the lords of her council know well, that there is in
the world great diversity and peruersitie of wills and judgments; he does
also beseech them to consider, that even among them which hold firm against
the Spaniard, there are many, whereof part through pride, part by
covetousness, and some through error do very much hinder the advancement of
that which is most profitable for them. The which the prince will forbear to
discourse of, for the small delight her Majesty would take in such a subject,
and he in delivering it: the which he referres to the sufficiency and
discretion of the Seignior Norris, who for his long continuance in these parts,
is able to satisfy her Majesty, if it please her to do him the honor to
demand it.

This design was managed a whole year and more, and yet the said prince to
his great grief could never effect his intentions, so as every one governing
himself after his own fantasy, and he (having only a goodly name and title of
honor) could not execute any matter of importance, neither in assailing nor
defending; having not the means, nether yet could he aid (as he desired) the
towns and private provinces, for that they have relected his 1583
had, as to seek succor and an assured support in Germany, when it was time.

By these errors there have not only ensued losses, but also such confusions
in the public and private affairs of provinces, and a general ignorance of
that which was done and treated, or that should be done; as the said prince
could not with his honor write to any, nor advertise them of that which was
unknown unto him, and over the which he had no power nor authority. The
which the said prince entreats general Norris to represent unto her Majesty,
and to beseech her most humbly to hold him excused in this point. And moreover,
to let her understand how long the said prince had been in speech with him to
take the opportunity of his voyage, to advertise her Majesty more
particularly of all things concerning the

The said prince then seeing such disorder, and foreseeing, yea feeling by
effect the miseries that might ensue, continuing notwithstanding the
soliciting of this general union of all the provinces, not in name, title, or
paper, but in resolution, will, means, and faculties, he has thought it
necessary to devise the means, until that this general union might be
concluded and put in practice, to unite most of the towns and provinces he
could, that they may serve as a firm rampar for a time, to oppose against the
violence and fury of the enemy, whilst that the others should resolve in one
will: And in the mean time also to prevent all extreamities, that the said
provinces (in case that worse should happen) should defend themselves by their
own proper forces and means, and also succor their neighbors, allies, and
confederates,

According to the which, the said prince has of late set down a proportion of
horse and foot, which may be entertained at the charges of the said provinces
which have committed unto him the charge of the war: with the which he will
endeavor (with the help of God) not only to defend the said provinces, but
also to succor the rest, as he has done within these few days, and does
now at this present, having sent what forces he could to hinder the enemies
incursions into the duchy of Gueldres, and to chase them out of the said
country, if it may be. He has not also omitted by the same means and forces
to succor the country and county of Flanders, in releeuing the town of
Oostend, and forcing the enemy to raise

Since, to favor the town of Gant, which was resolved against the Spaniard,
and to keep the enemy from taking away the navigations to Antuerp, he has
caused Terneuse to be fortified with the same forces; and by the same means to
entertain the garrison, the which besides the benefit which our men hold and
retain thereby, has disappointed many of the enemies

And thus the said prince is resolved to continue, according to the occasions
which shall be offered, being well assured that a convenient army to oppose
against the enemy, and to chase him away, were very necessary. But having not
the means without some better resolution of the provinces, and foreign
succors to raise it, he is content with that which he can do, which is but
little, if it please not God to assist him from above, as he prays and hopes.

The prince does what he can to persuade them that have not this resolution, to
embrace it, that by their united forces they may break the course and
proceedings of the enemy, in the which he will labor unto the end: seeing
that such as will not give ear to this resolution, are some of them undone,
and some in the way to be undone through their own follies. And with open
force make war against him, and for his part, he has not at this day any
prince 1584
that he promised unto himself greater aid and assistance than he has yet
found.

And forasmuch as the conformity of religion, the neighborhood of countries,
and the same adversaries which press him and us equally, should incite us to
aid one another with our means; the said prince continues to treat a league
and alliance with him, that until it shall please God to give us other
succors, we may employ those forces which God has given us, one for another:
having in the mean time (notwithstanding our own difficulties) assisted him
with a good sum of money.

But the said prince knows well, that all the said means (to speak as a man)
are not able to resist half the forces of the king of Spain, the pope, and
all those that fight under their ensigns,

According unto the which, he has entreated general Norris to acquaint her
Majesty with the forces of the enemies of these countries, and of the elector:
Her Majesty's accustomed bounty, which she has extended often to them that
were in like sort oppressed, and namely the favor which it has pleased her to
show to them of this country, who are much bound unto her, for that the enemy
has been long stayed from the execution of his designs. He shall represent
unto her Majesty her happy and royal succors given unto France, and to

In doing whereof, her Majesty has purchased so great honor and reputation
with all that beliuing, and shall leave so pleasing a memory to posterity,
and has so won the hearts of all men, as they would as willingly employ
their lives for her service, as if they were her natural subjects. And
therefore he shall most humbly entreat her in the behalf of the said prince,
seeing that the necessity seems greater than ever, the enemies bending all
their forces against these countries, hoping that after they have compassed
their design over this little

The said prince entreats general Norris to propound some particular means,
fearing either to demand too little from her Majesty, considering her power,
which he neither can, nor ought to limit; or that he should require too much,
considering the extreme necessity which does press us, referring all to her
Majesty's good pleasure, the said prince hoping that she will be more liberal
to do good to this country, than he for his part has been bold to

And although the means of these countries (exhausted with long wars) are
very small, yet her Majesty knowing better than our selves, wherein it may
please her to do them of this country the honor to employ them to do her
most humble service; and for the great knowledge which God has given her of
all the Estates of Christendom, and especially of her poor neighbors, her
Majesty knows, if there yet remains any means to do her service, namely
for the provinces of Holland, Zeeland, and Vtrecht, we humbly beseech her to
let us understand it. And the said Seignior Norris shall assure her, that the
prince will do his best endeavor to give her Majesty contentment, beseeching
her to hold as well the said prince, as the general Estates, and particularly
them of Holland, Zeeland, and Vtrecht, in her

He shall also let her Majesty understand, that my masters the Estates have
sent their Ambassadors to the French king, and to his highness, and that
their commission and instructions are altogether conformable to that which it
pleased her Majesty to let the prince understand by sir Francis Walsingham her
chief secretary of estate.

Finally, the said Seignior Norris shall most humbly beseech her Majesty, and
entreat the 1584
lords of her council always to show some testimonies of their favor to the
subjects in general of these countries, and particularly to them of Holland
and Zeeland.

Soon after the departure of general Norris into England with these
instructions, the prince of Orange received a discourse sent out of Germany to
his Excellency, by Cont John of Nassau his brother, persuading him to a
reconciliation with the king of Spain, and to reject the amity of the French;
whereunto his Excellency made an answer, the which for that it is a discourse
of state, and worthy your reading, I have thought good and necessary to set
down at large.

The Prince of Orange to Cont John of Nassau his brother.
MY lord and brother, I have seen the discourse which you sent me, the which
I cannot think proceeds from you nor your judgment, for I find it better and
more solid, than to build upon such weak reasons, as are produced in the same
writing. Wherefore you shall not take my answer as directed unto you, but unto
them that have forged it, and sent it.

In the beginning the author spends much time to discourse of the great forces
and means the alliances and intelligences of the king of Spain, of my small
means, of the doubtful events

As for the king of Spaines forces, I think there is none doubts, but I know
them as well as any man living, for that I have had special and long
employment in the affairs of these countries, as also having undertaken so
necessary and honorable a war, I have for these many years felt them,
tried them, and endured them; and whereof I assure my self, that this

I speak this to show, that these great forces are not invincible, seeing that
we have seen them in a manner ready to be wholly defeated and chased
shamefully out of the country. And in like sort, seeing God has given me the
grace to withstand them so long, it is no wonder if I know them well; so as all
these admonitions can teach me no new thing. And as for that which concerns
my weakness, the which I hope (with the help of God, and their good
resolution, which are determined to obey me) is not so little as it has been:
neither do I expect that fourscore thousand men shall fall upon me, led by a
duke of Alua, as heretofore, when I was much weaker, I have felt them, and yet
God did not abandon me, neither I hope will he at this day.

But as I have discoursed at large in my instructions which I have sent to the
Queen of England, whereof I send you a copy, I take the sovereign guard of
the universal God for my chief foundation, who has hitherto made my
weakness strong, and I hope he will continue it unto the end.

And when I come to examine all these difficulties by my self, that is, when I
come to 1584
alteration of men's minds; and when as I also discourse of that which may
happen after me, I must confess plainly, that if I took counsel of the
flesh and humane understanding, that I should find great cause and subject of
amazement.

But seeing the question is for the glory of God, and for our consciences, for
the liberty of the country, and the preservation of the lives of so many good
men (over whom the cruelty of the Spaniards should pass like a deluge of
waters, if we should suffer them to recover the power they sometimes had over
these countries) I can resolve no other thing, but that having recommended my
self unto God, I conclude, that there remains nothing but to oppose against
such dangers with constancy unto the end: resolving that for me and mine,
there are

And whereas he objects that some of the religion love me less than they
should, admit it were so, it were no new thing, the which I have long since
foreseen; for what man is he that has had a chief charge, be it in the
church or commonweal, that has not had many enemies, not only of them
abroad, but even of such as followed their party, and termed themselves of
the same religion? Such an one was Moses, who could not avoid the slanders
and mutining of Corath and Dathan: such a one was David who had his Semes: such
an one was Jeremy, who was buffeted in the temple: and such an one was S.
Paul, who was persecuted by

But I hope that such men (who it may be are not abandoned to so great
ingratitude, so much through their own malice, as by the induction of others)
will not continue in that error, but will remember themselves, as many have
already done, being warned by their own follies, and so many losses which
they have had, following their private affections. And if they should continue
unto the end (the which I hope not) yet considering the great number of

But that which has been hitherto touched in the discourse is not the authors
chief design; but me thinks all this beginning is like unto some trialls of
the disposition of the body, which fencers use, before they play in earnest,
or like unto a musicians preludium: for all these preparatiues are made, to
fall in the end upon the alliance of France, which is the chief and maine
point the author means to treat of, and for the which he has taken so
exceeding great pains.

But I observe in this part, among other things, want of judgment in the
author of this

And as I can take no better counsel than of mine enemy, to choose that which
he fears, and reject that which he desires; so I confess, that if I had
never so much as thought on the alliance of France, that (having no other
inducements or persuasions) this discourse

The chief reasons are, that there is no assurance with the French, that we
shall be circumuented 1584
not incense our enemies more, having such a weak support as the French.
First, to answer to that where he says, that I have made my name famous
enough, I think it needless, for never any such vanity did move me to
endure so great travel, and so many losses, and to sustain such and so
dangerous hatreds.

If then they think that the alliance of France be (for the above named
reasons) not only dangerous, but also undoubtedly pernicious; what counsel
then remains? for as for me, I confess that I am vanquished, by many towns
and provinces of this country, which speak not secretly but openly, not
before one or two, but before all the Estates, that it is necessary to
reconcile themselves with the king of Spain, or to seek sufficient succors
elsewhere: and

But if I may not for conscience sake make any agreement with the French king,
how may my conscience be dispenst withal to accord with the king of Spain?
do they differ in religion? the king of Spain, is he not the best beloved
son to the holy Apostolic sea of Rome? and the French king a putatiue son,
and that in title only. The king of Spain has the popes favor for the
foundations of all his greatness: and the pope should acknowledge that he has
not a foot of land, but by the benefit of the ancient kings of France, who
does now requite it with so great ingratitude.

To say that the king of Spain is the natural prince of these countries, that
question has been long since decided, and put out of doubt, seeing that by a
general judgment of the Estates,

They will object the massacre at Paris, the which as it is not to be excused;
how will they excuse also the massacre of the poor Moors, where there were
above threescore thousand slain after the accord was made and sworn. And if
they say they be no Christians, yet can they not deny that the king of Spain
and the pope are more cruel enemies to our religion, than to that of the
Moors. If they will not believe me, let them look unto the difference of the
effects of that which they have practiced against the Christians and the
Mahometans, and then let them judge without passion.

At the least, we cannot deny, but under the government of the French king,
there are many towns, castles, villages, and gentlemen's houses, where there is
exercise of the religion, the which could never be obtained from the king of
Spain, so much he was incensed against the true religion, the which he
cannot make show to endure. The like is not found in the French king, who
allows free exercise of religion in many and diverse places, and where it is
not openly permitted, yet is it exercised without any great search, even within
the city of Paris.

I would willingly that some of your divines, which are so ready to judge of
another man's conscience, would show me by the word of God (which should be the
rule of our consciences and not a zeal without that guide) that we ought to
agree rather with the king of

And whereas they say that the French will deceive us, and take away our
liberties, seeing 1584
will infer that the Spaniard will not deceive us, but will preserve our
liberties. And therefore they add, that all the world will be better pleased
that we accord with the Spaniard than with the French.

I wish that all private passion and affection might be laid aside, and that
the persons and all other circumstances might be well examined of all sides, to
judge, by whom we should most fear to be deceived, either by the French or the
Spanish.

I will not deny but there is danger on both sides, but if we must pass over
one of these two bridges, I think that any man will choose that which is most
large and strong, rather than the weaker and narrower. And to judge
indifferently of all dangers, in my opinion, we must

The king of Spaines power is such in this country, as without bringing in of
any Spaniard or Italian, within less than a year, and without any army he
may root the reformed religion out of the country. The multitude of people
that favor him, and are of his religion, much exceed all the rest, and will
not be backwards in all servile obedience to do all that the Spaniard shall
command them, as it is daily seen; for if the enemy winnes any town or part
of the country from us, the people do presently seruilely observe them, and
do what they please.

This cannot be said of the French; for when any opposition was to be made
against them, all have jointly banded, some for religions sake, others to
favor the Spaniards, as experience has taught, that such as have most
exclaimed against them, have yielded to the Spaniard, and have betrayed the
country, although that some ill advised, have esteemed them the better, for
that they spoke so ill and so boldly against the French, as the author of this
discourse does. But the end has showed their drift and intention, which was to
deliver us to the Spaniards.

The old officers which are yet in the country, carry the king of Spain
graven in their hearts, and all that have received any rewards, pensions, or
recompenses, which are very many; besides, so many that are voluntarily
banished, who would come in an instant like pigeons to

By these reasons we may see, what power the king of Spain has to hurt us,
when as he has even within us all instruments prepared to ruin us, both in
goods, body, yea and in soul, if he could: and on the other side, the French
have no such might. Neither do I doubt but that the king of Spain and his
adherents have as great a will to hurt us, as they have might and power.

Kings never esteem offenses light when they are committed against their own
persons, by such as they hold to be their subjects: and therefore they hold
their subjects that have attempted any thing against them, guilty of high
treason. But when such an insurrection

His chief officers have been put in prison, chased away, and their goods
seized on, and the ordinary officers have had no better entreaty: his arms
have been beaten down, an other prince first called in against his will, unto
the government, and after that another chosen to be absolute lord. Shall we
think or imagine that he will ever pardon or forgive such things? He I say,
who for small pretended faults, has so cruelly entreated men of that honor
and reputation (by their good counsel and service deserving so well of their

And if God should give me the means (after this reconciliation) to retire my
self into 1584
yet this infinite multitude of people, and so many good men which have
embraced the religion, and have opposed themselves against this cruelty,
whither shall they retire themselves?

The duke of Alua going out of this country, did vaunt that he put to death by
the hand of the executioner, eighteen thousand men. Let us now compare what
had been done by the inhabitants of this conntrie, before the coming of the
duke of Alua, with that which has followed, and thereby we shall judge of the
kings mind being incensed.

As for particular persons, first of all the Clergy (which are in number like
Locusts) will demand their revenues, their houses, and their goods: and after
them, the gentlemen, and

The said clergy men, nobles, and others, without any reason, but only a
poor pretext of religion, have burnt, hanged, drowned, and banished them that
had but a little taste of religion: and now being incensed as much as men may
be, do we think they will be more merciful, seeing they have not yet cast off
the wolves disposition? but contrariwise, it is more augmented, as if one
should cast a heap of dried wood into a burning furnace.

It auailes not to say, that many of ours have excelled measure, the which is
true: and all good and modest men know that it was not my fault. But do we
think the Spaniards can or will make any such distinctions? Nay will it not
be a sufficient crime to be condemned,

All these things cease in regard of the French; but if they will object that
they are affected against them of the religion: first, they are not all so, as
the Spaniards and their adherents be, who are generally their enemies. The
French are not incensed; they have no goods to demand, as the Spaniards
pretend. By these reasons we may easily conclude, that if for these apparent
mischiefs, it is dangerous to accord with the French, (as the author of this
discourse says) without all comparison, it is far more to be feared in all
kinds with the Spaniard.

In the mean time, I can assure you, that hitherto I have not much busied my
self to Charles, when as he thought to have commanded all Europe.

And as at that time the princes of the empire (grave and indicious men) did
their best and utmost endeavors to persuade the French king to that
resolution, whereon depended so great a good for all Germauie; so also our
duties should be to do the like: But contrariwise, as if we were grieved that
these two princes are not jointly armed against us, we do what we can to
unite them by all means possible, not weighing their forces and our own
infirmities.

If they will also touch our house in particular, I am assured that both you my
Lord and brother, and I, have done so good offices to the king and emperor,
and that the memory thereof is so well graven in their hearts, as the
remembrance thereof can never be defaced. The which I desire not to try in
any sort whatsoever, but am rather resolved to all extremities

After the yielding up of Ypre, they of Bruges beginning to look back,
refused to take a 1584
town: but the Catholics, at the instigation of the prince of Chimay, who
was their governor, and of John Heren his Minister (who was become an
Apostata, and afterward joined to the Jesuits sect, having written against his
first profession) did oppose themselves against the Estates party, so as there
fell a division among the bourgers, the Catholics being the stronger: who
(after long contention) sent their deputies to the prince of Parma, being at
Tournay, to desire to be reconciled to the king, in renouncing the union which
they had with the Estates. In what manner this division passed in the town of
Bruges, and by what means the Catholics became the masters, we will show it
succinctly, beginning to describe what the prince of Chimay was, being called
Philip of Croy, son to the duke of

This nobleman in his youth had been well instructed, and was of a quick
capacity, the which he afterward applied ill: being thrust on by an
ambitious spirit, to make himself great, he left the party which his father
held, which was that of the Spaniard: first, under the cloak of Religion,
whereunto he showed himself wonderfully zealous (the issue of his designs
having since showed what his heart might be) he let not a Sermon escape, but he
was at it, receiving the Communion oftener than any other: yea, he did write a
small pamphlet in praise of the Protestant Religion, extolling the duke of
Aniou to the heavens, to the blame and suppression of the Spaniard, whom he
disgraced all he could: so as if it had not been that his mother was issued
out of the house of Halewin a sworn enemy to the Religion, Marie of Brimeux,
Countess of Meghen, widow to Lancelot, earl of Barlamont, a lady much
affected to the said Religion, he went first to Bruges, where he was presently
made governor; and not long after, blinding the world with this goodly show of
Religion, he (in like manner) got the government of all Flanders: during the
which, and especially after the duke of Aniou his retreat, matters being thus
confused throughout all Flanders (in the which he was an actor) his courses
began to be suspected unto the prince of Orange, whom all his counterfeit
zeal could not please: who did once write unto him, that he should otherwise
govern and moderate the devotion Casimire his succors, to exclude the duke of
Aniou: That he had left the garrison of Alost in such extreme poverty and
misery, as the Englishmen were moved to yield it unto the Spaniard, who did
thereby seize upon all the land of Waes, with many other practices wherewithal
he is charged.

If the actions and dealings of the prince of Chimay were suspected and odious
unto the prince of Orange, they were no less unto the Seignior Jacques de
Grise, great baylife of Bruges, to Kasenbroth bourgomaster, to Maximilian of
Horn, to the Seignior of Lorkeren, and many others, who were resolved to seize
upon his person: for the effecting whereof

This colonel (whose name was Bloyde) did presently and willingly offer them
his service: but soon after, upon the tenth of January 1584, a little before
it should have been 1584
Seignior of Grise, and the bourgomaster Casenbroth, telling them what he had
heard of their enterprise, accusing most of all the Seignior of Lockeren, whom
(as being no bourger of the town, but a mere stranger) he put in prison, not
daring to attempt any thing against the rest, who were in great credit and
authority with the people: but he complained much of them, and did tax them
before the magistrates of the town and of Franc, whereby he took greater
occasion to advance the reconciliation with the Spaniard as secretly as he
could.

The Seignior of Grise being no less perplexed than the Seignior of Lockeren,
he retired himself out of the town, and after that he had conferred with the
Estates, he resolved to return with five hundred men, through the favor of
the good bourgers: but as the treachery Boyde was well known unto him, and
that he durst not trust in the garrison (although that captain Balfour and
others had always carried themselves faithfully in the Estates service) having
also taken the advice of them of Zeeland, and of the Seignior of Groeneuelt,
governor of Scluse, this second enterprise was likewise discovered to the
prince of Chimay; who finding himself the more grieved, caused all them that
were acquainted with this exploit, to be put in prison. Then having grievously
accused the magistrates before all the people, he took occasion thereupon to
displace them, and to choose new after his own fantasy, whom he knew to be at
the Spaniards devotion: by whose assistance he did easily induce the people to
this reconciliation, so much affected by him, yea he drew Iunius thither to
dissuade them, who prevailed so much with his reasons, as neither the duke of
Arschot nor the prince of Chimay Chimay yields Bruges to the Spaniard.
of May, with reasonable conditions, to draw on them of Gant, Scluse, and
Oostend. The Scottish garrison which were in it, were left to their choice, to
retire, or to continue in the king of Spain his service, of the which few
remained: and although that colonel Boyde did soon find how little the prince
of Parma did esteem him, yet he durst not trust the Estates. By this treaty
of Bruges, they of Franc and Dam were also reconciled, in restoring the Clergy
men unto the possession of their goods, and leaving all exercise of the
reformed Montmorency, was appointed governor there without any garrison,
seeing that the Catholics (who had fled away before) and the Clergy were
fully restored.

The prince of Chimay, after the publication of this treaty of reconciliation,
required of the ministers of Bruges (wherein it was thought, that he did both
mock them and their Religion) a certificat of his good life and profession.
But being departed with his Minister, home to his own house, they soon left
their Religion, the prince discharging all his household servants, which desired
to continue in the profession thereof: by the which renunciation

The prince of Parma having at that time seized upon the village of Burcht on
Flanders 1584
to keep any thing from passing by water to Gant, Brussels, or Macklyn, they
of Antuerpe sent their ships of war thither, to chase them from thence, or
to hinder the fortification, but it was in vain; by reason whereof they made
another fort on the other side of the river, upon Brabant side, about the
village of Hoboken, right against Burcht, to defend their navigations to the
said towns: then they pierced the dike betwixt Burcht and the head of
Flanders, the which drowned the whole country, unto Beueren and Calloo. At the
breaking of which dike, they made a fort opposite to that of Burcht, the which
did batter one another continually with their great ordnance, and with musket
shot, having nothing but the said breach betwixt the two forts. But this fort
was made by them of Antuerpe

They of Bruges, Franc, and Dam, being (by reason of their reconciliation) well
accorded with the king of Spain, yet were they no less free from enemies
round about them, than if they had been besieged, for that they of Gant,
Scluse, and Oostend cut off their victuals upon all passages: wherefore they did
write to them of Gant on the seventh of July, to induce them to their party,
showing, that they being one of the four members of Flanders, they had no
reason to reject the reconciliation with their king, and not to join with the
other three members, already reconciled, alleging many persuasiue reasons,
the which for breuities sake I omit.

Hereupon the Estates of Brabant, Holland, and Zeeland sent their deputies to
Gant, to show them, that such private reconciliations could never b^eed a good
peace, but rather a dangerous and miserable war, unsheathing more the enemies
sword against their brethren and friends. And, if it happened that Brabant,
with Holland and Zeeland, were in war against them, that Flanders would be
more miserably oppressed than ever, considering the hinderance of the
navigations by sea, whereof the Spaniards were barred, the breaking of the dikes
in the land of Waes, and the inundation which should cut off their victuals on
all sides: besides, that France nor England would never suffer the Spaniard to
lodge so far within the country, whereby they might doubt to have war
against him. And touching the two points which the king of Spain demanded,
which was the Romish Religion only,

These and such like reasons were laid before them of Gant on the Estates
behalf, with good hope to bring a goodly army shortly to field, the which
should come into the country of Flanders, as soon as they had won the forts
of Zutphen, whereof they hoped soon to see a good end; the which retained the
Ganthois for a time, and kept them from making of any reconciliation, until
that their affairs were otherwise disposed, as we will presently

At that time there was a Diet of the Electors and other princes of the empire
held at Bottenberch in Germany, to treat of the means to keep the Empire in
quiet, rooting out all distrust which was among the princes, by reason of the
diversity of Religion, whereby it was easy to comprehend, that Monsieur
Segur, ambassador for the king of Navarre (being sent unto the said princes,
to draw them into league with his master, and them of the Protestant Religion
in France, and withal, to moderate the difference of Religion betwixt the
Protestants of Germany and the French) should return with small fruit of his
embassage: for they said, that Augustus duke of Saxony answered them, That he
would not trouble the prosperity of his Estate with the affairs of France;
and that the Landtgraue make some broils in Germany, and (in the mean time)
to assure their affairs, that the 1584
against the violence of the Spaniards, who began now to prosper more than they
did before.

Among the towns of the united Provinces, it was propounded, Whether they
should continue the customs imposed for the maintenance of the war (upon all
merchandise that came in or went out) or take them quite away. Some said, that
seeing the countries and sea towns depend upon the profit which comes unto
them by the traffic and free negotiation of all merchandise, that therefore
this imposition was necessary for the maintenance of the war: That the
country of it self could not spend and consume the great abundance of
commodities which it yields, as butter, cheese, and fish, dry or salt,

Although this defense was in force for a while, yet soon after, the Frenchmen
by Callais, and the Englishmen by Dunkerke, furnished the Spanish army of what
they wanted, which otherwise had been forced to retire from Antuerpe:
whereupon it followed, that the merchants of the united Provinces did the like,
and that these defenses were no more observed.

In May, the prince of Orange and the Estates sent the earl of Hohenlo again
with greater forces, to besiege the town and fort of Zutphen, being then well
furnished with all Truchses, and the noble Henry of Brunswicke had brought out
of Germany: with all which forces the earl of Hohenlo besieged the town, in
the which colonel Taxis was in person with two thousand men. The earl of
Hohenlo took from him at the first the use of the river, both above and
beneath: Verdugo seeing that the siege could not be raised without great force
and fighting, durst not attempt nor hazard any thing; and the rather, for that
he knew there was much due unto his soldiers for their pay, fearing that they
would not fight without money: wherefore he sent unto the prince of Parma, to
have directions from him, and that if he would have him to raise the Estates
camp, he should send him greater provision both of men and money. Whereupon the
Parmois writ unto him, That he should do his best to force the Estates camp,
and to raise Dom John Mauriques de Lara, of the earl of Aremberg, and of some
others, with good store of horse; who being joined with Verdugo, had the honor
to raise this siege, without striking stroke, for that the earl of Hohenlo
would not attend their coming, nor hazard any thing upon a doubtful battle,
but raised 1584
scoffs of the common people of those towns, saying, that they durst not
fight, and that they had fled before they had seen the enemy. The horsemen
laid the fault upon the footmen, who (they said) would not make head against
the enemy, until they were paid, as it is the Germans use, when they must
fight, whereof there was a good troop, belonging to the Elector and to noble
Henry. So the next day after their rising and departure, the king of Spain his
men entered into Zutphen without any resistance, where they rested one night,
meaning the next day to pursue their victory: but hearing that the Estates
army had passed the river, they dislodged not.

The tenth of June, Francis of Valois, only brother to the French king, duke
of Aniou and Brabant, Earl of Flanders, etc. before he was fully reconciled to
the Estates of the united provinces, dyed at Chasteau-Thierry, not without
suspicion of poison. At his death he much lamented for that which had been
done the year before (through the advice of some pernicious counselors) in
Antuerpe, and would willingly have repaired it, if he had escaped death. I
have heard him grieve nine or ten days before his death, being upon his bed
(whither he commanded, I should be called) that having been duke of Brabant,
John Petit.
he had never been in Brussels, where the palace is of the dukes of Brabant.
He commanded me to recommend him to the Seignior of Timpel, governor of that
town (besides the letters which he writ unto him) and to tell him, that as
soon as he should be able to travel

This death of the duke of Aniou did break the banks which did bound and
keep in the ouerflowing ambition of the league in France, for that they
feared him more than the king, but it began now to show it self, as you may
read at large in the French Inuentarie, unto which I will refer you, for
that it does belong properly unto that History. He that brought the first
news of the duke of Aniou his death unto the Estates in Holland,

The third of July the prince of Parma sent colonel Mondragon with five
thousand men and ten pieces of artillery, to go and besiege the forts of
Lillo and of Lyefkens hoek, both opposite one unto another, at the mouth of the
river of Escaut, which goes from Antuerpe into the sea. The Vicont of Gant
(then newly called Marquess of Roubay) besieged Lyefkens-hoek, on Flanders
side, the which he caused to be battered with all speed, being not yet fully
finished; where, after he had spent three hundred canon shot, he caused an
assault to be given, but at the first charge, they were sharply repulsed. At
the second assault he caused certain carts laden with hay and straw to be
brought near unto the breach, and to be He caused some to be hanged afterward
in cold blood, the which was dear for the Spaniards N. Berendrecht, a captain
in the 1584
fort, who in former time had been steward to the prince of Espinoy his
brother. Colonel Petaine, borne in Arras, seeing the place forced, and the
massacre of his men, having almost escaped, was taken, and brought before him,
being desirous to see him, whom he also stabbed, and being upon the ground, he
caused his men to make an end of him, exercising his accustomed rage and
madness upon all that he could meet; for he was of such an humor, as he
cared not for the death of a man or two, having begun, ten years before, his
first apprentiship of murdering, upon Cont Philip of Mansfeldt, son to Cont
Peter Ernest, governor of Luxembourg in the town of Brussels; and the second
a year or two after upon a gentleman named Ponthus Nay, Seignior of Chapelle,
in the open market place of Bethune,

Whilst that the Marquess was busied before this fort of Lyefkens-hoek, the
Superintendents of the town of Antuerpe (whom it imported more to guard the
fort of Lillo) sent a full company of their best trained young men, and some
hundred men out of their sworn bands, to fortify the garrison, who in the
beginning were but six score men. Soon after, captain Gau (being come from
Terneuse) entered with a company of Gascoines: Mondragon being busy to plant
his artillery, the said captain Gau made a brave sally upon the Bourguignons,
so as he put five companies to rout, with the loss of above a hundred and
fifty men, bringing away two captains prisoners. The Seignior of Teligny,
son to the Balfour. Mondragon seeking to plant four canons upon the dike on
Zeeland side, these Scottishmen sallyed forth, thinking to take it from thence,
or else to cloye it: but as the dike was too narrow to make any speed thither
in troop, they could not advance themselves, but the Spaniards made head
against them; yet they did them a great affront, slew about three hundred of
them, and carried away their master myner prisoner with them, who discovered
unto the Seignior of Teligny all the mines which Mondragon had caused to be
dug, remaining after that time in the Estates service, where he did
discharge himself both faithfully and truly in his place of Master

Mondragon, after he had spent five hundred canon shot, and made a fair
breach, he made his preparatiues to give an assault unto the fort. The besieged
perceiving it, they presently made a spacious mine under the breach which they
should assail, that having drawn their enemies thither, and then they
retyring, as if they gave back, to blow it up. The invention was not bad, if
it had been well followed. But as the besieged went out by the said breach, to
go and encounter with their enemies, coming to the assault, making presently
their retreat and being pursued even into the breach, he that had charge of the
said mine, gave fire too soon, so as there were some thirty of their own men
blown up, and no harm done to the Spaniards that pursued them; whom the canon
of the fort notwithstanding did

Colonel Mondragon finding, that notwithstanding all his endeauours, he could
not stop the passage of the river, but that they of Lillo received what they
needed from Antuerpe: the better to stop this passage, he caused certain
ordinance to be planted on the other side of the river, right opposite unto the
sort, and near unto Lyefkens hoek, which might shoot close by the water, even
unto Lillo: but for all that, they did not forbear to go in and out, and to
pass and repasse from Holland and Zeeland to Antuerpe; and seeing that they
made no esteem thereof, he brought other artillery to the dike that was
broken at Calloo, where

In the end, the prince of Parma considering the strength of the place, the
which had always a port open by the river, and could not be taken away,
hearing also, that the besieged were reenforced with fifteen or sixteen
companies, and sufficiently provided of all things 1584
spent three weeks before it, and done what he could: yet he left some of his
men, near unto Lillo, in certain forts which he had caused to be built at
Coesteyn, Oordam, and Blaugarendyck, where he also planted some artillery, to
shoot at the ships that went and came from Antuerpe by the river into
Holland, Zeeland, and other places. They do hold for certain, that during
this siege, what by sallyes, and the canon from the fort, the Spaniard lost not
less than two thousand men: whereat we must not marvel, seeing the besieged
in six and thirty hours spent two thousand weight of powder. Most of the
Estates soldiers that were sent to defend this place, after the Spaniards
retreat, were drawn forth, and sent into other garrisons. Those which
remained (the greater part of Plucket and other captains, demanding their pay
within a short space, the which did much perplexe the Estates of Brabant:
wherefore they were forced to provide speedily, by reason of the great
importance of the place (fearing least the Spaniard should make his profit and
advantage of such a mutiny) so as they were pacified with the receipt of four
months pay in money, and five in cloth and apparel.

Although the prince of Parma had left the siege of Lillo, yet had he planted
artillery in diverse places along the river upon the bank; whereby they of
Antuerpe knowing him to be master of the field, judged, that he would seek to
cut off the passage of their navigations; Morgan; for the leuying whereof, the
Wallon and Dutch churches within that Realm disbursed twenty thousand
florins, and they were sent over. They sent likewise into France, thinking
that colonel Allein Allein had received to make the levy, was kept by him for
the arrerages of his pay, in regard of the service which he had done unto the
Estates.

There was an advice given by the colonels that were bourgers of Antuerpe, who
then had taken upon them (although unworthily) the knowledge of all matters
concerning the The colonels of Antuerpe abandon Herental.
war, in the said town, and in all that quarter of Antuerpe, to abandon
Herental, and to retire the garrison and the munition, to employ them
elsewhere. But this was done with such disorder, as all the powder was lost.
After they had provided and taken order for the defense of Antuerpe, the
Estates of Brabant found it needful to entertain fourscore companies of
footmen, and sixteen companies of horsemen, as well for the said

Many of the chief bourgers and merchants of Antuerpe, seeing the fort of
Lyefkenshoek thus poorly lost, and their fellow citizens that were in it, so
miserably slain; that they had neither prince nor head; that the Spaniard
began to build forts upon the river, and to furnish them with good artillery,
they began to fear; so as some hundred of them retired out of the town, who
were afterward commanded by a public proclamation to return within a
certain time, to help to defend the town, and the place where

The tenth of July the prince of Orange having made his residence above a whole
year 1584
one Baltazar Gerard, a high Bourguignon, borne at Ville Franche, whereof we
will relate The prince of Orange traitorously murdered.
the history, or rather Tragedy, truly as it happened, and as succinctly as
we can. The Spaniards thinking, that they had no other enemy in this world,
and that he being dead, they should attain unto their wished desires in the
Netherlands, they never ceased, until that (in the end) they caused him to be
murdered, after the manner which follows.

In May there arrived at the princes court (being then at Delft) a certain
young man, about seven and twenty years old, of a mean stature, and carrying
but a simple countenance: who as in passing delivered a letter to the said
prince, who demanded of him from whence Francis Guyon. The next day he
addressed himself to one of the princes secretaries, who sent him to Peter^l
Oyseleur, called Villiers, a minister and counselor to the said prince, whom
he requested to procure him an answer of his letter, saying, That he had
matters of importance to impart unto him, concerning the country and the
Religion. Certain days after, the prince of Orange understanding the tenor of
this letter, commanded Oyseleur to hear what he would say^: and so this
gallant gave him to understand, that his name was Francis Guyon, borne at
Besanson, and that he had been always a most affectionate servant unto the
said prince, being Vicont of Besanson (as he was) and the greatest nobleman
Pre, Secretary to Cont Peter Ernest Francis Guyon had received the Sacrament
at his hands; the other answered, no: whereupon the said priest knowing, that
Guyon was in the castle of Fontaine, near unto Luxembourg, with the earl, he
came thither, and would have taken him, but he defended himself, and hurt the
priest with his dagger, so as he escaped, and went to Treues, from whence he
sent to his cousin for his horse and some little money: but as he stayed too
long, fearing to be discovered to have undertaken this voyage unto the prince
of Orange, to do him service, as he had both desire and means: and in saying
so, this impudent affronter drew out of his sleeue a packet full of blankes,
sealed by the earl of Mansfeldt, saying, That du Pre; and that therewith he
had given many pasports to victuallers and others that had need thereof.

All this discourse being delivered unto the prince by Oyseleur, he commanded
him to 1584
make an enterprise upon any town in Luxembourg, or if that were too far, it
might serve for spies to go through the country. This being delivered unto
the prince of Orange, he replied, That there was no means to attempt any thing
with those blankes: but they might serve to cause messengers to pass from
Brussels to Cambray, commanding, that they should send part of them to
Brussels: as for the rest, the prince having conferred with the Seignior of
Espruneaux, ambassador for the duke of Aniou, an occasion being offered, it
was resolved, that Caron, Seignior of Schoonwal, returning then into France,
should carry him with him, to know if the Seignior of Biron (who it was said
should be governor of Cambray) could make any use of those seals, to make
pasports for his men. Whereupon Caron having his dispatch from the prince, was
charged to take him with him, as he did. This villain being in those parts,
he writ into these parts, That he did hope to see the Seignior of Beauieu
shortly (he called the murder which was proiected by him, Beauieu) who did
well temember his father, that dyed in his service, by whose means he did hope
to be advanced, and to attain unto some better estate. See the constant
cosenage of this wretch.

Soon after, Caron sent him back with letters unto the prince and the
Estates, aduertising them of the duke of Aniou his death. The prince having red
these letters, sent for Guyon into his chamber, being yet in bed, to understand
the particularities of the duke his death (this wretch did since confess,
being in prison, That if at that time he had had a dagger, du Bartas works,
and especially the History of Judith, where there are certain persuasions to
encourage men to root out tyrans. Sometimes he borrowed a Bible of the Porter,
to read some chapters before him, whereby (under color of Religion) he grew
familiar with some of the princes household. In the end, his dispatch being made
to return into France to Monsieur Caron, he was commanded to depart, having
no more to do there. Whereupon he entreated them to give him some money,
showing his hose and shoes, which were not worth any thing. The prince
commanded, that in delivering him his dispatch, they should give him ten or
twelve crowns, the which was Rene; but finding that it shot not true, he
bought 2 more of one called John de la Forest, sergeant to captain Claude
Caulier, the which he tried three or four times, and found them good.

The tenth of the same month he watched when the prince should go down into
the hall to dinner, from whom he demanded a pasport, speaking (as the
princess did observe him) with a hollow and unsettled voice: so as she
demanded of the prince (her husband) what he was, for that she did not like
his countenance. The prince answered her, that he demanded a pasport, the
which he would cause to be given him. During dinner time, he was seen walking
about the stables, behind the house, toward the rampar of the town. The
prince slain.
stomach and the vital parts. The prince feeling himself hurt, said nothing
else but, O my God, take pity of my soul, I am sore wounded: my God take
pity of my soul, and of this poor His last words.
people. Having spoken these words, he began to stagger, but his gentleman
Usher stayed him, and set him upon the stayres, but he spoke no more. Then the
Countess of Swartzenbourg there gave up the ghost. Such was the end of the
most wise, constant, and virtuous prince 1584


The murderer assuring himself that he had done the deed, sought to escape by
the stables, whereof he had before observed the paslages; and as he was to go
down four or five steps of the gallerie, he leaped them all at once,
wherewith the other pistol fell from under his arm (with the which, being
charged, he thought to defend himself) having The murderer seeks to escape.
no leisure to take it up, for that he fled away as fast as he could, passing
through the stable into the street which goes unto the rampar. But as he ran
over a dunghill, being the nearest way, the straw being long, he fell, yet he
rose again, thinking to get unto the wall, and so to cast himself into the
towne-ditch, where he was taken by a lacquey and an halberdier, with the help
of some others, which came running, who brought him unto the Bastien, a
Frenchman, said unto him: Art not thou a wicked traitor, who had thought to
have killed the prince, if God had not prevented it? What (said he) have I
failed! cursed be the fault. From thence he was carried to his lodging that
kept the court, whither the magistrate of the town of Delft came to examine
him. There he demanded paper, pen and ink, promising, that seeing he was a
prisoner, and as good (said he) as dead, he would lay open the whole truth; the
which he did not:

He confessed, that he was called Baltazar Gerard, of Ville-Franche in
Bourgoigne, and The murderers confession.
that for six years, yea, after the breach of the pacification of Gant, he had
had a great desire to kill the prince. He made show of the same desire, for
that (he said) remaining at Dole six years before with a Proctor, called John
Villan, he took a dagger, and struck it with all his force into a door,
saying, I would this blow were through the prince of Oranges heart: for the
which he was blamed by one John Guillaume, that kept the bridge at Vret in
Bourgoigne, who said unto him, That it was not for him to kill princes. And
having heard within three years, that the king of Spain had given sentence of
death against the prince of Orange, and liberty to kill him wheresoever they
could, he had come John du Pre, Secretary to the earl of Mansfeldt, governor
of Luxembourg. But hearing afterward that he was not dead, but recovered, he
then resolved (whatsoever should happen) to execute this design, hoping to
find some good opportunity, the earl of Mansfeldt being in field, about the
place where the prince should be; to whom he would present some flying seals,
and blankes of the said earl: assuring himself, that in time he should find
access into the said prince his court, and so effect this his enterprise upon
the first occasion, and with the least danger that might be. According du Pre,
being at Dyest, to suffer him to depart, for that he saw no better means to
approach near unto the prince, than at that time, the earl of Mansfeldt being
to return into Luxembourg: yet du Pre (his master and cousin) entreated him
instantly to follow him and serve him, persuading him, that the earl would
return soon unto the camp, yea, before a month were expired: but seeing
that du Pre protracted the time to dismiss him, being thrust on unto the
execution of this design, he resolved to quarrel with him, and so to get
away: But being returned to Luxembourg, he thought to retire to finish his
work. His master finding, that some one had stolen from him four hundred and
fifty crowns out of his cofer, he then stayed in his service, to free
himself du Pre his sickness; the which continued eight days before, and
fifteen days after Christmas, before he was fully recovered. 1584


At the last, in March last past, he took his leave of his master: but before
he came into these parts, he went to Treues, where he confessed himself unto
a Jesuit, who kept him in their College, discovering his design unto him,
showing him the flying seals, which he entreated him to keep secret until
Easter, and then to acquaint the earl of Mansfeldt therewith: following also
the counsel and direction of this Jesuit, he also imparted this fact unto the
prince of Parma, by letters which he did write in Tournay, and presented unto
the said prince: but yet he durst not stay for an answer, fearing least he
should take the stealing away of those seals in ill part. And from thence he
came unto Delft, where he presented the said seals, hoping it should procure
him some means to execute Monsieur Caron, to deliver some of these seals unto
the marshall of Biron, and other noblemen, holding the duke of Aniou his
party. But the said duke dying soon after, he desired to be sent back into
these parts, the which the Seignior of Caron did, with letters unto the prince
of Orange and the Estates, by the which he did advertise them of the death of
the said duke. After which time he sought all opportunities to do the deed;
and finding none more fit, than to shoot him, either coming from the Sermon,
or going out of his chamber to dinner, or rising from the table, the day before
he bought two pistols, the which he charged, one with three bullets, and the
other with two, shooting that which had three through the prince of Orange his
body, having no means to use the other, for

All this and more (which were superfluous) was confessed and written by the
hand of the said Baltazar Gerard, in the keepers chamber; and there were found
about him two bladders somewhat blown, with a little pipe to blow them up,
hoping (although he could not swim) with the help thereof to get through the
towne-ditches. He used also many speeches to this end, That if the prince had
been in the midst of fifty thousand soldiers, if he might have approached
near him, he would have done it, yea, and would do it again, being very
sorry (for that they made him so believe) that he was not

First (besides his former confession) he voluntarily declared, and without
torture, That The murderers second confession.
he had not seen the sentence of the princes proscription, and liberty to
kill him, where they could, but five months before; yet he had heard it
spoken of, and that some such thing had been proclaimed in the Netherlands.
He said moreover, That in May last he had not been eight days in these
parts, but he sought to execute his design, if he had had the means, or any
hope to escape: That after the death of the duke of Aniou, he presented
quarrelled with the other servants, to the end he should take an occasion to
send him 1584
France he would have been of the reformed Religion in some Church, and would
have carried himself in such sort, as he would have gotten access into the
Consistory, and procured letters of recommendation, to have returned into
these parts, and so to find the better opportunity to finish this proiected
murder.

Before he was put unto the torture, he confessed, That he had acquainted M.
Gery, doctor of Divinity, guardian of the Franciscan Friars at Tournay, with
this enterprise, in March last past; in which confession he persisted, being
from the rack; and being brought unto it again, he said, That for that he was
a poor companion, and to get some help or means, he had made the prince of
Parma acquainted therewith, who commanded the counselor d' Assonuille to
treat more amply and at large with him. This counselor Francis Guyon of
Besanson, son to Peter Guyon, sometimes executed for Religion, and lost all
his goods; and that he (being but a poor companion) would feign himself to be
very zealous to the reformed Religion: and that he would go into Holland to
the princes court, where (to have the better reception) he would present those
flying seals: wherewith d Assonuille was well pleased,

The next day he confessed moreover without any torture, that the day before
he came unto the court, to see if the prince were come out of his chamber to
dinner, and finding him set at the table, he went home to his lodging, and
charged his two pistols, and hung them at his girdle on the left side,
suffering his cloak to hang down upon his shoulder, that they might suspect
the less. He said moreover, that d' Assonuille (after that they had conferred
together of this business) promised to make report thereof unto the d'
Assonuille did propound unto him again some difficulties; but finding his
courage and resolution, he said unto him: Go my son, if you perform this
deed, the king of Spain will accomplish and perform all that he has
promised, and you shall purchase an immortal name. Whereupon he answered,
That he would counterfeit himself so well of the Religion, as he might get
into some Secretaries service, and by that means watch an opportunity to
present some letters unto the prince of Orange, for him to sign, in doing
whereof he would stabbe him into the body with a dagger. Being taken from the
rack, he said again, That he did nothing

The four and twentieth of the said month he confessed moreover, That d'
Assonuille had promised him, That the prince of Parma would be a means, that
he should be satisfied of that which the king had promised by the
proscription, and that he had undertaken this fact, to make himself rich:
That d' Assonuille had showed the said flying seals unto the prince of Parma,
who delivered them back again unto him, saying, That he was very well
content, that he should make use of them, and that the earl of Mansfeldt
should alter his seal, and change it into another manner or fashion: That d'
Assonuille had charged and commanded him, that (coming into Antuerpe) if he
should be brought before the Seignior of S. Aldegonde, that he should boldly
show those seals unto him: and that when he should enter into the town, he
should hide them in some place before he came in, and then fetched them again:
That the said master Gery having 1584
should finish it, and gave him his blessing, promising to pray unto God for
him: the which the Jesuit of Treues did in like manner promise, assuring him,
that in case he died in the execution of this design, that he should be put
in the number of the holy glorious martyrs: the name of which Jesuit he did
not know, but as he was called the regent of the college, having a red
hair, who imparted this fact to three other of his brethren.

According to which confessions, wherein he persisted unto his death, he was
condemned, the tenor of whose sentence follows.

Whereas Baltazar Gerard, borne at Fans in the franck country of Bourgogne,
belonging A sentence against Baltazar Gerard the murderer of the prince of
Orange.
to the king of Spain, being at this time prisoner, has confessed, that to
murder the famous d' Assonuille, who had promised unto the said prisoner, that
if he could effect his design, and execute the king of Spaines proscription
against the said prince, that the king should pay him that which was promised
by the said sentence, and among other points should give him for recompense,
five and twenty

That the prisoner having consulted with d' Assonuille touching this execution,
had agreed and concluded betwixt them, that the said prisoner should go into
the princes court, and call himself Francis Guyon, son to Peter Guyon of
Besanson, in former time executed for religion, and forfeited his goods.

That under color to have been zealous to the religion, for the which he had
lost his father and goods, and under this borrowed name, and with these seals
and blanks, he should seek and endeavor to have access unto the said prince.
According unto which resolution, the said prisoner belying his name, and
calling himself Francis Guyon, had come unto the said princes court, and the
ninth day of the month had bought two pistols, and on the tenth

Wherefore the commissioners of the general and provincial council, together
with the bourgmaster and shirifs of this town, upon the examination and
confession of the said prisoner, all being duly weighed and considered, have
condemned and do condemn the said Baltazar Gerard prisoner at this present,
to be laid upon a scaffold in the market place of this town, before the
towne-house, there first to have his right hand (with the which he did commit
that execrable mutther) torn and pincht with two hot burning yrons, then to
be pincht in six several places of his body with burning pincers, as upon
his arms, thighs, and other places where there is most flesh, the which being
thus burnt, his members upon four gibbets, upon the bulwarks of the Hegeport,
Oostport, Ketelport, and Waterslootscheport 1584
Pronounced unto the prisoner of Delft upon the foureteenth of July 1584,
signed, Vander Mere.

The same day the hour of his death was signified unto him, that he might
prepare himself for the next day. At the first he was much amazed, cursing the
hour that he had ever learned that wicked practice at Dole, wishing, that he
had rather been a poor mechanicke tradesman, than to have fallen into that
disaster; much lamenting his death: yet in the end he said, That seeing he had
done and committed the folly, he must now suffer for his folly. And the next
day after he was executed according to the sentence.

Being there a spectator among many others that went to see this execution, I
will show The execution of the murderer.
you what I observed therein. This murderer, although he had his feet
scortched and swollen with the torture, yet he went firmly betwixt two hangmen.
He was of a small stature, having the hair of his head, beard, and of all his
body shaven, doubting least he had some enchantment about him, which might be
the cause that during his torments he cried little or not at all. Being tied
upon the scaffold, he might visibly see the princers and fire which should
serve to that use, he might behold the table whereon he should be quartered,
with the knives and the axe, and yet all this did not move him. And as the two
hangmen were busied to break the pistol (wherewith he had shot the prince)
upon an anuile, one of them striking with his hammer, it flewe off the handle
close by the others

All men that have any judgment, or spark of pity or remorse in them, may
see, if Paradise be won by such treacherous and detestable murders (as they
seek to persuade

The four and twentieth day of August, the funeral pomp at the interment of
the The prince of Oranges funeral pomp.
prince of Oranges body was performed withgreat pomp, according to the estate
and quality which his greatness required, and his merits, with the Estates of
Holland and the united provinces. Cont Maurice of Nassau his second son (the
earl of Buren his eldest being Truchses prince elector of Cologne, and on the
left hand the earl of Hohenlo, then followed William and Philip earls of
Nassau his cousin germans: and after them came the carle of Solins as the last
mourner; the rest of the pomp following 1584
was intombed.

He died at the age of fifty and one years, eleven months, and twenty five
days, of a mean The prince of Oranges age and disposition.
stature and corpulent, the color of his hair inclining somewhat to brown,
somewhat lean visaged, but otherwise well set of his members. His body being
opened to be embalmed, his inward parts which were not touched with the blow,
were found so sound and perfect, as by the course of nature he might have
lived a great age. He was of an active spirit, and great memory. As for his
virtues, wisdom, constancy, and magnanimity, his life, his actions, his
toiles, and his patience, we will rather leave to all impartial men to admire
it, than attempt to describe it, being impossible.

He had to his first wife, the daughter and only heir of Maximilian of
Egmont, earl of His wives and children.
Buren, and of Iselstein, by whom he had Philip (at this day) prince of
Orange, and Marie countess of Hohenlo. By his second wife daughter to Maurice
duke of Saxony, he had prince Maurice marquis of Camphere and Flessingue, who
succeeded him in his governments, Anne, who is now deceased, who was wife to
Cont William, Lewis of Nassau, and Emilia princess of Portugal. Of his third
wife, who was daughter to the duke of Montpenser, he had six daughters,
Louyse the eldest, married to the elector palatin of Rhin, the duchess of
Bouillon and vicontesse of Tureine, the princess of Tremouille, Touars, etc.
the countess of Hennau, etc. and two remaining yet to marry. Of his fourth
wife, daughter to the Admiral of France, and widow before to the Seignior of
Teligni, he had his third son, Cont Henry Frederick, at this time he is
about twenty and four years old, of whom the united prouinees hope great
matters, and expect good fortunes, Delft in Holland being the place of his
birth.

By this sudden and unexpected death of the prince, the united provinces were
unfurnished of a governor, the which troubled many of the Estates, some
fearing that through the disorder or small concord that would be among the
Estates, they should not be able to resist the mighty attempts of the king of
Spain, and that all would fall into a confusion. Yet Grave Maurice chosen
governor.
the funerals being ended, the Estates being loath to seem to faint, made
choice of Grave Maurice his second son, being then but eighteen years
old, for their head, being assisted in his affairs by a council which was
given him, the general Estates remaining still

This young prince did thank them for the honor which they did him, promising
his best endeavor for the defense and preservation of the country,
maintenance of their privileges, and the revenge of the prince his fathers
death, and not to attempt any thing, without the advice, resolution,
determination, and good liking of the said Estates of the united provinces:
whereupon the earl of Hohenlo was made Lieutenant to the Captain general.

They of Gant having kept John d'Imbise their bourgmaster a long time prisoner,
finished John d'Imbise beheaded.
his process, and found him guilty of treason in many points, by a sentence
given by the Shirifs: they caused his head to be cut off in the open market
place, and to be set up for certain

The prince of Parma after the death of the prince of Orange, by the which he
did hope for some alteration in the united provinces, would loose no occasion
to make himself master of Antuerpe, Gant, Brussels, Macklyn, and Dendermond;
for the effecting whereof, he 1584
both above and beneath the town (the which he did almost effect and bring to
pass) causing many forts to be built close to the river, to batter the ships
that would pass and repasse from Holland and Zeeland unto Antuerpe. And
although at the first it seemed a ridiculous thing to stop up so large and
deep a river, where the tides ebbing and flowing are so strong; yet since
experience has taught, that the prince of Parma his diligence and industry
has made it feasible.

This opinion of men, that he should not prevail any thing, was the cause of
their slackenesse and negligence to hinder him in the beginning, when as they
had good means to do it: he therefore caused a mighty fort to be built at
Calloo in Flanders, upon the rivers side,

On the other side, they of Zeeland cut the banks on Flanders side, near unto
Saftige, the which did drown all the country from Hulst unto Beueren and
Burcht, except the Doel and some high grounds near unto Calloo, the which was
afterward of great advantage for the Parmois: for by means of the said
inundation, the dike being also broken at Burcht, he caused his ships to
enter, coming to Dendermond, which came to Calloo by the drowned land, without
any danger of passing before Antuerpe, for otherwise they had had no passage to
come.

And to tier them of Gant and Dendermond on the other side, he caused a
palisado to be made in the said river at Bassecode, a league from Dendermond.
Then he went and planted Dendermond besieged by the Spaniard.
his camp at Lobec joining to the said town, and sent a herald to summon it
to yield. The

The besieged who were but three hundred soldiers, seeing their ditches dry,
and that they should soon have a breach in the rampar, and besides that, the
bulwark which Dendermond yielded.
any armor, but their rapiers and daggers only, and that they should be
safely conducted unto the fort of Villebrouk. The bourgers were free from
spoil, and were received into grace and favor, paying sixty thousand florins
within three months next following: and if there were any that would depart
with the soldiers, they might do it freely, no man should hinder them. There
went not above a hundred and fifty soldiers out of the town, but many women,
strumpets, and children: the two ministers were kept back against the promised
faith, whereof the one was drowned, and the other hanged: the which

Soon after, on the sixth day of September Villeuoord did also yield, being a
little town upon the river which goes from Brussels to Antuerpe, where one
must pass just by the port. 1585
with some forts.

The general estates of the united provinces considering with themselves that
they had to do with a mighty enemy, such an one as the king of Spain, that
his war would be long, and in the end might consume them; distrusting of
their means and abilities to subsist and to maintain themselves in their
war, they propounded to seek succor from the French king, or the Queen of
England. The French king answered them, that he would by no means enter into
war with the king of Spain his brother in law, yet he sent monsieur
d'Espruneaux (who had been Ambassador with the Estates for the duke of Aniou
his brother) into Holland, to understand their demands more particularly:
which were,

Thereupon the Seignior of Espruneaux made a long oration in the open assembly
of the Estates, extolling the bounty and power of his king, with the good
affection he bare unto them, disgracing as much as he could the king of
Spain. In the end (yet without any certain assurance at all) he promised
them in the French king his masters behalf, all aid and favor.

The Estates sent also M. Paul Buys advocate of the particular Estates of
Holland, and some other deputies, unto the Queen of England, to make the same
request; to the end, that if they could not persuade both to succor them, yet
at the least that neither of them might be opposite unto them: yet it seemed
they were more inclined to the English, by reason of the neighborhood, and the
ancient alliances betwixt both countries, and also for that they were stronger
at sea than the French.

The prince of Parma having (by the taking of Dendermond) no obstacle, (and
withal having blockt up the Ganthois on every side) knowing well that the
Estates had no means to put an army to field, which might hinder the
fortification of Calloo, upon the river of Escaut, on Flanders side, being
lodged at Beueren, he sent Colonel Mondragon to advance

They of Antuerpe for their part wanted nothing that seemed necessary for
their safety, and the preservation of the town: Colonel Morgan with his
regiment of English came to their succors, and was lodged in the suburbs of
Burgerhout. There was a great sum of money collected in the town to supply
all necessities and charges, as well for the entertainment of men of war, as
for the fortifications which they made along the river; as Anthonies houcke,
Vaert, Teligni, Toulouse, Melckhuys, Boureschans, Austerweel, and other
retrenchments, and also for the reparation of the rampars of the town.

In the mean time the garrison of Cambray made great roads and spoils, upon
the country of Arthois and Henault, and sometimes even unto the ports of
Douay, taking all they could carry: whereof the prince of Parma made his
complaint unto the French king, who made answer that it was not his fault,
neither was it done with his leave or consent: besides, the said town did not
belong unto him, but to the queen mother, by legacy and succession from the
duke of Aniou her son. Upon this answer, the prince of Parma sent la Motte
governor of Graueling to run over all the country of Boulenois, The
Ganthois having been a long time coopt up, and as it were invested by the
enemy, seeing 1585
to be reconciled to the king of Spain, sending their deputies to Beueren to
the prince of Parma the seventeenth day of September: so as after many voiages
and conferences, they made an accord or agreement with him, upon condition to
receive thirty companies in An accord made with the town of Gant
garrison, Bourguignons, Wallons, and high Dutch, by equal numbers, and no
Spaniards, to remain there as long as he pleased. These companies being
entered, the accord or agreement was published, with all solemnities fit and
requisite in that case, the chief points whereof were:

A perpetual forgetfulness, and absolute pardon for all that had past since
the trouble, holding them from that time for good vassals and subjects: that
the bourgers and inhabitants should

That at the end of the said two years, they might retire themselves freely
out of the Netherlands, with all their goods, or else sell them, exchange them,
alienate them, or give them in charge to any other, who might send or conueye
them unto them into any neuter place, where they should please to reside. That
all suites ended, and sentences given, as well by the provincial council,
shirifs, or other judges, to avoid all confusion, should be confirmed and

That all prelates, abbots, chapters, conuents, hospitals, and other religious
places, should be restored and put in possession of all their goods, and the
town not to be bound to the restitution of any thing that had been
heretofore received; unless it were some private person which had received it
without any authority from the superiors, whereof the judge of the place
shall take knowledge.

But whereas the prince of Parma is given to understand, that what has
happened within

Finally, the bourgers, for the favor which he had showed them by the said
accord, should pay three hundred thousand florins, before that any one of them
should depart out of the town, promising after the payment of the said sum,
he will hold the Ganthois for good,

The six that were reserved, were M. Anthony Heyman shirife, and of the
council, Lucas Mayaert receiver, Lievin Meynkes, Renier de Pestre, Dominicke
Derban, and Iosse of Vleeschauwer: the said Heyman and Mayaert escaped, Lievin
Meynkes was delivered at the suit of a gentlewoman, and the three others were
put to ransame. Of the three hundred thousand florins, the king forgave a
hundred thousand, that the inhabitants might not be too much oppressed: the
rest was gathered of every one in particular, according to their means, or as
they were able, so as no man could go out of the town before he had paid his
part whereat he stronger than before. The port of the town which was of old
masons work, very thick 1585
year 1577, when it was yielded unto them) they had planted certain pieces of
artillery, for that it did command over the said citadel, was beaten down to
the ground. The town was by little and little dispeopled of the best
inhabitants and bourgers, which during these two years retired themselves,
some into Holland and Zeeland, some into England, and some into neutrall places.

In the mean time the bishops of Cologne and Treues sent the Seignior of Melro
to the general Estates assembled then at Delft in Holland, to exhort them unto
peace: but he could have no audience, being told him, that they had spies
enough without him, and therefore he was commanded to depart presently without
any delaie.

Notwithstanding that the prince of Parma had planted above an hundred pieces
of artillery, great and small, upon either bank of the river of Antuerpe, yet
the ships of Holland and Zeeland past without any great danger of the cannon;
for sometimes there past a hundred or six score, yea more, altogether, whereof
by mischance the Spaniards took some one The ships enter into Antuerpt not
withstanding the cannon.
in the tail, or sunk him: the which they had not done, but they came with
the tide out of the danger of their forts, under those which the town of
Antuerpe had built on either side, as that of Toulouse on Flanders side, that
of Austerweel on Brabant side, and others. True it is, that there arrived some
daiely, carrying men and women, whereof some were slain, and others without
arms and legs, but all this did not stop the passage, so as there came
daiely great store of all commodities. And the superiors of Antuerpe, whilst
they had yet this We must try again, for one lost, two recovered: we must
seek it where it has been lost.

Many were of opinion, that it had been better to have employed the money of
all those forts, and of the great preparations to batter the Spanish forts
(such as was that great and fruitless mass of floting wood, the which in
mockery was called Elephant, and the end of the war; the which cost above a
hundred thousand florins) in buying of corn, and other

Besides, they of Antuerpe were very improuident in one point, that having cut
the dike beneath Burcht, to drown all the country about Calloo, they had set
no guard at the hole of the said dike: or at the least, their ships of war
should have kept the princes flat bottomed boats from passing at noone day, as
we have heretofore seen them: for if 1585
boats which they of Gant and Dendermond sent to make the bridge, had never
past that way as they did, within cannon shot of the castle of Antuerpe, and
of one of their ships of war, who fearing the artillery of Burcht, durst
not once approach them to stop their passage. And when as they were past
without any opposition or hindrance, and come unto Calloo, which was the place
they desired to come to, then they of Antuerp sent to build a fort upon the
dike, close by the hole called Telignies fort, to keep any more from passing,
but it was too late.

Afterward they began to build that great mass of wood in form of a castle,
floting upon the water, called The end of the war, of cannon proof, with
four small bulwarks, and twenty

In the end when all was done, it was a very chargeable work, and exceeding
hard to be governed, as the event did show, before it began to work any
effect, remaining in the enemies power at the first shot, as we will show.

About this time, there was one which spoke in the open council at Antuerpe,
when as they treated of these preparatiues, after this manner. Although (said
he) the prince of Parma A speech in Antuerpe tending to an accord.
could not finish his work, and stop up the passage of the river, do we not
yet see that he besides, he is master of the field, and can cut off the
passages, so as nothing shall be brought us into the town. He has near unto
him a mighty army, and invincible for us: he has raised his forts and
trenches so high above the water, as the tides ebbing and flowing cannot annoy
them. And besides all this, the passage of the river is so stopped, as we can
have no traffic of merchandise remaining, without the which the people cannot
live, nor the town subsist. Wherefore all these difficulties being well
weighed and considered, in my opinion we should seek in time to reconcile our
selves to the king, else this siege will prove but unfortunate for us.

Some of the bourgers muttered the same words as they walked in the streets, so
as in the more to terrify the bourgers, they gave them to understand, with
what cruelty the prince of 1585
whereof he had cast a great number in prison. And when as their friends made
offer to sue for them, to have them delivered out of prison, and presented any
petition unto him, they were answered, that he did not receive any more
petitions, and that they should be entreated after another fashion.

Hereupon the Seignior of Saint Aldegonde foreign bourgmaster of the said
town (which indeed is the chief dignity) made an oration in the open
assembly of the great council of the bourgers, to persuade them to defend the
town yet half a year longer; before the expiration of which term, he hoped
to see a goodly victory over their enemies; and that they should not only
chase them from their walls, but with the assistance

The prince of Parma in the mean time advanced his work, not sparing either
cost or labor, The prince of Parma builds a bridge upon the river of Autuerpe.
until that the two heads of either side, being made as far as was possible
they could

At that time there came a spy from the States into the prince of Parma his
camp, who was known and brought before him, not without great perplexity, as
you may easily guess. The prince seeing him, willed him not to fear, and
having caused him to see all his forts and trenches, and all his equipage,
which he had prepared to subdue the town of Antuerpe, then suffered him to
depart freely, without any violence done unto him, and commanded

They of Holland and Zeeland did in the mean time fortify Berghen upon Soome,
the which they did man with a good garrison, as well of the natural
countrie-men, as with English, to serve as a bulwark for their frontiers. They
of Antuerpe had also eight hundred Englishmen in the suburb of Bourgerhout,
whereof thirty went and yielded themselves to the prince of Parma at one
instant, to whom he gave a crown a man. And thereupon he took an occasion to
write unto them of Antuerpe, persuading them, that they should not expect any
succor or assistance from the Queen of England, seeing that the English
bourgers answered him also in writing, thanking him also humbly for his good
will and honest 1585
French, they could not forsake them, unless they would be taxed of
lightness, inconstancy, and ingratitude.

At the same time the Seignior of Teligni, son to the lord of la Noue, who
the year before had valiantly defended the fort of Lillo against all the
Spaniards camp, parting in the night in a galley of Antuerpe to go into
Holland, he fell among the prince of Parma his Teligni taken prisoner by the
Spaniard.
ships before Calloo, by whom he was set upon: but seeing that he could not
hold out, finding himself wounded in the shoulder with a musket shot, after
that he had lost three of his men, before he yielded, he cast a letter which he
carried into the water, containing certain secrets of the same town, and
among others to cut Coesteins dike. This letter was perceived and

The Seignior of Saint Aldegonde had insisted long (before that the prince of
Parma had built so many forts along the river) to have a fort built at the dike
called den Cruydyck, beneath Lillo, in the mouth of the river, and to cut the
dike near unto the village of Coesteyn, to prevent the prince of Parma, that
he should not build one, and hinder the opening of the said dike: the which
the Seignior of Coesteyn did advise and urge very earnestly, as one that knew
the importance of the place better than any other, and the good that would
redound thereby unto the town.

But this good counsel was overthrown by a rabble of butchers (which make a
great company in the town of Antuerpe) who had their pastures there for their
fat cattle, and some others which had arable land in that place, who would not
suffer it to be drowned, seeking rather their own private profit, than the
common good: and who for this occasion grew into such hatred of the Seignior of
Coesteyn, as they forced him to forsake the town, and to retire himself to
the prince of Parma, unto whom he revealed the counsel which in that case he
had given to them of Antuerpe, and they so mechanikely rejected. By reason
whereof he was well entertained by the said prince, who after the yielding up
of the town, in requital of this advertisement, he honored him with the
place of Markegraue, which is the most honorable degree of a magistrate in
Antuerpe.

In Gant after the yielding up of the town, all such as were suspected to be
of the protestants religion, were put from their offices, and Romish catholics
substituted in their places: and their arms were taken from the said
protestants, and given unto the papists who were in their places; of the which
the prince of Parma made four several companies, to guard the ports of the
town.

They of Brussels, after that the navigations of the river to Antuerpe had been
taken from them, began to have want of victuals, and other necessary
provision, but yet they would not by any means give ear to any accord. The
town of Antuerpe did once relieve them, and sent them a hundred wagons of
victuals, the which entered safely with a good conuoy, whereby they of Brussels
were greatly comforted and relieved: but in their return,

The prince of Parma having finished all his forts along the river of Antuerpe,
the ships of Holland and Zeeland could no more pass so freely as they had
done before, for that the cannon from those forts did shoot close by the water,
wherewith many were spoiled; so as of a hundred or thereabouts, which were sent
in the feast of Christmas, being laden with victuals and munition, five were
lost, two sunk, and three were taken. The prince meaning to try them of
Antuerpe once more by his letters and admonitions, sent them word, among other
points, that according unto their ancient privileges which they had sworn,
they ought not (seeing they did build so much upon their said privileges) to
by the kings own letters, the which for the better proof and manifestation,
he sent unto 1585
the king of Spain, to receive them into grace and favor, if they would
reconcile themselves, and give over those excessive propositions and demands
which they had before made.

The magistrates of the town sent these letters unto the Estates, being
assembled at Middlebourg in Zeeland, entreating them to advise thereon, the
which they said they did not find convenient to open, for fear lest the
people (who then seemed to be inclined unto peace) should mutine against them.
And in the mean time the French king sent another Ambassador to the prince of
Parma, to quench the brute which was general, that he had taken the
Netherlands under his protection; declaring that he would not mingle the quiet
of

The Seignior of Hemert being gone with a good conuoie of horse and foot, to
carry another victualling to Brussels, he found trees cut down and laid in
the high ways where he should pass: and withal the Spaniards were in all
places in guard: seeing that it was impossible for him to pass with his
wagons, turning head again, he was charged at the passage of a little river
near unto the castle of Eyckhouen, defeated and put to rout, whereas many of
his men were slain. After this badde encounter, the Seignior of Merode laid
before them of Brussels, the small hope they had of any succors or relief
from their confederates, who hereafter should have work enough to defend
themselves: wherefore considering the great necessity and want which began to
press them, he did counsel them to agree

Whilst that the river and town of Antuerpe were thus blockt up with these
forts, and The Estates consult to whom they shall give themselves.
the river ready to be shut up. The Estates of Brabant, Gueldre, of that which
remained of Flanders, of Holland, Zeeland, Friseland, Vtrecht, and Oueryssel,
being in their general assembly, they consulted, seeing that by the death of
the duke of Aniou, they were without a lord, and by the death of the prince of
Orange without a governor, to what prince they might best give themselves.

The French and English were both in fear, lest the united provinces should
return unto the king of Spain; who having recovered them, at his pleasure
would attempt war against the one or the other. The Queen of England would
not willingly have seen the French

But there fell out another great difficulty, which was the doubt of the
succession to the crown of England, after the Queens death; the which might
fall into the hands of the Queen of Scotland, although she were then a
prisoner: and that she being of the Romish religion, and wonderfully affected
to the king of Spain, might deliver up the said countries into his hands: and
withal they could not ground any firm assurance upon the king of Scotland.
Whereas on the other side, the succession of the crown of France was more
assured unto them, seeing that after the kings death, it fell to the king of
Navarre, a prince making yet would he give offices to protestants, and other
good countrymen, whereby the country, 1585
by the general Estates, and the council of estate, they resolved to offer
themselves absolutely to the French king, with the best conditions they could
devise and agree upon, without any restriction or reservation, that Holland and
Zeeland had been formerly given to the prince of Orange and his heirs, as it
had been concluded with the duke of Aniou (the which had bred jealousy (as
some said) betwixt him and the prince, and had been the cause of the error
which was committed by the said duke in Antuerpe the seventeenth day of
January two years before) Finally after long deliberations and consultations,
there were deputed by the general Estates, and the chief noble men of the
said provinces, the third of January 1585, twelve men of account: for the
duchy of Brabant, doctor Iunius bourgmaster Quentin Taffin Seignior of la
Pree: for the duchy of Gueldte, the Seignior of Oyen, and doctor Elbert
Leonin, called Longolius chancellor of Gueldres: for the county of Holland,
Arnold van Dorp Seignior of Maesdam: for Zeeland, Ieams Valck: for the
Seigniorie of Vtrecht, N. de Menin: and for that which remained yet in the
county of Flanders, Noel Caron Seignior of Schoonwall: for them of Brussels
(who were then distressed) Arssees keeper of the seal of Brabant, to the which
there was adjoined in the behalf of the Estates, the Seignior of Lamouillene;
and for the chief of the embassage, the prince of Espinoy, to offer absolutely
unto the king all the said countries, with the property, Seigniorie, and
sovereignty, for him and his successors, being French kings, upon conditions
limited, and to be limited. All which deputies, (except the prince of Espinoy,
who was a John Petit.
the king and queen mother, of the estate of the said town which was then
besieged, and of the great need they had, together with the towns of Brussels
and Macklyn, to be relieved.

The fourth of January the Seignior of S. Aldegonde made a long oration to
them of Antuerpe, in the open assembly of their great council, exhorting them
with many lively and pregnant reasons, to preserve and defend themselves,
feeding them with a continual hope of succors, and of the good success of
the affairs of the said deputies. And then the better to provide for the
defense of the town, he created four new Colonels, men of action, and capable
of such a charge. And moreover he decreed, that such as had absented

The countries of Arthois and Henault, being continually tormented and
troubled by the garrison of Cambray, made a truce for the space of one whole
year, with the Seignior of Balaigni, governor of the said town (the which
they could not obtain without bribing him) having since continued it for many
years, so as this truce brought him in a good revenue.

The Seignior of Nyeuwenoort being in the field in Friseland for the Estates,
he cunningly good number of ships, both great and small, to carry his men in,
and the Spaniards being ignorant 1585
and right against Embden, they could not overtake him, nor yet march so fast
with their horse and foot by land, as he did by water, so as they could not
hinder his landing, nor his fortifying. Verdugo knowing how much this place did
import, meant in the Winter time to besiege it on both sides upon the dike: and
for the effecting thereof, he sent colonel Rhyneuelt of Vtrecht, to win it
by famine, whilst that the ships of Holland should be retired, by reason of
the ice. But the Seignior of Nyeuwenoort had set so good an order for all
things, as during that Winter they wanted not any thing: so as the Spring being
come, the Hollanders ships returned, which (in despite of all the resistance
which Rhyneuelt could make) did succor the fort, and forced him to retire,
having

Whilst that the town of Antuerpe was distressed, as we have formerly
related, the earl of Hohenlo, lieutenant to Grave Maurice, after that he had
conferred with the Estates, gathered together some four thousand men, the
which he lodged covertly, not far from the town of Boisleduc, one of the
four chief towns of Brabant, and approached as secretly as he could with some
companies of foot, and two hundred horse, close unto the town. Captain
Cleerhaghen, a gentleman of Brussels, having married a wife in Boisleduc, of
the house of Erp, was conductor of this enterprise; who (knowing all the
passages) went upon the tenth of January with fifty good men, who clyming
over the corpse de guard, whereas no man remained in the night time: the which
they did so quietly, and without disturbance, as they were not heard nor
discovered.

The next day in the morning, about eight of the clock, the port being open,
those of the guard which were sent to discover, were presently slain by
Cleerhaghen and his men; who (at the same instant) enforcing the rest of the
guard, the which were at the port, made themselves masters and commanders
thereof: and the said captain sent certain soldiers unto the top of the
gate, to be assured of the port-cullis, whereas they found none but an old man,
whom they used in such sort, as they left him in the place for dead. This being
done, the earl entered with his two hundred horse, and such footmen as

The day before there was come into the town about forty launciers,
Bourguignons, and Italians, and some three or four squadrons of foot, having
conveyed certain merchandise thither, else there was no garrison. These
horsemen were ready to go to horseback, to return when the alarm was
given, not knowing any thing, but hearing of the noise, they made have to
horseback, and went to encounter the earls horsemen, who ran

The earl seeing that there was some resistance, and that his horsemen did
fight, he posted with all speed, to cause the rest of his troops to advance.
In the mean time, the old man, whom the soldiers had left for dead over the
port, hearing the noise, and that they did fight hard, and some fled, seeing no
man near him to hinder him, being fore wounded, Iselstein, was much amazed,
seeing the port-cullis down, and his men to cast themselves over the rampar
into the ditch; among the which was the Seignior Justin of Nassau, bastard to
the prince of Orange, at this present Admiral of Zeeland, who saved himself
by that means; but 1585
hundred men, through the fault of those spoylers which were set at the
port-cullis, for else all had succeeded well enough. The earl cursing the
fault, retired to Gheertruydenbergh.

They of Brussels hearing of these news, the famine increasing more and more
among them, and being without all hope of succors, they sent their deputies to
the prince of Parma, to mediate an accord: but for that they propounded no
articles that were pleasing, or to be accepted, he sent them back, more like
spies than deputies. The poverty began to be so great there, as many dyed of
hunger. Some to avoid this misery, sought means to fly away, and to escape,
if they could possible; but being taken upon the

They of Antuerpe were at that time nothing inclined unto peace, and caused a
new Edict to be made, prohibiting to give ear to any accord, upon greater
penalties than before, causing the bourgers to renew the oath in the form that
follows: I swear, that The bourgers of Antuerpe take a new oath.
with all my power I will maintain the ordinances of the general Estates, and
will help to maintain and defend them, according unto the sentence which they
have given against the king of Spain and his adherents, enemies to the
country: and that I will never depart from the said ordinances, nor make any
accord nor agreement with the said enemies, nor will use any speech openly nor
covertly, nor meddle in any sort whatsoever, but will

In the mean time, the prince of Parma advanced the work of his bridge and
stocado, and they of Antuerpe went slowly to work to hinder it, presuming that
he should never effect it: and that whilst a sail might pass, they should
not have any need: neither would he trouble the Estates in any other place, so
long as they should keep him occupied there. The prince sent a herald unto
them again with letters, and a copy of the precedent, being of opinion, that
they had not been imparted unto the people: the which

And indeed Dom Bernardin of Mendosa, ambassador for the king of Spain in
France Bernardin de Mendosa his speech to the French king.
(after that he had been chased out of England) said openly unto the king:
That the General Estates and all the Netherlands revolted from their king, had
been long since convicted and declared guilty of high treason, both against
God and man; the which, (according to the sentence of condemnation pronounced
against them by the counsel of the Inquisition of Spain) must be quite rooted
out: And therefore that he should remember the league, alliances, and
consanguinitie that was betwixt him and his master, and not give ear
thereunto, but rather chase out of his presence and out of his kingdom such
revolted rebels: The which should not only redound unto the good of France
(being so near a neighbor unto Spain) but also to all Christendom, which
was put him, That he would give audience unto the deputies of the general
Estates, not as unto 1585
that were done them: That (in all ages) Christian kings and princes did never
refuse to aid the afflicted, neither ought they refuse them, especially such
as desire nothing, but to be reconciled to their prince (for that the deputies
of the Estates had given the king to understand, That they had made diverse and
sundry petitions and supplications unto the king of Spain, and could never
obtain any answer thereunto) wherefore (and that, according unto the laws)
he thought it to be lawful and allowable for every man when right and
justice is denied unto him, to seek support where he can find it: and
therefore he was not once to be blamed at all, if at the least he did hear
them.

The Queen Mother told the said deputies (making a show of love which she bare
them, and to feed them with hope) that as heir to the duke of Aniou her son,
she would come in person, and take possession of the town of Cambray, to be the
nearer to the general Estates of the united Provinces.

Many in the Netherlands were of diverse opinions concerning this legation of
the deputies of the Estates to the French king. Those that were best affected
to the king of Spain, could not persuade themselves, that the French king
would embrace the cause of the Netherlanders, and that he sought nothing but
the quiet of his own Realm. Others made themselves believe (considering the
good and honorable reception which he had given them at their coming into
France) that the king would take them into his

The said earl of Darbie arrived soon after, being honorably attended. He
brought unto the French king the order of the Garter, which the Queen of
England sent him, as a testimony of her love; the which was very pleasing and
acceptable unto his Majesty. The said ambassador did recommend unto the king,
in the name of the Queen his mistress, the cause of the Netherlands, to the
end the king of Spain might not grow so mighty, as having overcome and
subdued them, he should fall upon one of those two Realms. But to the end
that we may not pass over slightly the success of this legation of the
deputies of the Estates, we will discourse somewhat more at large thereof;
wherein the same did chiefly consist, when they had their audience, and what
their answer

They had audience given them upon the twelfth of February, in the which they
besought his Majesty (the prince of Espinoy speaking for them all) That it
would please him to take them, their provinces, and communalties, into his
safeguard and protection, as his own proper subjects and vassales, and under
his jurisdiction, as they desired to be, under such honorable and reasonable
agreements and conditions, as it should best please his Majesty to grant unto
them; the which they would faithfully promise, and bind themselves to obey, by
virtue of the Commission and authority which they had received to that end and
purpose from all the Estates of the said united Provinces of The kings answer
to the deputies of the Estates.
the Netherlands. Whereunto the king answered them with a great affection and
good honor which they did him by so goodly an offer and presentation, together
with the love which they bare him, saying, That before he held himself bound
unto the said countries, for the great honor which they had done unto the late
deceased duke of Aniou, 1585
them, by this great and honorable offer which they made him, whereof he made
very great esteem, and for the which he wished them all prosperity and
happiness, promising to show himself hereafter (on their behalfes) a good,
just, mild, and gracious prince: And seeing that they entreated him in what
sort he should best please, and how he might with most conueniencie, to assist
and help them, and to have a future care both of them and of the said
countries, like unto a good and careful father, as he has of his own
natural subjects, and that they were ready to bind themselves unto him under
some good and reasonable conditions; for the which he gave them great thanks.
But seeing that a matter of so great importance deserved to be duly considered
and advised of, he thought

The Queen Mother having heard their reasons, and what they demanded; after
that she had conferred with the Seignior of Bellieure, the Secretaries of
Estate, and other of the king his privy counsel, he gave them a full answer
thereof, as we shall hereafter see.

On the other side, the counsel of Spain having a due consideration and
regard of all those things which concerned the people of the Netherlands, did
see plainly, that the French king might easily, and with small toil, get the
possession of the said countries

He had in December before sent one Augustino Graffino (an Italian) into
England; but being a subject of the Popes, he was charged to have been
acquainted with the prince of Orange his murder, so as he had no audience at
all. And the Spaniards seeing, that

The French king seeing himself suddenly assailed by the Guisian league, in
the which many of the nobility of France, gentlemen, and good towns were
engaged and carried away, under a color of Religion and the public weal; he
had no other help or means, but to fly unto his Edicts, forbidding by
public proclamation all his subjects and vassales that were under his
jurisdiction, to levy any men, or to serve them, without his leave, declaring,
that this league and confederacy was ill grounded, and against had recommended
the united Provinces unto him, in like sort he entreated the earl of 1585
please her to succor them, and to take their defense in hand, making the like
request unto the Queen by his own ambassadors, and also to the king of
Navarre; the which he promised by the faith of a king, and has been ever
since well affected unto the said united provinces.

The prince of Parma, to finish his work, and to stop up the passage of the
river of Antuerpe from them of Holland and Zeeland, he sent for all the masters
of ships, mariners, and shipwrights of Flaunders and Brabant, whom he caused
to come to Calloo: So as upon the five and twentieth day of February the
bridge was fully finished, whereby they might pass out of Flanders into
Brabant, and the passage to Antuerpe quite stopped

But being done and ended, they sought to break it with the force and
violence of ships of war, as well of Holland and Zeeland, as of Antuerpe:
yet before they Treslon, and others which had had the chief charge: but every
man excused himself of this negligence in the prevention thereof (in the which
there was also some private commodity or advantage, as it is the usual
custom in matters which pass by many heads and hands) yea, they did greatly
tax the Hollanders therewith, some saying,

The town of Nymeghen in the country of Gueldres, situated upon the river of
Wahal 1585
that they would change their party, and fall to the king of Spain. The earl
of Moeurs (who was governor) sought all means to draw in a greater garrison
for the Estates, the which he could not effect, the bourgers opposing
themselves, not without great danger of his life, two millers having
discharged two shot upon him, wherewith he had been slain, if he had not
been armed at proof: and in like manner he was set upon by two brewers, the
one thinking to thrust him through with his halberd, and the other striking him
on the head with a hatchet, but he was armed.

This being past, and the tumult pacified, he put such out of the town, as he
had noted. Whereupon the bourgers took counsel how they might chase away the
garrison which

These undertakers were in great perplexity and fear to be discovered: for
there were How Nyme. ghen came into the Spaniards hands.
five days respite from the day they should have executed it, before their
company came in guard. These five days past, and the matter was not
discovered. The day of their guard being come, some of this enterprise going
the round about the break of day, they found corpse de guard of soldiers, whom
they shut up there, and then seized upon the Arcenal, and on the market place.
The other bourgers which were in their houses hearing this noise, ran toward
the market place. These undertakers went and met them, telling them, that the
soldiers were in a mutiny, and meant to spoil the town. Whereupon every man
went to arms, and joined with the first motives of this tumult, to defend
themselves, the town, their wives and children, falling upon the soldiers and
other bourgers which held their party, whom they disarmed, and afterward
chased the whole garrison out of the town, renewing their magistrates, and all
their law. Yet at the first they would not receive the king of Spain his
garrison; although that Martin Schenck and Camillo de Monte did much insist to
put in some, whilst they were in these garboyles: The which being pacified,
they of Nymeghen sent their deputies unto the prince of Parma, with whom they
agreed to submit themselves under the king of Spaines obedience.

Whilst that this was working at Nymeghen, Taxis, lieutenant to Verdugo, took
the The castles of Nienbeek and Hackfort taken by the Spaniards.
castle of Nyenbeeke, in the quarter of Veluwe in Guelderland, by force,
whereas some of them were hanged, after they had yielded up the castle, and
others put to ransom. From thence he went before the castle of Hackfort, the
which held out long, and did him much despite: yet being forced in the end to
yield themselves unto his mercy, he cut all those in pieces that were within
the place, except only one clarke of a band,

Those of Doesbourg, being a town that is seated upon the river of Yssel,
which is Doesbourg yields to the Spaniard.
one of the arms of Rhyn, seeing how the Spaniard prospered, and that they of
Nymeghen had had good success in the expulsion of their soldiers, they did
the like unto their garrison, and sent messengers for others to Zutphen: so as
upon the nine and twentieth of March they concluded with the prince of Parma,
as they of Nymeghen had done before.

The earl of Moeurs was all this time at Arnham, the chief town of the
Duchy of Gueldres; the which did in like manner waver: for the which the said
earl was much the watch who was in the steeple giving the alarm (whether that
he were won by the 1585
port, than that whereas the soldiers were, who in the mean time entered,
making themselves masters of the bourgers corpse degard, whom they chased from
thence. And by this Arnham assured for the Estates party.
means the town was assured for the earl of Moeurs, holding the Estates
party; the which was much displeasing to some bourgers, who desired rather to
have had the Spaniards in their town.

The tenth of March, Oliver vanden Timpel, Seignior of Corbeke, and governor of
Brussels, Brussels makes an accord with the king of Spain.
after that he had been long besieged, and seeing no hope of succors, made an
accord with the prince of Parma for himself, the soldiers, and bourgers, as
follows: That the said Seignior of Timpel should not for six months space
serve in the country Richardot President of Arthois, and Garnier, Secretary
of Estate. In regard of the bourgers, it was agreed, That he should settle
again the Romish Religion within the town, and restore the churches which the
Protestants had held: That their privileges should be maintained, unless
there were any that might minister occasion of new troubles, the which should
be consulted of, and moderated by the counsel of Estate: That nothing should
be imputed unto them for all the wars past: That they of the Protestants

At that time, William of Blois, Seignior of Treslon, who in the beginning, in
the year 1572, with the Seignior of Lumay, earl of March, had taken the
Island of Bryel, being Iustine of Nassau, base son unto the prince of Orange.

They of Antuerpe knowing that the bridge and the Stocadoes were finished, made
a great ship, to be a means to break all this work of the prince of
Parmaes: this great ship was made of masons work within, in the manner of a
vaulted cave: upon the hatches there were laid myll-stones, graue-stones, and
others of great weight; and within Lanckhaer, a sea captain of the Hollanders,
being then in Antuerpe, gave them counsel to tie a great beam at the end of
it, to make it to keep a straight course in the midst of the stream. In
this sort floated this ship the fourth of April, until that it came unto
the bridge; where (within a while after) the powder wrought his effect, with
such violence, as the vessel, and all that was within it, and upon it, flew in
pieces, carrying away a part of the Stocado and of the bridge. The marquess of
Roubay Vicont of Gant, Gaspar of Robles, lord of Billy, and the Seignior of

The same day the Hollanders and Zeelanders won the forts of Lyefkenshoek
(whereas 1585
that of Doel, which were not far from the prince of Parma his forts upon the
river of The forts of Lyefkenshoek and Doel taken by the Estates.
Antuerpe, that of Lyefkenshoek being right against Lillo. The captain, who
had commanded therein, for that he had yielded it up so lightly, lost his
head, by the prince of Parma his commandment. The said burning ship struck
such a terror into the prince his men, which were within the forts of Calloo
and Oordam, as they abandoned them for a time, not only for the fire which
flew, but also for the great abundance of water, which the violence of the
powder cast into the said forts out of the river; so as the soldiers knew not
what should become of them, no more than if the world had instantly perished by
fire and water. If they of Antuerpe had followed, and charged them presently,
it is to be

The eight and twentieth of March, la Motte, governor of Graueling, made an
enterprise An enterprise upon Oostend well begun, but ill followed.
upon Oostend, the which succeeded so happily in the beginning, as he won the
old town, in the which there was an old church, from whence he might command
with his musket shot over all the town. This part is divided from the new
town by a bridge, which the said la Motte had given in guard to one of his
captains, attending the rest of his troops, which should enter by the haven:
but the soldiers of the garrison, which were within the new town, being in
arms, struck such a fear and amazement into the hearts of them which were in
the old town as they suddenly abandoned it, and so it was presently recovered
by the enemy: the which did wonderfully discontent la Motte, being forced to
retire, by reason of the cannon, which played from the town

At this time, the deputies of the general Estates of the united Provinces
returned from their embassage out of France, after that the king had thanked
them, and made his excuse unto them, as we have said; yea, he advised them to
depart as speedily as they could, and to stand upon their guards, for fear of
them of Guise, having gratified every one of them with a goodly chain of gold:
so as the deputies taking their leave, gave his Majesty most humble thanks
for the good will which he showed to the united Provinces.

The Queen of England hearing how the affairs of the united Provinces had
passed

Colonel Martin Schenck, and the Seignior Bentine, governor of Stralen in
Guelderland, for the king of Spain, crossed through the Betuwe in the Veluwe,
and presented 1585
Schenck was wounded there, and carried to Nymeghen.

In the beginning of May, they of Antuerpe sent their great floting fort
(called, The end of the War) down the river, near unto the fort of Oordam,
where the Spaniards were. But coming too near unto the dike, it run on
ground, so as in the end they were forced to abandon it, having retired with
the Ordnance and all the provision and munition that was within it: the which
fell afterward into the Spaniards hands. It was

The seventh of May, the earl of Hohenlo and Colonel Iselstein came with all
their ships laden with choice soldiers, and a good number of pioners to cut
the dike of Coesteyn, to the end that they might pass with long boats and
oars near unto the fort of Lillo, through the drowned meadows unto Antuerpe,
leaving the river and the Spaniards forts upon the left hand; the which had
been easy to effect, if they could have been masters of the dike, as they
expected. But as the earl had put his men in order, and that the pioners began
to dig, the Spaniards charged them with such fury, as well upon the dike,

Colonel Verdugo, governor for the king of Spain at Groningue and in
Friseland, Schuyleburch taken by the Spaniard.
after that he had taken the castles of Rha, Rechteren, and Ruttenberch, in the
country of Oueryssel, went with two pieces before the castle of Schuylenburch,
a place strong by nature and by art; yet the besieged fearing they should not
be able to hold it long, yielded it up.

Whilst that Verdugo prevailed thus in the country of Oueryssel, Cont William
of Nassau, Sclickenbourg taken for the Estates.
governor of Friseland for the Estates, with the regiment of Frisons and
Waterlanders, besieged

At the same time, the earl of Moeurs, lieutenant and chief of all the
troops under Truchses, elector of Cologne, having drawn forth some part of
the garrisons out of Rhynbergh, Nuis surprised and spoiled.
and other towns of Gueldres, both horse and foot, he surprised the town of
Nuys in the diocese of Cologne, a very famous town, for the great siege which
Charles duke of Bourgoigne laid before it. It was surprised by scalado at the
first by a few men, who, without discovery of the guard, went from the rampar
to a port, whereas captain Kunyt attended with the horsemen; the which being
broken open with hammers, and an engine Herman Frederic Cloet, a valiant
captain, governor of the town, who from that place did afterward make
sharp wars against all the diocese of Cologne, under the authority of the
said elector, 1585
the prince of Parma.

Colonel Martin Schenck having taken a disdain, that the king of Spain had
made no more account to free him, being a prisoner in Gueldre, as we have said,
and that the seignior of Hautepenne was preferred before him (and all by the
instigation of the bourgers) to the government of Nymeghen, he had afterward
such a hatred against the said town, as to be revenged, he desired to be
discharged of his regiment, the which the prince of Parma granted him. Then
having treated with the earl of Moeurs in the behalf of the Elector Truchses,
who was in league with the Estates (and with the consent of the said Estates)
he came to serve them in May, delivering unto them for assurance of his

At that time, Cont Philip of Egmont, prince of Gant, was exchanged with the
lord of la Noue, upon certain conditions.

The two and twentieth of May they of Antuerpe made new engines to break and
burn the bridge and Stocadoes which the prince of Parma had made. For the
effecting whereof,

Afterward they sent four ships prepared like unto the first, which they had
sent down the fourth of April, to work their effect altogether. But as they
went not equally, the first was stayed by the Spaniards, and anchored right
against the fort of Paysande, which was held by the garrison of Antuerpe, where
having remained some time, it took fire, and did

The six and twentieth of May (as they of Antuerpe had sent down the day before
twelve Another design to cut Coesteyns dike.
such ships with fire, to break the bridge) they brought through the drowned
land their flat bottomed boats, near unto the dike of Coesteyn: the Hollanders
and Zeelanders having The prince of Parma was not far off, being much
perplexed in his mind to see the Protestants 1585
or desire to attempt it. For as one Pedro de Padille, with eight brave
caualiers, would make the point of a new charge, at his first approach he had
his hand shot off, and was afterward slain: which presumptuous charge was
very shameful and prejudicial to the Spaniards. The prince of Parma taking
counsel with the old earl of Mansfeldt, what was to be done, the said earl
said unto Cont Charles his eldest son: Charles my son, here you must either
vanquish, or die. Whereupon there were three pieces of Ordnance brought; the
which playing upon them of Antuerpe, the said Cont Charles came resolutely
(with a regiment of Wallons and another of Germans) to charge the Protestants
in their trenches on the East side. He was twice repulsed, but at the third
time he

There dyed in this fight (on both sides) above fifteen hundred men: among
others of the Protestants side, the Seignior of Honteyn, governor of the
Island of Walchren, with many gentlemen and captains of good sort. On the
Spaniards side there dyed many more captains and commanders (marching in the
head of their troops) than of the Protestants. Most of them were natural
borne Spaniards and Italians, as they were also that endured the first charge
at their landing, and made the first attempt upon the trenches made by the
Protestants upon the dike, as soon as they had made any thing to defend their
pioners.

The next day (as nothing was done in Antuerpe, but they were presently
advertised thereof in the Spanish camp) news came unto the prince of Parma,
that they of

Colonel Hautepenne, governor of Nymeghen, had built certain forts about the
town of Grave, to shut it up: in the mean time Colonel Schenck went thither
with Hautepenne having drawn the garrisons out of the neighbor towns
thereabouts, thought to stop up his passage from coming thither. Colonel
Schenck being advertised of his coming, and finding himself too weak to
encounter or fight with him, he retired with his forces to Arnham. In the
mean time, Verdugo and Taxis did besiege the fort of Berchhooft in the
country of Bethune, the which was battered, and endured some assaults: but
being undermined, and ready to be blown up, they that were within the fort,
yielded it up, and went forth without their arms. From thence Verdugo retired
unto his government at Groningue, and Taxis went to Zutphen.

They of Antuerpe considering, that all their designs and enterprises, to
break the bridge, and cut through Coesteyns dike, proved vain and
fruitless, they began to bethink themselves how they might make an accord
with the prince of Parma; to which end the Seignior of S. Aldegonde should go
unto the camp on Trinity Sunday, being 1585
of Hulkes, the which with a strong gale and a Spring tide should come with
full sails upon the Stocadoes and bridge; and although it could not be put in
execution (as it was proiected) without the loss of men, yet was it liked and
allowed of. But these Hulks approaching to Lillo, the wind began to grow scant,
and when the wind was good, the tide was spent, or was against them, so as it
was not possible to make them work their effect.

This falls out commonly, when they embrace not the occasion which is
offered, or neglect it: for (to say the truth) if they had showed half those
endeauours in the beginning (when as the prince resolved to make the bridge and
Stocadoes) as they did afterward when

On the eleventh of July, the earl of Hohenlo going out of Lyefkenshoek, went
to assail one of the Spaniards forts near unto it; in the which there
commanded one captain Wiiflenen, who defended it valiantly, and repulsed the
earls men, whereof some were slain upon the place, and the earl himself had
two horses killed under him, the which made him retire. At his departure he
cried out unto them of the fort, that they should tell the earl of Arembergh,
That of late he had borrowed two of his horses, the which

This Summer, in June, John William, prince of Iuilliers, Cleue, and Bergh (his
father The unfortunate marriage of the prince of Cleue.
duke William being yet living) married with the lady Iaqueline, daughter to
the marquess of Baden; and the solemnities of this marriage were celebrated
with great pomp in the town of Dusseldorp, in the country of Bergh. It was
an unfortunate marriage for this young prince, not only for that she was given
unto lasciviousness and looseness of life (whereof she was publickely
convicted) being also barren; but for that she had drawn

There was another project to break the bridge before Antuerpe, made by one of
Berghen upon Zoome; the which the general Estates (being then at Middlebourg)
did like so well of, as within eight days he came before Lillo with his
invention, being of five water might enter by little and little into the
ships unto the hatches and barrels, and no further; so as after they which
did guide them, had made those vents and passages through the 1585


The earl of Moeurs, Colonel Schencke, and the Seignior of Villers governor
of Vtrecht were with the Estates army about Amerongen, betwixt Vtrecht and
Rhenen, whither Verdugo governor John Baptista Taxis his Lieutenant, the three
and twentieth day of June, with certain troops of horse and foot, the which
he laid in ambush in a wood near unto Amerongen. The earl of Moeurs men
hearing that the Spaniards had been seen in those parts of the country, and
that they came near unto them, went forth to charge them: the Spaniards to
draw them on, made a show of flying, and skirmished faintly, until that the
protestants were come into the ambush, then they discovered themselves, and
charged them behind, and those which seemed to fly, turned head upon their
enemies, and fought valiantly for a long time; till in the end the protestants
being compassed in round about, and charged of all sides, were put to rout: all
their footmen were in Schencke in Vtrecht, but the marshall Villers being
sore wounded, was taken prisoner, with some captains and diverse soldiers.
They thought to have put Villers to death, for that long before in the
delivering over of the town of Bouchan he had dealt hardly with them: yet in
the end he was set free for a great ransom, and in exchange of other
prisoners.

This overthrow given by Taxis, after a long and doubtful fight, was much
furthered by the two sons of the earl of Berghes, who at that very instant
came with a troop of fresh horse to help them: these two young earls of
Berghes are the prince of Oranges sisters sons, and brought up by him; but
for that the Estates had their father in suspicion, they left

The earl of Moeurs and Schencke having gathered the scattered troops again
together, built certain skonces betwixt Vianen, Vtrecht, and other places, and
Schencke not long after recovered some part of his loss from the enemy, by
the overthrow of two cornets of horse, and after that he had an enterprise
against Groningue, but being discovered, he was forced to retire.

The prince of Parma the more to press them of Antuerpe, sent some troops
from the camp to seize upon one of their suburbs, called Bourgerhout, which
they won easily, the place being abandoned by the garrison which fled.
There was in the suburb a great fort, which the Spaniards took by assault,
chasing the soldiers that were in it even unto the Sterckenhof and Cantercrois
yielded.
and then at the ninth shot he did capitulate, so as he and all his men
departed with their arms and baggage, in yielding up the said fort, and the
other, where the rest of his company was, the which was done.

From thence they went to besiege the castle of Stralen, the which they within
it would not yield, unless they might see the cannon; the which being
planted, and they offering then to yield, it would not be accepted, but to
depart with their rapiers and daggers only. The soldiers which had been in
these forts, coming to the ports of Antuerpe, they of the The castle of
Stralen yielded.


Having the said forts, he commanded the peasants, laquaies, and horse-boies,
to cut up all the corn and pot-hearbes, and to pull up all parsnips, carrets,
turnups, and other roots, and to 1585
end that they of Antuerpe might reap no commodity thereby. This happened in
the end of June.

At the same time the prince of Parma went to visit his camp at Strabrouck
lying on Brabant side. The deputies of the town being come to Beueren, having
spoken with the prince, returned the next day, which gave some hope of an
accord, for news was brought unto his camp, that they of the town had
nothing the first day of June but oate bread, and that the common people cried
out that they would have bread or peace. The council of the town assembled
often, but by reason of the diversity of opinions, they could not resolve any
thing. Of eight Colonels there were but two that desired peace, and of
fourscore captains,

The marquess of Gwast general of the Spanish and Italian horse, incountred
two corners of horse of the garrison of Macklyn, the which he defeated, whereas
captain Suisse was slain, and some taken prisoners, the rest saved themselves
by flight: and soon after the marquess of Renti and la Motte were sent with
some troops of horse and foot, and some little artillery toward Macklyn, to
importune them of Macklyn, as they had done them of Antuerpe. At the first they
took the fort of Walhem and the Blochmy, then Neckerspal, and some other

All these losses moved them of Macklyn to consider of their affairs, and to
give ear to an accord, with the marquess of Renti, unto whom they sent their
deputies, who concluded upon certain articles, the which were sent unto the
prince of Parma, and were confirmed by him: whereupon the town was yielded,
the Seignior of Famas governor of the town, Macklyn yielded by composition.
and the soldiers going forth with their arms and baggage, having liberty to
retire whither they pleased. Of all the captains, only Benguatre (a gentleman
of Bethune, brother to the Seignior of Ourthon, nephew to Saint Aldegonde)
remained with the Spaniards, but very

In the mean time they attended the deputies of Antuerpe at the prince of
Parma his camp: but before they returned, the Hollanders would needs make an
attempt upon the bridge and stocadoes. They had with great charge prepared two
great thundering ships, like unto those of Antuerpe, in the which there was
much poulder and great stones, which

In the mean time they of Antuerpe began to be extremely pressed by famine,
which was not likely to be relieved, but in the end they must be forced of
necessity to yield, or else the commanders would be in danger by reason of the
commons want and discontent, who did nothing but murmr and would have peace:
so as the three and twentieth day of July they sent twenty deputies to the
prince of Parma, chosen out of the magistrates of the Estates of sent them to
the president Pamele, and to Assonville, and Richard vander Burcht, being all
of the 1585
of difficulties, and in the end fallen to an agreement, there was a certain
treaty of reconciliation drawn betwixt them, the which was sent by some of
the deputies unto the town, to impart it unto the great council, that so upon
the view thereof, they might resolve accordingly.

A little before Philip earl of Egmont (who as we have said, had been taken
in his own town of Nyeuhouen, by monsieur la Noue) returned to the prince of
Parma his camp, from a long imprisonment, having been kept at Gant, and in
the castle of Ramekins in Zeeland, since the year 1579. And in like sort, the
said monsieur la Noue, taken at Engelmonster and kept in the castles of
Tournay, and of Lembourg, since the year 1580, the said two noblemen la Noue
was tied to harder conditions than the other, promising upon the penalty of a
hundred thousand crowns, never to carry arms in the Netherlands against the
king of Spain, if it were not by the express commandment of the French king
his natural lord; for which promise, the duke of Lorraine was his caution, and
the king of Navarre his counter-pledge. It did much grieve and bred a great
coffeehouse in the earl to be exchanged against monsieur la Noue, who was
not equal unto him in degree and quality, and the rather in regard of the
promise, which he thought to be done purposely to his disgrace: but the
sweetness of liberty made him to digest these comparisons which seemed
odious unto him. It was confidently reported, that monsieur la Noue taking his
leave of the prince of Parma, said unto him, Sir, this town of Antuerpe cannot
escape you, when you shall enter into it, I would advise you to hang up your
sword and La Noues speech to the prince of Parma.
arms at the gate, and there to end your victories. To whom the prince
answered, You say well monsieur la Noue, and my friends do also advise me
thereunto; but how may I retire my self, being engaged in the Kings service,
as I am? Doubtless monsieur la Noue was not deceived, for since the prince of
Parma did not any thing that might equal the hundredth part of his precedent
happy success in the Netherlands, only after that time he took the towns
of Nuys and Scluse.

The deputies of Antuerpe that were returned unto the town with the articles
of the accord, to impart them unto the people, arrived the ninth day of August,
and the next day the great council was assembled, where they were seen and
examined, and were allowed of by

In this treaty of Antuerp, there was great difficulties upon the word
scandal, the which by the pacification of Gant had been strictly and bitterly
interpreted, the which they desired to have explaned, and not to have the word
of scandal applied to the least point that should be spoken or done by them of
the religion, as it had been often construed to the worst, since the said
pacification of Gant; for it had been said, that they should live in liberty
of conscience, committing no scandal. This word had been generally taken
against all those that would not conform themselves to the ceremonies of the
Romish church. The interpreters of this maintaining, that such as would not do
as the rest did were scandalous; and therefore this word thus construed and
understood, the liberty of conscience was nothing, that if they did no
reverence unto the priests carrying the sacrament through the streets: 1585
saying moreover unto the Seignior of Saint Aldegonde, can you not do as the
country man did at Rome, who passing along the streets before an Eccehomo,
(which is the figure of the representation which Pilate made of our Savior
Jesus Christ unto the people, saying, Behold the man) having made a reverence,
and passing on, he bethought himself, that Pilate might attribute this honor
unto himself: wherefore returning and putting off his hatte again, he said,
It is to the Christ, not to the Pilate. Do so said the prince of Parma, and
think that the honor and reverence which you do unto the sacrament, you do
it unto almighty God.

The eleventh day of August, the prince of Parma received the order which the
king had The prince of Parma made knight of the Order.
the earl of Egmont, the marquess of Renti earl of Ouereinden being at that
time there present, and to the marquess of Renti who was dead, as we have
said, the old knights assisting, as the duke of Arschot, the old earl of
Mansfeldt, and others with the Seignior of Assonuille chauncellor of the order,
the treasurer, and the king at arms, whom they call Toison d'Or, or golden
fleece. This was done publicly on a scaffold richly furnished in the fort of
Calloo: this being ended, the ordinance in all the sorts thereabouts were
discharged.

The seventeenth day of the month of August, the treaty of accord with the
town of Antuerpe was fully concluded, and signed by the prince of Parma, who
promised

This proclamation being made before the towne-house, in the presence of the
prince of Parma his deputies, the magistrates and the superintendents of the
said town, the Herald or king at arms having his coat on him with the arms
of Spain, cried out thrice, God save the king of Spain: the which was
seconded by the shouts and cries of the people of the town.

This being done, the prince of Parma his deputies went to the cathedral
church of Te Deum was sung; from thence they returned to the State-house,
whereas a costly dinner was prepared for them. The magistrates entreated the
prince that he would stay his entry into the town for some few days, that
they might have some respite to prepare themselves to receive him in triumph,
as a victorious prince, with all the honor and pomp they could devise. And
all strangers, especially the Geneuois, and the companies of trades, did strive
who should exceed in sumptuous acknowledgement of their duty.

So upon the seven and twentieth day of the month, the prince of Parma
(meaning to make his entry into the said town of Antuerpe) sent two thousand
and four

At the same time the prince of Parma wrote many letters to the other towns of
the provinces of the Netherlands, to persuade them to a submission and
reconciliation with the king of Spain their sovereign lord and king, after
this manner ensuing. We have heretofore and of late written unto you, and
earnestly entreated you in the behalf of the king your natural prince, to
consider of the miserable estate whereunto you are now reduced, and to embrace
the means to return unto the true obedience which you owe unto your prince,
1585
being environed on all sides with the oppressions and ruins of war, which
you draw vpvpon your selves: into the which, many towns have fallen, and do
now (but too late) lament their misfortune, seeing that we are forced to
proceed by the way of arms. Notwithstanding, we have always conceived a
good hope of you, expecting a good answer from you, and that you will show your
selves, as it befitteth good and faithful subjects, if our letters may be
delivered unto you; for we have been duly informed, that (God be thanked)
your hearts are not so much alienated from his Majesty, as many others be,
which persist obstinately in their errors. But, for that hitherto we have
received no answer, we find that our letters have been suppressed by some, who
for their private

Wherefore we do exhort you again by these our letters, that you will
consider of that which is fittest for you, and that you will give ear unto it,
and not carelessly to let it pass without regard, and then you shall find us
very ready to assist you in all that shall tend to your good; knowing well,
that by the instigations and persuasions of some wicked persons, you have been
drawn into this war, which does now so much importune you: although it has
not been so much through the violent attempts of the perverse (who

The F^ench king being forced this year in March (by the wars which were
very like in a short time to grow within the bowels of his own kingdom
through the practices of the league) to refuse the sovereignty of the
Netherlands, which was offered unto him by 1585
advised them to recommend their cause unto the Queen of England, and to the
king of Navarre. The Queen being duly informed of the estate of their
affairs, lest they should be forced to make some desperate agreement with
their enemies, had sent them many comfortable words, as well by the Lord of
Grise, as by master Dauison her Majesty's Ambassador.

Whereof the general Estates being advertised, during the siege of Antuerpe,
they resolved to give the sovereignty of the Netherlands, absolutely unto the
Queen of England, upon lawful and reasonable conditions; or else to treat
with her, to take the protection and defense thereof upon her, or otherwise to
crave her aid and assistance, by some forces to succor

And to that end, upon the sixth of June, their deputies arrived in England,
which were these; for Brabant (although by reason of the besieging of Antuerpe
not fully authorized) was sent Iacques de Grise chief bailife of Bruges; for
Guelderland, Rutgert van Harsolt bourgmaster of Harderwicke, for Flaunders
(although likewise not fully authorized) Noel of Caron, Seignior of
Schoonewall, bourgmaster of Franc; for Holland and Friseland, John vanden Does,
lord of Noortwicke, Ioos of Menin counselor of the town of Dort, John van
Oldenbarnevelt counselor of the town of Rotterdam, doctor Francis Maelson,
counselor of the town of Enckhuysen; for Zeeland, Jacob Valck, a civil
lawyer, and one of the counsel of estate; for Vtrecht, Paul Buys doctor; for
Friseland, Ielgher van Feytzma counselor of estate, Hessell Aysma president,
Laest Iongama: all which had full power and authority by procuration, from
their several places and provinces, to treat either for the delivering over of
the absolute sovereignty to the Queen of England, or else to make a treaty
for protection and defense, or for aid and assistance by some English forces:
the Hollanders for their parts were resolved and content to deliver over some
of their towns unto the Queen, for her security.

Their deputies procuration and authority was made from the nobility,
gentlemen, and towns; as Dort, Harlem, Delft, Leyden, Amsterdam, Gant,
Rotterdam, Gorcum, Schiedam, Briel, Alcmar, Hoorn, Enckhuysen, Schoonhouen,
Eedam, Monickedam, Medenblick, Woerden, Oudewater, Heusden, Gertruydenberghe,
Weesp, Naerden, Muyden, and Purmerend, answering for the rest of the small
towns, lordships, and villages of Holland and

These ambassadors being arrived in England, they were well and courteously
received, (and while they abode there) honorably feasted, and entertained at
the Queens charges; and upon the ninth of June were admitted to her Majesty's
presence, being then at Greenwich, where with all honorable and submissiue
duty, in humble wise they presented their request by word of mouth, delivered
by Ioos de Menin, the effect whereof was as here follows.

That the Estates of the united Netherland provinces greatly thanked her
Majesty for the honorable and many favors which it had pleased her to show
and vouchsafe unto them in their necessities, having not long since renewed and
confirmed her princely clemency, when Dauison to signify unto them, the great
care she had for their defense and preservation; and after that again by the
lord of Grise, by whom she let them understand how much she was discontented
to see them frustrated of their expectations, reposed upon the hope they had in
the treaty of France: and that nevertheless the care she had for their
prosperity and welfares, was not in any thing diminished, but rather
increased, in that she saw greater reason to move her thereunto: for the
which, the whole Netherlands in general, and every of them in particular
should rest bound unto her Majesty for ever, to deserve and requite the same
with all fidelity and submission.

And therefore the Estates aforesaid observing that since the death of the
prince of Orange, them from the insolences and oppressions of the Spaniards,
and their adherents, who sought 1585
means, to spoil and utterly root up the foundation of the aforesaid
Netherlands, and thereby to bring the poor afflicted people of the same into
perpetual bondage (worse than the Indian slavery) under the unsupportable and
accursed inquisition of Spain. Finding likewise, that the inhabitants of the
said Netherlands were persuaded, and had an assured confidence, that her
Majesty out of her princely mind, would not suffer nor endure to see them
utterly overthrown, as their enemies expected and desired, by molesting them
with such long and tedious wars; the which the Estates (according to their
duties, and in respect of their places, in the behalf of their fellows and
brethren) were forced to withstand, and as much as in them lay oppose
themselves against the manifest slavery, which they thought to places hardly
beset, and sore encumbered and oppressed, and to deliver the Netherlands and 1585
dangerous invasions of the Spaniards) were so rich, and flourishing in all
kinds of wealth, by reason of the great commodities of the sea, havens, rivers,
traffic, manual trades and occupations, whereunto they are much given, and
very apt by nature. She should likewise preserve them from utter destruction,
and perpetual slavery both of body and soul, and so effect a right princely
and most royal work, pleasing to God, profitable for all Christendom,
worthy of eternal praise, honor, and glory, and fitting well the greatness
and state of her princely Majesty, including therein the assured security,
prosperity, and welfare of her own kingdoms and subjects. Which done, they
presented their Articles unto her Majesty with all humility, beseeching God,
who is the king of

This humble petition, tending so much to the honor and glory of the most
magnificent and royal Queen and princess in the world, was with all
thankfulness received at their hands.

Thereupon the Queen willed them for that time to depart, and in the mean
while she assembled her counsel, to confer with them, what was to be done in
this so urgent a cause, and to have their advice touching the same. To
conclude, she found all her subjects generally addicted thereunto, saying, That
she might not by any means altogether The Queen takes counsel what to do
touching the low countries.
careless for procuring the delivery of the town of Calais unto the English
again, the which was lost by means of his wars; and on the other side he
caused the French to deliver many towns over unto the duke of Sauoy, and left
her in war, both against France and Scotland, without any assistance.

They showed likewise the unkind refusal by him made, of passage through the
Netherland countries, with munition, arms, and powder, which she as then had
caused Thomas Gresham, unto whom it was denied.

Further, That when her Majesty, by her ambassador the lord Vicont Montague,
desired the king of Spain to renew and confirm the ancient contracts made
between his father, the emperor Charles the fifth, and her predecessors, he
would by no means be drawn to yield thereunto.

That he had suffered the Inquisitors in Spain to persecute her poor
subjects with all cruelty and extremity, and commanded her ambassador out
of Spain, because of his Religion.

That his governor (the duke of Alua) in the Netherlands, had used all manner
of hostility

That he had sent an army into her Majesty's kingdom of Ireland, and with
colors flying invaded the said kingdom, upon a supposed gift thereof made
unto him by the Pope of Rome, which he thereby excused, intending also to
enterprise the like against the Realm of England, as it manifestly appeared by
the Jesuit Sanders letters, to that end dispersed abroad, and by the Jesuit
Creyghton, who was then a prisoner: and many other such like practices also
were discovered by the dealings of his ambassador Dom Bernardino de Mendosa in
England.

Besides these many forepassed injuries, the Counsel laid before her Majesty
the danger merum imperium, that is, full and absolute authority in the
Provinces of the Netherlands; how he would alter their Religion, break their
ancient privileges, and subject them wholly to his will and pleasure: which
done, out of his malicious heart and intent* he would easily invade England,
with the 1585
first depriving England of all trade of merchandise with the Netherlands, and
within the land procuring domestical dissension; and that therefore she was
not as then to let slip the present occasion, nor yet to attend until the
Netherlands were fully planted with Spaniards and Italians; for that the war
was not undertaken against the Netherlands, but with a further intent and
meaning to make a greater conquest.

On the other side, there was laid before her Majesty, what difficulties and
troubles might arise, by entering into war with the king of Spain: as first,
that thereby she should break the ancient contract between her and the king
of Spain, and that it would not be well thought on, nor by foreign princes
esteemed an honorable action, to aid and assist the subject

To these reasons aforesaid it was answered, that therein she should break no
contract nor league made with the house of Burgondie, for that thereby she was
bound to aid and assist the Netherlands, and to uphold them in their ancient
laws and privileges, and not to permit or suffer strange nations to plant and
settle themselves there, and so intrude themselves into the government: and
that if she let slip this fair occasion, and did not assist them, the
French might set foot therein: moreover, that she intended not to aid any
rebels against

These reasons and allegations thus propounded and answered, were communicated
with the aforesaid deputies for the Estates, who at that time made known unto
her Majesty, the estate and power of the Netherlands, and what contributions
the same were able to raise; as also what the charges of an offensive war
would be, and what by love and good government might be hoped for, and gotten
from such as were willing thereunto, so as they might be maintained and kept in
their freedoms, laws, and ancient privileges: for that it was What money
Holland had contributed in 9-years.
and hinder the traffic of the Netherlands: and therefore in times past these
causes especially 1585
not to suffer them to be invaded or governed by strangers; and that not only
between the princes of the said c^ntries, but also with the Estates of the
same, as perpetual friends and welwillers.

These things on both sides well weighed, debated, and considered, had moved
the Netherlands, once again to make a motion unto England, and likewise had
stirred England to heatken unto their request, and the rather, for that now by
means of the untimely death of their prudent protector the prince of Orange,
the loss of many towns and castles, and the refusal of aid to them made by
the king of France, by the procurement and secret practices of their enemies,
they were brought into a miserable and desperate estate: and therefore it was

The Queen of England was herewith not a little in mind perplexed and
troubled, being a matter that much concerned both her own person, and her
kingdoms and dominions,

The reasons why the Queen took not upon her the sovereignty and chief
command over Reasons why the Queen of England did not take upon her the
absolute government of the Netherlands.
the provinces of the Netherlands, for an inheritance to her, her heirs, and
successors, all wise men persuaded themselves to be these: first, that she was
a princess in years, past hope of having any children, and that she had not
any man within her kingdoms, fit in all respects to take upon him the command
and authority of so absolute a government, and to execute the same as it ought
to be done: that she was not mighty enough to rule over both places, because
she did not believe, nor could be persuaded, that the power and contribution
of the Netherlands was so great and so much as it was affirmed to be (whereas
for good considerations they made it not known to be so much as it was) but
to the contrary she of munition, ordnance, and other marshall furniture
therein: and that she should take seven 1585
always reserved, that the said town should continue (concerning the civil
government) under the jurisdiction of the Estates of the said provinces, and
not be burdened nor charged by the Queen with any thing whatsoever.

This being thus concluded, sir John Norris, that worthy gentleman, was
appointed to be general of these forces, for the relieuing of the town of
Antuerpe. The inhabitants of the same town that had fled from thence,
(being many merchants and others, as then remaining in the city of London)
did willingly and freely give the sum of ten thousand gulderns.

And after that, when the Queen could not be persuaded to take the absolute
sovereignty

1 That the Queen of England should send four thousand foot men, and four
hundred horse men into the low countries, to aid the same: but presently,
after it was agreed that she Aid of 5000 foot, and 1000 horsemen.
should send five thousand footmen, and a thousand horsemen, led by a
general by her thereunto appointed, which should be a man of authority,
quality, and respect, addicted to

2 For the repaiment whereof, the united provinces of the Netherlands, as well
in general The time of repaiment of the money disbursed.
as particular, should be bound (when it should please God of his mercy, by
her Majesty's help and assistance, to send them peace and quietness) to pay
all the money which her Majesty shall have disbursed for them, as well for
pressed money for the leuying and taking of them up, and transporting them over
the seas, as for their pay and entertainment, in this manner: that is, all the
sums of money that shall have been disbursed by her Majesty in the first
year, shall be paid again, within the compass of the first year next
ensuing after the peace, and the rest within four years then following, every
year one fourth part of the said sum,

3 And for the better assurance of the repaiment of the said money, it is
agreed, that within Flessingue and the Bryel given to the Queen in caution.
one month after the confirmation of the said contract, the town of
Flessingue, and the castle of Ramekins, in the island of Walchren, and the
town of Bryel, with two skonces thereunto belonging, in Holland, shall be
delivered over into the hands of such governors, for her use, as it shall
please her Majesty to appoint, to be kept by her garrisons, until such time
as her Majesty shall be fully satisfied and paid, within the city of London,
all such sums of money as she shall have disbursed for them: and if the
Estates think it good for the country, and profitable for the common good and
unity of the same, that her Majesty's soldiers

4 That the said towns and places so delivered unto her Majesty for her
security, shall be The towns shall be left furnished with ordnance, etc. as
they were found.
provided of ordnance, powder, and other munition fit for war, in such sort
and quantity, as the governor general for her said Majesty shall think
expedient and necessary, to defend and keep the said towns and places; upon
condition, that a just and true inucntorie shall be made thereof, that (when
time shall serve) the same may be redeliuered again in like order.

5 That the Estates shall retire their garrisons out of the said towns and forts
(excepting such Receiving in of English garrisons, but still holding their own
civil government.
persons of quality as dwell therein, and are appointed to govern in
politic and civil causes)

6 That neither the governor for the Queen, nor the soldiers of the said
garrisons, shall 1585
other of the Estates enemies, neither suffer it in any man, but to the
contrary shall let it, and They shall not have any conference or con spiracie
with the enemy, etc. The observing and keeping of privileges.
use all kind of hostility against them, in regard of the safety and
preservation of the said places.

7 That the said cautionarie towns and places, concerning policy,
jurisdiction, privileges, and freedoms, shall be governed according to their
general and particular contracts and unions, observing their own laws,
customs, and magistrates, without imposition of any manner of taxes, imposts,
or contributions, on her Majesty behalf, or for the soldiers.

8 That the English soldiers of the said garrisons, shall be bound to pay
the imposts and The English soldiers must pay impost and excise.


9 And that the inhabitants of the towns aforesaid may not be ouercharged by
the soldiers Provision for discipline and pay to be made by the Queen.
of the garrisons, her Majesty shall take order for their pay, and all good
discipline: and that the said inhabitants shall not in any wise be molested
and troubled, for the accomplishing of any part of the contract, which is to
be observed on the Estates behalf, so they do that which in duty belongs
unto them to do.

10 That when her Majesty, or her successors, shall be satisfied, contented,
and paid, all Delivering of the towns again when the money is paid.
the money by her disbursed, the said towns and forts with all their ordinance
and munition, shall be delivered again into the hands of the Estates, without
any exception or denial, and

11 That the general and the governor of her Majesty's garrisons, shall be
sworn to be An oath of fidelity to be made by the soldiers.
true and faithful unto her Majesty, and to the Estates in general, for the
safe keeping and defending of the said towns, places, and dependances, and for
the maintenance of the true christian religion, as it is now at this present
used and exercised in England, and the united Netherlands and to observe and
cause to be observed all points of this contract, concerning them: and that the
officers, captains, and common soldiers shall take the like oath of fidelity
to her Majesty, and to the general Estates of the said united provinces, as
also to be obedient

12 That the soldiers being in the field shall be lodged and victualed at
reasonable prices, Provision for the field.
without any imposition to be taken for that which is to be eaten, and other
necessaries, but shall in all things be entreated like other of the Estates
soldiers.

13 That the governors of the said towns shall be paid their entertainment
every month, Monthly payment.
which money her Majesty shall cause to be brought unto the same towns: and
that the number of the soldiers shall not be greater than the number of the
garrisons were six months before the delivering over of the said towns: and
it shall not be thought any wrong, if it happen that the said pay be
sometimes brought eight or ten days after the time

14 That the governors and soldiers of the garrisons of the said towns,
shall have the The soldiers shall have free exercise of religion.
free exercise of religion, as it is now used in England, and to that end in
every of the said towns they shall have a church appointed for them.

15 That the said garrisons shall be used as other garrisons that have lien
there before them Order for victuals.
have been, as well for their lodgings as victuals: and the Estates shall take
order, that they shall have victuals at as reasonable prices as the inhabitants
of the said towns have, and shall have powder, march, and bullets in like
quantity as the garrisons before them have heretofore had, and as other
soldiers in other garrisons usually have.

16 That it shall be lawful for her Majesty (besides the governor general
that shall be Entrance and permission to fit in the counsel of Estate.
good, and as the cause shall require. And that the two governors of the
towns that 1585
of Estate at any time, when they shall think it most convenient and
necessary, for any matter of importance, touching the service of her Majesty,
and the benefit of the united Provinces, and yet shall not be accounted nor
held for any members of the said counsel of Estate.

17 That the governor aforesaid, with the counsel of Estate, shall have power
and The authority of the governor general.
authority to redress all disorders and abuses committed in the Imposts, and
to cut off all excessive fees of the officers, and to see that the moneys
proceeding thereof be employed to the most profit and commodity of the
country, for the better resistance of the enemy, both by water and by land.

18 That the said governor general, with the counsel of Estate, shall
reform the Reformation of the Mint.
disorders in the mynts of the said united Provinces of the Netherlands, and
reduce them to a convenient number, and that they shall not exchange the
moneys current in those countries, or any others, thereby to inhaunce or raise
the values thereof, without the consent of her Majesty, or her governor.

19 That her Majesty, or the general governor of her forces aforesaid, with
the counsel Prouiso for public authority and martial discipline.
of Estate, shall take order for the reestablishment and restoring of public
authority, as also the upholding and observing of martial discipline, the
which at this time are both much decayed, by reason of the equal powers and
authorities of governors, and multitudes, or confusion of counsels.

20 That her said governor general, with the counsel of Estate, shall have
the oversight The governor shall have oversight of all things without altering
religion or privileges.
and ordering of all things concerning the common utility and welfare of the
land: provided always, that they shall not take upon them to alter any thing
in the aforesaid true Christian religion, neither in the laws, privileges,
customs, freedoms, statutes, nor ordinances of the said Estates, provinces,
members, towns, colleges, or inhabitants of the same in general or
particular.

21 That neither the Estates general nor particular, shall have any dealing
with the enemy, No compact to be made with the enemy without consent of her
Majesty etc.
without the knowledge and consent of her Majesty: nor yet with any foreign
prince or potentate, without her knowledge, or the consent of her governor
general aforesaid.

22 That her said Majesty likewise shall not deal with the king of Spain,
nor yet with any other enemy to the Estates, concerning any cause or matter
that touches the united Provinces The Queen shall make no treaty but by
consent.
in general or in particular, without the advice and consent of the general
Estates, lawfully called thereunto.

23 That the raising and paying of new forces, which are to be raised for the
defense of the Taking up of new soldiers, and paying the^, to be done by the
governor etc.
land, shall be done by the said governor general, and the counsel of
estate, with the consent of the general Estates.

24 That at the death or alteration of any provincial governors, or of
frontier towns, the Estates or provinces where any such alteration happens,
shall nominate two or three To change or choose new governors.
sufficient persons, well addicted to the religion, whereof the governor
general aforesaid, and

25 That as often as her Majesty, for her defense and security, shall send
any ships The authority of the admiral of England.
of war to sea, if the enemy send any fleet into the narrow seas, between
France and England, or between England and the Netherlands, the Estates shall
send forth as many ships to sea, as her Majesty shall then do, so they
exceed not in number and charge the limited number, in times past presented
in Anno 1584, unto the prince of O^nge by M. Dyer, or more, as the necessity,
and the Estates uttermost means may reach unto, which shall join with her
Majesty's said fleet, and be under the command and appointment of the
admiral of England; with this prouiso, that whatsoever shall be gotten or won
by that fleet, shall be equally divided, according to the charges and expenses
disbursed

26 That her Majesty's ships being at sea, shall always have free egresse
and regresse Free use of the havens on both parts.
into the havens and streams within the said Netherlands, and there be
victualled at a reasonable price: and that the ships of war belonging to the
Netherlands, shall like wise enjoy 1585
her Majesty's dominions.

27 That the ordering and taking up of all controversies and contentions which
may To end all questions and controversies.
fall out and happen between any of the united Provinces, or any towns, that
cannot be ended by ordinary course of justice, shall be sent unto her Majesty
or to her governor general, to take order therein, with the aforesaid
counsel of Estate, within the united Provinces.

28 That it shall be lawful for her Majesty's subjects to carry their horses
(which they Free passage for horses.
shall buy in the said countries of the Netherlands) over into England, paying
the ordinary customs and charges for the same, upon condition, that they
shall not carry them

29 That the English soldiers that are desirous to go over into England,
shall pass freely, The Englishmen may pass over with the generals pasport
alone.
without any other pasport than the generals, signed and sealed with his hand;
conditionally, that the number of the Englishmen be complete, and that the
Estates be not compelled to any further charges, for taking up and transporting
of new soldiers in place of them that are gone away.

30 That the governor general, chief commanders, colonels, captains,
officers, and The commanders oaths.
other her Majesty's soldiers, shall take the accustomed oath (as aforesaid)
to the Estates of the same Provinces, always excepting the homage and fealty
by them due unto her Majesty. This contract was in this form made and
concluded at Nonesuch upon the tenth of

In memory of this contract, the Zeelanders caused certain counters to be
made, having stamped on the one side thereof the arms of Zeeland, being a Lion
rising out of the waves of the sea, with this inscription, L^ctor and emergo,
158^. On the other side was the arms of the towns, with this inscription,
Authore Deo, fauente Regina, that is, The Zeelands Lion clymeth out of the
water by Gods power and her Majesty's aid. And according to the said contract,
there were certain soldiers sent over, under the command of Sir John Norris,
and others.

At this time the Queen of England caused a book to be printed, both in
English A declaration in print made by the Queen of England.
and in French, therein showing the reasons that had moved her, to aid,
assist, and protect

To the same declaration was added the Queens answer, unto two several
slanders imposed upon her, and published by a certain famous libell, written
in Italian: The first, for unthankfulness showed by her to the king of Spain,
who (as the author reports) in her sister Queen Mary's time, had saved her
life: The second, that she had sought to procure certain persons to kill the
prince of Parma, and that two men were executed for the same. To the first the
Queen said, That her faith and fidelity was never in any such question in her
sisters time, and much less, that ever any sentence of death was pronounced
against Touching the prince of Parma, she said, That she had no reason to be
more enemy to 1585
good conceit of him, and never sought any other course against him, and that
every man of judgment might well conceive, that if she should practice his
death by any sinister means, yet the troubles in those countries could not
thereby be ended, with many other reasons to that purpose.

According to the contract aforesaid, upon the nine and twentieth of October
1585, the Estates caused the earl of Hohenlo in their behalfes, and in the
name of prince Maurice (the lord thereof) to deliver the town of Flessingue
and the castle of Ramekins to Sir Philip Sidney, knight, to the use and behoof
of the Queen of England, who presently put an English garrison into the same,
and was himself made governor thereof. The Thomas Cecile, knight, governor
thereof for her Majesty, where he took his oath in the towne-house, in the
presence of the said earl of Hohenlo, and the magistrates of the same town.

Prince Maurice himself likewise (as marquess of the towns of Campuere and
Flessingue) Grave Maurice letter to the Queen, for consent of delivering
Flessingue into her hands.
by advice of Loise de Coligni, princess Dowager of Orange, the lords of his
blood, and others his friends and servants, wrote unto the ambassador of
England (as then M. Dauyson) touching the delivering over of Flessingue unto
her Majesty, saying, That he thanked God for the fore-passed contract made
between the Queen of England, and William of Nassau by that their
protestation avouched: and so he, with the princess, the children, and the
whole house of Nassau, desiring nothing more in this world, than the favor,
good will, and assistance of her Majesty, recommended themselves most humbly
unto her protection; praying the ambassador to recommend them likewise to the
earl of Leicester, desiring him to use all the means he could (if it pleased
almighty God to grant it) that some one of great quality should fall
prisoner into his hands, that his brother, the prince of Orange, and earl of
Buren etc. might be exchanged and set at liberty, and that he would be pleased
to be a means therein. As also, that if any new soldiers were to be raised
for her Majesty's, or the countries service, that those of the house of Anno
1559, between France and Spain.

And whereas the principal inheritance that belonged unto him and his brother,
prince Frederick Hendericke, lay in the earldom of Burgundy, and that there
might be some hope in time to recover the same into their hands, he besought
her Majesty to aid and assist them, with her favor and authority, unto the
French king and the Switzers, bordering 1585
for the recovery of the same, as occasion should serve.

And further, as it was manifestly known, what great loss of lands and
possessions, the said house of Nassau had sustained and endured by the king of
Spanies, and his adherents means, he besought her Majesty to interpose her
authority (good occasion being offered) that they might be recompensed
(being now almost deprived of all their inheritance) with some possessions and
lands, of the like nature unto those which they had lost.

And if it should so fall out (as the said prince Maurice and the princess in
heart desired) that her Majesty would be pleased to take the chief
soueraignetie and government

Also if it pleased her Majesty to employ any men of honor and quality of
the country of Germany in her service, he besought her to prefer Grave John
van Nassau, as one well affected to do her Majesty any service whatsoever,
and one that always had been true and faithful unto those countries, and
whose zeal unto religion, wisdom, and experience, was known unto all men.

Lastly, he besought her Majesty to be pleased to cause some act to be drawn
and made, Loise de Coligni and Maurice de Nassau.

And before the coming over of the earl of Leicester, the general Estates
gave unto prince Maurice of Nassau a commission for the government, captain
generals, and admirals place of Holland, Zeeland, and Friseland, with due
respect to be had unto the governor general which her Majesty should send
over. They likewise ordained and Maurice, which should be used in all
commissions and executions of things that should pass out of the Courts of
Holland, Zeeland, and Friseland, in the same manner as follows: Maurice,
prince of Orange, earl of Nassau, Catzenellebourg, Vianden, Dietz, etc.
marquess of Campuere and Flessingue, baron of S. Vijt, Doesbourg, of the town
of Grave, and of the land of Guycke, etc. governor, captain general, and
admiral of Holland, Zeeland, and Friseland, and since that time there was
added thereunto the earldom of Moeurs, and others.

The nineteenth of December, Robert lord Dudley, baron of Denbigh, and earl of
Leicester, son to John lord Dudley, duke of Northumberland, appointed by the
Queen

After the loss of Antuerpe, the Seignior of Saint Aldegonde (who had been
bourgomaster of the said town, and a chief actor in the treaty with the
prince of Parma for the yielding of the town) was fallen into disgrace with
the Estates of the united provinces of the Netherlands, upon the false
suggestions (as he pretended) of his enemies,

A Letter of advice written by the Seignior of Saint Aldegonde, 1585

MY good cousin, I doubt not but you are informed of the particularities of the
yielding up of the town of Antuerpe, and how that since mine enemies (having
sought by false and slanderous suggestions, to blame me, and to wrong mine
honor) have gotten so great credit with the Estates which govern there, as
they have written plainly unto me, that they would not suffer me to remain in
the united provinces, I have made many complaints to the Estates of Zeeland,
but it has auailed me nothing, so as I am resolved to leave the country,

And on the other side, I see in my example, as in a clear glass, that such
as govern the Crisis, the good or bad conduct whereof will be of great
importance, and may qualify the last event.

I would they would take example of the town of Antuerpe, and others, which
have run and with great discretion. But there will always some difficulties
arise, the which (it 1585
We have seen it in the wars of Holland, that they have attempted it twice
or thrice without success, and yet we have not seen the public affairs of
the Commonwealth run to wrack and confusion: for when as they discovered the
shelfe, they presently turned away the course of their ship. But there was a
good and a wise pylote, who governed the helm, and knew well enough how to fit
the sails to the violence of the wind. Having none such now, I know not (if
having once let slip a cable) how they shall recover it again, but that the
storm will soon ouerset the ship, even in an instant. It is therefore a
very difficult and hard thing to give any counsel or advice in this case, and
yet there must be an absolute resolution therein: For you must undoubtedly
expect, to have all the burden and extremity of the wars to fall upon you
in Dulce bellum inexpertis. Now it is quite contrary: For on their side, the
late examples of clemency and humanity which has been showed to many
conquered towns and castles, dazell the eyes; the courtesy and discretion of
the General wins the hearts and minds of all men; the severity and
discipline used against the common soldiers, takes away all jealousy and
distrust. On our side, I know not if we have a commander, if the governors
have any shadow of authority and command, the soldiers and men of war any
kind of obedience, or the common people any zeal to Religion, or to liberty:
war is hateful unto them, yet what hope prince Maurice does give: yet I
believe, that want of experience will daily 1585
to be hoped for from the English; if they be masters, you shall have an
alteration of the people; if they be not, you shall reap small profit. We
have one point yet remaining, which does serve as a sacred anchor, to be our
stay even in the greatest calamities, which is, that God will preserve and
defend his Church in the midst of all storms, whereof I am assured. But the
question is, by what means? It may be his pleasure will be to try it under
the yoke of bondage and persecution: it may be he will preserve it by the hand
of a mighty Cyrus, an Artaxerxes, or an Alexander: it may be he will
disperse them into the four corners of the world, and take the light from
among them, that have not showed themselves worthy of it. We know, that the
church of God is not tied or limited Go unto Silo, and see what I have done,
says he: And his Apostle says, If he has not spared the natural branches,
do you think he will spare you: Wherefore we must not in any case rely upon
bare words, and cry, The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, or the
children of Abraham, and the race of Israel: for God can out of stones raise up
children to Abraham, and there are none but the children of promise that are
accounted for seed. I am therefore of advice, that we should every one of us
humble our selves under the Lords hand, that we should hear his word
diligently and sincerely, and that we should examine carefully his great power
and virtue; the which notwithstanding we see more often exercised by 1585
doubt, almighty God is as powerful to bend the hearts of kings and princes
to mercy unto their subjects, and to make them do that which they had never
before pretended, as he is to give victory and conquest unto them, that
without any appearance of means (having no special revelation, nor warrant)
attempt war against great and mighty kings and potentates: but he does it
much more commonly: for in persuall of all the ancient hystories of
fore-passed ages, you shall find a thousand examples of the one, and scarce one
or two of the other. Jacob meeting with his brother, relied upon this support,
and sped very well. Sending his children afterward into the land of Egypt,
he gave them no other armor but this. His children being in bondage under the
cruelty of Pharac, felt the omnipotent hand of God stretched forth, turning
the kings and the Egyptians hearts, sometimes to love, sometimes to hatred, now
to cruelty, and then to mercy; sometimes to chase them away, and then again
to stay them. And I pray you by what means or miracle did the Israelites
obtain health and prosperity from king Nab^cadnezzar, and afterward from the
kings of Persia, from king Alexander, and in the end from Pompey and the
Romans, by the way of arms? Nay contrariwise, their continuance in arms had
always drawn them into misery and bondage, and in the end quite ruined and
spoiled their goodly city Jerusalem, utterly defaced the memory of the
Sanctuary, and dispersed the people into all the corners of the earth, like
dust. And thereunto it is referred, when as the holy Prophets of God do exhort
us so often to attend world by arms, and is drunk with the blood of Martyrs.
An accord has not always 1585
own bowels have felt it, and the examples of all ages and nations do
witness it: But in the end, when the Impostume is ripe, it must be then
broken. But some will say unto me, that they fear too great inconveniences may
arise by these treaties of peace; I confess it, and (without doubt) they are
exceedingly to be feared, yet a wise man must (with due deliberation) consider
of the inconveniences on either side, and where there is greatest likelihood of
remedy and help. If they hope to obtain victory against the enemy by
arms, to preserve the liberty, laws, and privileges of the country, to
defend the true Religion, to warrant the Church of God from oppression and
ruin; in the name of God let us resolve to take arms, but let us undertake it
courageously and cheerfully, and employ both our hearts and hands therein. But
on the other side, if our forces accord, and to expressly forbid, that no man
should talk privately thereon; but in the 1585
consult alone of that business, and manage it with all the wisdom and
discretion they could. And so it happened, that the magistrate, after the defeat
of Coesteins dike, seeing how we were distressed for victuals, munition, and
other necessaries, did make the first motion: but this business was handled
private in counsel, with great alterations for a months space, before it was
vented to the multitude, the which did avail us much for the accord: but the
error was, that it was not propounded, until we were so bare of victuals and
other means, as what hard conditions soever the enemy had offered us, we must
have been forced to accept them. If happily we had spoken before we had tried
the fortune of the fight, we should either have obtained a more easy and
favorable Quid far recusent, quid valiant humeri, and govern the affairs
of our country with wisdom and discretion, and not to stand upon popular
opinions. My meaning is not to give you counsel herein, for that were
presumption and rashness; but falling upon this subject, I thought good to
discourse on both sides, as it comes often into my mind. I would I were a fit
man to serve my country, either for matter of counsel, or action, either in
war or peace. But seeing that my misfortune will not permit it, yet it has
been some ease and comfort unto me, to discharge my thoughts in the bosom of
my friend, whom I hold to be wife, circumspect, and zealous to true Religion
and the good of his country. If there

Ph. de Marnix.

This Summer there were many attempts made against Groaning, and the Hollanders
and they of West-Friseland (meaning to bring it to extremity) maintained and
kept certain ships of war continually in the river of Ems, for that they
of the town of Groaning fetched their victuals and all other their provision
from the town of Embden,

The Estates ships of war lying upon the river of Ems, would not suffer any
ships to pass up to Embden: whereupon the earl and the town of Embden sent
unto the admiral of the fleet, whose name was captain Knoop, and also to the
Estates of Holland and West-Friseland, complaining of the great wrong and
injury that was offered unto them: but finding no redress thereof, but only
good words and many delays, Knoop escaping hardly into another ship: the
admiral of Embden was forced to cut down her maine mast, and 1585
work of God, the merchants ships got free passage up the river, to go up
unto the town of Embden, and their ships of war with them, who (by
fortune) tocke a gentleman of Embden, called Onne van Ewesten, prisoner, who
served under the Estates, and carried him with them to Embden: which tempest
(through the providence of Almighty God) prevented a great quarrel, which
otherwise had fallen out betwixt the Estates and the town of Embden: yet the
Summer following, the Estates sent their ships thither again, and stayed the
coming of the Embden ships, as they had done before; but upon the four and
twentieth of June there was an agreement made, by the means of certain
Englishmen, who were dealers in it: and yet many times after they fell

ELIZABETHA ANGLIAE REGINA
Elizabeth, Queen of England, France and Ireland, Defendresse 1585
of the Catholic Faith, and Protectrix of the liberty of the united
Provinces of the Netherlands.
When God by grace had me advanced unto my regal state,
(Which till this time I ruled have in peace most fortunate)
To serve him, and my subjects good to seek, it was my care:
And those that forced were to fly by means of bloody war,
Against them by Spaniards made, I did most willingly relieve,
And with a fervent zeal to them all aid and comfort give,
And by what means I could devise, my mind I always bent,
Their imminent decay and danger great for to prevent.
And to that end protectrix of their country I became,
Defending them with all my power (to my eternal fame)
Wherein no fear of Spanish force ere could my courage quail,
Nor in my resolution good, make me in ought to fail.

THE XIII. BOOK. 1585

The Argument.
THe Queen of England having taken upon her the protection of the united
provinces, sent the earl of Leicester to be her Lieutenant. They receive him
with pomp, and acknowledge him for governor. The Spaniards prosper in
Friseland. Colonel Schencke ouerrunnes the country of Westphalia. Grave
besieged and yielded to the Spaniard. Jar betwixt the Estates and the earl
of Leicester, who is discontented, and they discontented with him. Nuys
besieged by the Spaniard, and taken by assault, whilst Schencke. The king of
Spain makes a counterfeit show to desire peace with England. Deputies on
either side at Bourbroue, who do nothing, whilst the Spanish fleet advanced.
Prince Maurice takes his place in the government after the earl of Leicester
retreat. The Spanish fleet think to invade England, and is dispersed.
Geertruydenbergh sold to the Spaniards by the soldiers that were mutined
without cause. The death of Colonel Schencke

ACcording to the accord made betwixt the high and mighty princess, Elizabeth
Queen of England, and the Estates of the united provinces of the Netherlands,
her Majesty se^ certain troops of horse and foot, into the countries of
Holland and Zeeland, under the command of sir John Norris knight, a gallant
soldier (who had long done service to the said Estates, and to the prince of
Orange) who came to the rendez vous Verdugo for the Spaniard long before: the
earl of Moeurs hearing that Colonel Taxis was gone forth the day before, made
haste to besiege it, and to batter it, so as the besieged seeing no hope of
succors, and fearing to be taken by assault, they yielded Isselloort yielded
to the Estates.
up the fort by composition, to depart with their lives and goods. Although
this siege was not without the loss of some few men, yet the earl of Moeurs
and the English were so encouraged, as passing the river of Rhin, they went to
besi^ge the fort of Berchschooft in the higher Betuwe, in the which captain
Turc commanded for the prince of Parma: who notwithstanding

Colonel Schencke had at that time an enterprise upon the town of Nymeghen, by
an intelligence 1585
rampar. This man had in time dug a hollow passage under the rampar, which
went from the foot of the said tower unto the street, and had so undermined the
wall of the said tower within, having set up the stones again one upon
another, without cyment or mortar, as with a blow with ones foot they might
thrust it down, and thereby have a free passage into the town: for to finish
this enterprise, Schencke drew forth certain companies out of the garrisons of
Venloo, Guelder, Wachtendonc, Grave, and Blyenbeek, with the which he marched
secretly the eight and twentieth of September, in the night: but the night
before, this bourger (having let slip certain words) was apprehended, with
his son, who upon the circumstances of the said speeches, and his answer unto
the interrogatories, was put to the Schencke being near with his troops,
having no sign from his man, and being ignorant what place to go to, fearing
the matter was discovered, he retired. The earl of Moeurs seeing that this
enterprise had failed, resolved to have the town by force, and planted his
camp in the village of Bendt right against it, upon the other bank of the
river of Wahal, where he did build a mighty fort, the which since was called
Knodsenborch: and placing certain ships of war in the river betwixt the
town and the fort, to stop the passage from this fort (where he had planted
five or six pieces of ordnance) he battred the town at random, and shot
fiery bullets into it to burn the houses, but they were suddenly quenched,
so as there was not above two houses burnt.

In the mean time the garrison of Nuys did nothing but hunt after booty and
spoil, running even unto the gates of Cologne, carrying from thence oxen,
kyne, and other cattle, the which did so incense the duke of Cleues, upon
whose country (being a neuter) they were daily running (for that they could
not go into the diocese of Cologne, but they must needs pass through the
duchy of Iuilliers, of Berghe, or the county of Marck, which are his) as he
made a proclamation throughout all his territories, giving all them of his
countries free liberty to set upon and spoil the garrison of Nuys,
wheresoever they should encounter them in his countries, the which did somewhat
restrain the courses of the said garrison.

The Hans towns of the east country, fearing that by this alliance betwixt
the Queen of England, and the Estates of the united provinces of the
Netherlands, their navigations into

I believe you are not ignorant of the dislike and breach betwixt us and the
king of Spain; what will ensue we cannot yet judge: if matters tend to a
peace, we will not reject you, as our The Queen of Englands letters to the
towns of the east countries.
ancient allies; but if it grows to a war, you shall understand (as men of
judgment may well conceive) that we ought not to suffer our enemies to be
relieved with victuals, nor fortified with munition of war: wherefore you may
consider, that you ought not to require any thing of us that may turn to our
prejudice and disa^uantage. But touching all other sorts of merchandise,
whereby they of Spain or Portugal may not be aided with victuals and munition

About that time Cont Charles Mansfeldt marched out of the country of
Rauesteyn, with the chief regiment of Spaniards, being four thousand strong,
all old soldiers, and passed over the river of Meuse into Bommels Weerd, which
is a rich island betwixt the rivers of Wahal and Meuse, the which had not of a
long time seen any enemy. The Estates being advertised hereof, were at the
first somewhat troubled, but having invested the river with their ships round
about the island, the earl was very much perplexed, fearing to be shut up: in
the mean time the prince of Parma being returned from Antuerpe to Brussels
Mansfeldt was, went to horseback, with fourteen of fifteen post horses
only, and came to Boisleduc to succor him. This, island which may be easily
drowned, is a claie soil, and very myerie when it raines. The earl of Hohenlo
having environed the whole 1585
manner covered all over with water: the Spaniards retired unto the other side
of the river of Meuse, to a castle highly seated, called Empel, where they
might preserve themselves from the inundation, from the frost, and from the
winds; besides, they endured much poverty and famine, for they were in a
manner besieged by the waters, and by the Estates ships which Hohenlo had
caused to enter into the drowned land, being separated from the rest of the
prince of Parma his army, the which lay on the other side of Boisleduc, so as
they grew to despair, having continued there four days in great misery, by
reason of the cold; and if the weather had not changed, it was likely that all
this troop (being four thousand of the oldest and best soldiers, Spaniards,
that the king of Spain had in all those countries) had been Hohenlo finding
this sudden change in good time, fearing his ships should want water (as
without doubt they had) and so not be able to retire them; yea he had been in
danger (the Spaniard being six times stronger than he) to have been lost
there with all his men: whereupon he weighed anchor and went away. His ships
were no sooner retired, but the weather changed, and it began to thawe, so as
the towns thereabouts, especially Boisleduc, did help to retire the Spaniards
from the place were they were, with boats and barks, being half starued with
hunger and cold; whereof many died afterward, and some had their limbs so
benumbed and frozen, as they fell off, and some

The prince of Parma thanked them of Boisleduc for their readiness to relieve
his Spaniards: he gave unto the poor of the town fourscore fat oxen, and to
the town it self a gilt cup.

The earl of Moeurs was still lodged before the town of Nymeghen, for by
reason of the waters the lord of Hautepenne had no means to dislodge him; but
the fourth day of November, the waters being fallen, he caused certain barks
to be made ready at Nymeghen, to pass his troops to the other side of the
river into the Betuwe, causing them to pass along the river toward Bomel,
which put the Hollanders ships in great fear, and made them to fly,
Hautepenne had good means to pass over six thousand choice men, Spaniards,
Wallons, Germans, Italians, Burguignons, and Albanois: the English knowing
them to be so near, before they retired, they set fire on the church of
Lents, as they had done the night before on a gentleman's house, whereas the
earl of Moeurs had lodged: they did the like unto the church of Oosterholt,
whereas they had a far greater fort than that of Knotsenbourg. The lord of
Hautepen meaning to besiege it, caused it to be invested the night of his
arrival, but approaching near, they found that the English men had abandoned
it with six pieces of artillery, and great store of victuals and munition for
war in it. The lord of Hautepenne hearing that they were retired, sent part
of his men before the castle of Dornick: they of the garrison burnt the bridge
themselves: yet the Spaniards gave them so furious a

The sixteenth day of December, the lord of Hautepenne brought his troops to
the other side of the river of Wahal, and went to besiege the castle of
Duekenbourg, the which he won: the next day the English men which were in the
castle of Berckshooft, being terrified with the flight of their companions out
of the Betuwe, they in like manner left the place the nineteenth day of
December: the same day the Spaniards took the castle of Hoemen upon the Meuse;
from thence they approached by little and little toward the town of

On the twentieth day of the same month of December, the soldiers of the
garrison of Nuys surprised the strong castle of Grimmelyckhuysen, which was
then held and Hambach for the bishop of Cologne, whereas they slew some 1585
of the soldiers of the garrison, and kept the rest prisoners: and thus they
made war against the bishop and diocese of Cologne.

The prince of Parma being at the same time in the co^ntrie of Brabant with
his Spaniards, thought to have put in practice and executed some secret
designs which he had upon the Cloender, Rogghenhill, and Geertruydenbergh, by
reason of the hard frosts, but they took no effect.

Robert Dudley Earl of Leicester, Lieutenant and Captain 1586
General for the Queen of England, Protectrix of the united Provinces of the
Netherlands.
ROBERTUS DVDLEVS COMES L^YCESTER GVB: BELL:


My Princess, that Protectrix was of the united lands,
Advancing me to high estate, did put into my hands
The rule and government thereof, the which (though not long time)
I managed, unto my power, but in the very prime,
My government it was so bad, and found so full of trouble,
That it did not their griefs decrease, but rather made them double.
So that in fine, suspicion grown twixt me and them, I left
The country, and in England was of vital breath bereft.
THe Earl of Leicester, according to the agreement made betwixt the Queen 1586
to Dordrecht in Holland, accompanied by many earls, barons, and other great
personages of England, he was received by the magistrates, council, and
bourgers of that town with great state. And the 2 of January 1586, he parted
from thence to go to the Hage, where he was in like sort very honorably
received by the general Estates, with all good reception and shows of joy for
his coming: and on the 17 of the month, after many ceremonies, he was accepted
for governor of the said countries, The earl of Leicester acknowledged
governor general.
and sworn to maintain, defend and preserve them, against the oppressions of
the Spaniards. And in like manner, the Estates did swear unto her Majesty and
to him (as her lieutenant) the conditions and agreement that was concluded
betwixt them: which done, the said Estates made

At his reception to the government, doctor Leoninus chancellor of Guelderland
made an oration, saying, that the general Estates of the united Netherlands,
having had so great assurance of the Queens Majesty's, and his excellencies
honorable disposition, and favors unto Charles the fifth) by the governors
general, according to the lawful customs of the provinces. Understanding
that out of the revenues of the said provinces, the governors, officers, and
rent-masters should be paid their duties and fees, according to the ancient
manner, and that the said provinces, towns, and members of the same should be
maintained in all their ancient privileges, laws, and customs, as it should

And further that all the united Provinces were agreed, and had consented, that
1586.
the conuoye money, and imposts, raised upon merchandise, coming in and going
Signed. C. Aertsens.

According to this agreement the Earl of Leicester took the government upon
him, and thereupon the States, Officers, Provincial Governors, Coronels,
Captains and Soldiars took their oaths unto him, wherein Prince Maurice, and
the Earl of Hohenlo and other captains used all the means the could to bring
the soldiars thereunto, being accustomed in such accidents to have money given
them for a reward. The states upon the Earl of Leceisters acceptance of the
government, had drawn a certain instruction, or order of the Council of
Estate, which should aid and assist him in the The Earl of Leicester refuses
all instructions.
said government, the contents whereof were how the affairs of Estate and
others touching the government of the Netherlands, ought to be lawfully
executed with the governor before him. These things being imparted to the
Queen, she was much moved 1586
The Queen of England offended with the states for (...) the Earl of
Leicester the government.
then she was willing to undertake. Whereupon she presently sent Sir Thomas
Hennage her Vice-chamberlaine, and one of her privy council into Holland,
with letters dated the 13 of February, finding fault that the Earl of
Leicester had taken the absolute government of the Low Countries upon him,
which she thought very strange, in regard that she her self had refused to
accept it, and now to give that unto her vassaile and servant, which she had
refused, and that without her consent, she thought they offered her great
wrong and indignity, as if she had not discretion enough of her self, to
know what she were best to take or leave; saying amongst other things, that it
was clean contrary to the declaration she had made and put forth in Print,
wherein she

This letter gave the Estates great cause of suspicion, and therefore being in
Amsterdam, they made answer thereunto by letters dated the 25. of March, with
all humility, excusing the action, and protesting that there was no meaning in
them, thereby to charge or bind her Majesty any further-then the contract
lead her unto: but that the necessity of the country required to have this
authority given to one, for that it was better to have one governor then two:
and in regard of her Majesty, they had rather [Absolute] being put in, to
distinguish his government from others, that were put in but by prouiso, and
bound to instructions, as also to procure more obedience and care in the
people, for the maintaining of marshall discipline, furthering of the
contributions, and better execution of his commissions, and not to give his
Excellency the sovereignty therein following the examples of the Romans and
others, that it was also done, to let and break of certain enterprises of the
enemy, as also to comfort and stir up the hearts of the distressed people,
and that the recalling thereof would breed great confusion, assuring her that
it was not any thing contrary Thomas Henn^ge.

Sir Thomas Hennage being returned into England, and having made report of his
embassage, the Queen made answer by letters dated the one and twenty of June
1586. to deliver the money over into his hands, and to augment their
contributions, giving 1586.


With this authority, the Earl of Leicester was instauled in his government,
and the contributions of the country, delivered into his hands, amounting unto
the yearly value of four and twenty hundred thousand gilders and above,
besides the connoy money, the profits of the admiralty, and her Majesty's aid,
his own intertainement A proclamation made by the Earl of Lecester for
marshall discipline, and for the prohibiting of trafick with the enemy etc.
Jacques Ringoult (a man very familier with the Earl of Lecester and the only
inuentor of the said proclamation) had gotten by an extraordinary

This proclamation and commission much disliked the Estates, and moved them to
complain against it. At that time likewise it was put in practice, (and hoped
to be effected) The Earl of Lecester sought to force the seafareing men to buy
passeports, and to contribute something to the wars.
prescribe and give laws, as Lords of the sea, how, and whether men should
traficke: which law being set down, the Earl of Leicester, thought to
compel all sailors and sea-faring-men, to come and buy passe-ports, or saffe
conducts of him, thereby to have liberty, to deal freely in every place,
contributing some thing to the wars. But when many letters of complaint
concerning the same were sent into England. The Noble Council of Estate,
esteemed it a very hard matter for to bring the French, Scotts, Danes and
East-countrie-men there unto, and thereupon the contribution began to be
behinde-hand, and the proclamation standing

The five and twenty day of July the Earl of Leicester, being in Vtrecht made
an act 1586.
to be principal in that office, the Earl of Niewenar, and Menes governor of
Gelderland, Zutphen, and Vtrecht, with authority to sit in the council of
Estate: for the second man, he appointed Master Henry Killegray, one of the
receivers of her Majesty's Exchequer in England, and a Councelor of Estate in
the low countries: the third person was Reynardt de Aeswin Lord of Barkelo, and
for tresorer Jacques Reingoult, Lord of Canwenbergh, and for commissioners,
Sebastian Loose, Iosse Teylink, and Master Paul Buys. The Receivers general,
the Treasuror for the wars, the Clarke, nor the Vssher being not named, but
blankes left, to put in their names, one Danell Burgrate being appointed chief
secretary, with free liberty to go into the Council of Estate, and there to
have audience.

After the contract and union made by the Netherlands with the Queen was past
and agreed upon, the King of Spain caused all the Englishmen through all his
dominions, The King of Spain arested the Englishmen in Spain.
to be arrested and their ships and goods confiscate, using them most
rygorously, whereupon many of them became men of war, having commissions,
from the Queen, for that they might not otherwise do it in regard that as
then there was no open war proclaimed with Spain, who being at sea made
good use of the said arrest in Spain, for that all ships going or coming
Westward, that they could come by, under that pretense, were taken and made
prize, and at that time the Netherlanders could hardly deal or traficke into
Spain, Portingall, The Englishmen of war take the Neitherlanders at sea, and
make them prizes.
goods that were in them was delivered into the hands of them that took them,
(and if it were such wares as would not keep long, they had authority to sell
them,) giving security for restitution thereof, if the said goods were not
found to be good prize.

In the beginning of this winter in January, Taxis Lieutenant to Verdugo
Governor in Friseland for the King of Spain, gathered together the garrisons
thereaboutes, and entered into Westergoe, where having found means and
opportunity for to pass

In his retreat he met with some pesants armed, whom he defeated, whereof some
saved themselves in a Church, and refusing for to yield were burnt, from thence
they went to the village of Boxom a league from Leeuwaerden where they were
told that there was nere them 2000. Frisons Protestants, being intrencht with
Carts and Wagons, and having two field pieces, yet the Spaniards went to
charge them in their trenches, and Certain Protestants Frisons defeated.
their fort, whereupon the Spaniards charged them very furiously and put them
to rout: whereof part of them saved themselves in the Church of the village,
and afterward yielded upon ransom. Of the Protestants there died in this
charge fiuehundred fourscore and six, and about some three hundred taken
prisoners. Of the Spaniards very few, some said but five and twenty. Amongst
the which Olswald, one of the Earls of Vandenbergh lost his life in the flower
of his age. Captain Hendricke van Delden a brave soldier was also slain.
Among the Protestant prisoners, was captain Stein Malte a Dane, Lieutenant to
Count William of Nassau, who to do this service, the which for the love, honor
and respect of the said Earl he 1586.


At the same time Collonell Martin Schenck being in Venloo, he sallyed forth
upon 80. Spanish horse defeated
eighty Spanish horse having past the river of Meuse, whom he defeated, yet
withsome loss of his o^emen. A little before he had defeated some forty
Italien horse of the company of captain Appio Conti, of the which eighteen
were slain and twenty two prisoners. The King of Spain hearing of the succors
which the estates had gotten from the Queen of England, sent more money by
diverse means to the Prince of Parma for that as then his soldiars began
generally to mutine. And at that time also the King sent down the Marquis of
Guast and of Pescara, the last being of the house of Aualos, with many others:
this Marquis was by the Prince of Parma made General of the horse. The
seauenteene of January they of Antwerp appointed a day An enterprise upon
Zybrich failed.
and entreated his wife (all the country as they said being full of
Freebooters) to give them a guard to conduct them unto Cologne the which being
refused, they stayed a

About the end of February Collonell Schenck and captain Cloet) who commanded
Schenk with his men gave a sudden scaladoin one part farthest of from the
castle: and having past the rampar they went to the port, the which they
opened so suddenly, as their horsemen were upon the market place before the
Bourguers did know the town was taken. There was with in the town a castle
which Herman van Weda sometimes Bishop of Cologne, had caused to be built to
keep them in awe. The Bourguers fled with such fear toward the castle and
in such a throng, as the garrison fearing that the Protestants would enter
pel-mel Gerard Brandt the bourguemaister, and the Lieutenant of the Castle. The
town being thus taken, was kept very straightly that none might come in nor
get out to carry news thereof. The castle was sommoned, but the Gentleman
that held it called John Verminkh^uysen refused to yield. This place was of
great importance whereon depended the preservation of all the country of
Westphalia. The Captain sent a messenger withal speed to Cont Euerard van
Solms, Marshall of the country of Westphalia, giving him to understand the
estates of the town and castle entreating him to send him some succors, for
that he wanted men to maintain a long seege, and also to have In the mean
time the Marshall made all the speed that he could to raise men in the 1586
interressed) so as he made a little army, the which he brought and conducted
near unto the Castle of Waterlap, half a league from Werell, whereof the
greater part of them were footmen, and all in a manner peasants, with so^
which were the fewer part horsemen.

Collonell Schinke and Captain Cloet, knowing their enem^s to be so near,
would go with all the speed they could and skirmish with them, on the Sunday
the second of March, putting their horsemen into three several squadrons,
which went and charged them of Westphalia, which were but three score horse at
the most: who having with-stood the first charge, wheeling about (according to
their customs) Schincks horsemen fell and made pitiful slaughter of them:
among the which there The Marshall of Westphalias men defeated.
were thirty soldiers, harguebuziers, of the garrison of Arensbergh, the which
carried themselves very valiantly, who seeing these peasants turn head and
fly, they put themselves into a deep and narrow way, whereas the horsemen
could not annoy them, of the which they ouer-threw some. Schenck seeing the
hurt this handful of men did him, approaching near unto them, he said.
Soldiers I have known you well, and now I have tried your valors: wherefore
seeing your troops are in The bravery of thirty soldiers.
route, if ye will yield, I will make you a good composition, and entreat
you like

This discourteous answer did amaze Schencke, and as he returned back, an
other shot at the hinder part of his saddle, the which past through and
entered into his thigh, where the bullet remained. And as his men would no more
approache, fearing at the least to be dismounted from their horses, he
retired, and so did those Soldiers without any hurt or loss. Among the
Gentlemen of the Westphalian horse, were slain Hendric and Guytterman van
Pleytenberch and Merffart van Borch: Of the Peasants there were slain about
three hundred men upon the place,

After this defeat or overthrow, Schencke and his men returned to the Town,
the which was kept close as before, but that sometimes he sent his men into
the country for some booty. They within the Castle were not idle in the mean
time, annoying the garrison of the Town with their Artillery: and firing the
new gate, whereby they had access unto the town, which Schenckes men could
not prevent, by reason of the great Ordinance which played continually from the
Castle. Yet Schenck meaning to cut of this passage, built a Fort within the
Town, right over against the castle, the which did much annoye the Bourguers,
being also forced to

The Lord of Hautepenne had goodly troops about Keysers-weerd, with the which
he past the Rhine, and marched directly to Werell, with an intent to besiege it
before that Schencke had fully fortified, whereof he being advertised, he
resolved to make a retreat in time, the which he might easily do for that
Hautepenne came on but slowly. Being ready to make his retreat, (which was
the eight day of March) he kept the gates shut all the day, during the
which he laded all the spoil upon Wagons, and at nine of the clock at night
he parted out of the town toward Ham, and from thence he returned unto
Bercke upon the Rhine, carrying Schenck came into Holland to the Earl of
Leicester, by whom he was honored with Knighthood.

Whilst that the Prince of Parma was before Grave. Collonell Schenck ran
over 1586.
Schenck ouerruns the Diocese of Collogne.
Court, and have a goodly Palace) but finding them upon their guard, and well
provided, he retired, and came before Cologne, making war throughout all the
Territory, as well against the Gentlemen of the Champian country, as against
the Burgers, not sparing ^y. At his retreat he forced the Castle of
Monqchuysen, and took the Seignior of Grosbergh (Nephew to the last Bishop
of Leege) prisoner, who was carried to Nuys. The garrison of Nuys, went and
built a Fort in the Island which is betwixt the town of Soust and Cologne: This
place serving convenient for them to cut of the victuals that came to the
Spaniards Camp, if they came to besiege

The fifth of June there went a ship of war from Nuys, well appointed with
men and artillery, the which mounted up the Rhyne, and anchord before Cologne,
right against Duytsch: The Captain of which ship was called Peter van Allen
Vrienden. The Magistrates and Council not knowing what to think of this
affront, sent for the Captain to come and speak with them, and to give them a
reason of his action; he went boldly and told them that he was come by the
commandment of Captain Cloet, Governor of the Town of Nuys, to hold the
place, and to receive the towle of all goods and Marchandises that should pass
and repasse upon the River of Rhyne, in the name of the Prince Elector
Trucses, Arch-bishoppe of Cologne: And that he would hold all for good prize
that should offer to resist him. Heere-vppon the Peter with his ship, and
that if any one would dare to hinder him, that he would force him to obey: And
therefore he requested the Magistrates of Cologne not to take it in ill part:
The like he writ to the Burgers and Magistrates of the town, that it might
not seem strange nor grievous unto them, if they were forced to pay the said
towle, and that he suffered nothing to pass without a discharge.

The Council of the town was in doubt what to do, whether they should chase
him away by force or not: Wherewith they were much troubled, the issue of this
business seeming somewhat doubtful unto them. In the end they resolved to
compound with Cloet (who was come unto the said ship) and yet
notwith-standing they did write unto the Emperor, to their Princes Electors,
and to the Duke of Cloet, to let him vnder-stand that this new Imposition did
Impugn the Statutes of the Empire, and the liberties and freedoms of the
Town: And therefore the Council did not mean to allow of this Innovation.
Cloet demanded their answer in writing, to impart it unto Prince Trucses,
without whose warrant he might not depart by any means: And so the Deputies
retired, whom Cloet had feasted most courteously wiith great love and kindness
in his ship.

After the yielding up of Venloo, the Prince of Parma on the tenth of July,
came The Prince of Parma besieges Nuys.
from the Rhine, and much spoken of, for that the valiant Prince Charles Duke
of Bourgongne, 1586
could not take it. He brought thither a great and mighty army of Spaniards,
Italians, Germans, Netherlanders, Bourguignons, and Wallons, lead by the
Marquis of Warrenbon, Charles and Octauio Earls of Mansfield, the Earl of
Aremberg, John Ma^riquez de Lara, Bonninc, Liques, Camillo, Capuzucca, Gaston
Spinola, and many other Commanders of Regiments. The Marquis of Guast was
general ^f the horse: they had their victuals and munition from Cologne. The
Prince himse^e lay in the strong Cloister of Ghenaden-dael, where he was
visited by the Bishop of Beyern and Cologne, the young Duke of Cleues, the
Margraue of Baden, and other Princes and Lords. Within the Town of Nuys
Captain Herman Cloet was Governor, a wise Cloet did so press them thereunto,
as they had Nuys sommoned.
on the 24. of July, that if he would yield up the town, he would make him a
good composition: if not, that he must attend the extreamities of a siege, and
the fruits of his assaults. An answer was sent him in writing, that they did
thank him for his kind offer: and that knowing him to be a virtuous and a
valiant prince, they would willingly treat with him: but being a matter of
great importance, wherein they should be well advised, they demanded six hours
respight to consult.

The prince had sent a drum into the Town to demand hostages of either side,
and that the besieged should send their Deputies with Commission and full power
to Faelix Poucher answered, that they found not the prince of Parmas Articles
tolerable: saying, that he had not kept the accord made with them of Venlo,
the which the prince denied. During these sendings up and down, the Canons of
the camp played upon the town, and that of the town upon the camp against
the law of arms: so as the prince who was come near to parle with them, was
forced to hide himself in a dry ditche: for the which he blamed Cont Charles
of Mansfieldt, master of the Ordinance, at his return to the camp: who
excused himself; saying that it was without his priuitie. Afterward the
Prince sent Collonell Taxis unto the besieged, to know whether they were
resolved to defend The Prince of Parmas offer.
themselves, or to hearken to a good composition: who demanding to have the
articles Taxis with other Commanders were before the Port attending. This
Trumpet remained in the town from noone until night following: about ten of
the clock at night one came to tell The answer of them of Nuys.
them that the Trumpet was gone to sleep, and that they might go to bed if
they pleased, and that the next day they should have an answer. In the end this
Trumpet returned the next day about six of the clock in the morning, with this
answer. That they of Nuys wondered that the Prince of Parma made war against
their town, belonging Truchses, and depending of the holy Empire, demanding a
truce for six weeks, the which having obtained, they would enter into some
reasonable course of an accord. The Prince hearing this answer, and thinking
that they mocked him, he caused the town to be battered the same day, with
thirty Canons, being Saint James day the Patron of the Spaniards, never ceasing
from morning until night, so 1586.
Nuys battered.
thousand shot. So as Rhynport and Neerport were battered to the ground, with
a great part of the wall even unto the river: then changing the battery to the
other side of Rhinport toward the cloister of Maryenbergh, they beat down an
other curtain of the wall; so as there was a breach above three score foot
long, by the which they might look into the midst of the Town. Betwixt the
great Church and the Port there was a Tower, whereof part was beaten down: a
Spanish Captain adventured to creep up into it, and looking round about him,
seeing no man (for that the besieged in that place lay close, by reason of the
continual battery) approach, he made a sign with his hand to his men to
approach the which they did, and won that side of the Rampar. The Governor
Cloet, hearing that the Spaniards were

At this charge the Governor Cloet was shot in the calfe of the leg, and
was carried to his lodging. Soon after one of the Spaniards went out of the
Tower to The governor Cloet shot in the leg.
the Prince of Parma, telling him that the Town lay open of that side, and
that there was no flanks to hinder his entry. This did encourage the Spanish
soldiers being greedy of the spoil, thinking the time tedious until they
went unto the assault, and the rather for that it was their Patrons day, who
they hoped would give them victory. But the Prince of Parma for that it was
very late, and night approached,

The next day in the morning the Princes camp being all in arms, and ready
to go to the assault: the Captains of the Town came unto the Governor, to
demand his advise and counsel touching their yielding; who seeing himself
thus hurt, and being full of pain, he wished them to compound as well as they
could, at the least to have their lives and goods saved. Captain Rittall was
sent and an Ancient with him to the Prince, to treat of an accord: coming
near unto the Camp, an They of Nuys offer to yield and are sent back.
Italian Collonell caused them to stay there, until he went to tell the
Prince, and to

Those of the Town had by four of the clock in the morning discryed and
seen great troops of horse come out of a wood near unto the Town, every one
carrying a Faggot, which they cast into the ditch to fill it up, whereby they
might easily judge what their intent was: Wherefore the day being a little
more spent, they sent three of their Captains again to the Camp, but at
their arrival they were laid hold on and kept prisoners. The Spaniards
burned with desire to go to the

In the mean time the Wallons, Germans and Liegeois were quiet in their
quarters, lying by Hochporte, being ignorant what was done in the Town: but
The great spoil and slaughter at Nuys.
in the Island swamme over, and made all the haste they could to go to the
spoil. The slaughter was great, for that they spared not any.

There were some two hundred soldiers retired toward Hochport, and had cast
1586.
not be spoild with their blood, and then (the first fury being past) they
did murder them in cold blood. There were three hundred more gotten out of the
port (thinking to escape and to make their way by force, or to die in fighting)
were compassed about by the horsemen, and cut in pieces without all mercy. The
town being thus taken, and the Governor Cloets house seized on, he was found
lying wounded in his bed; his wife and two sisters being by him: the enemy
being entered into his chamber, they willed him to prepare himself to dye:
wherewith being much troubled, he entreated them to save his life, being a
soldiar, and that he had in discharge of his duty to his master, done the part
of a soldiar and an honest man, whereunto answer was made that both The cruel
death of Cloet Governor of Nuys.
he and his master were banished and condemned by the Emperor, and must be
punished Cloet and his Captains had not done ill in their resolution to keep
and defend tho town for their master, but that they committed a great fault
to mock the Prince of Parma, as we have said, having so mighty an army, and so
great store of artillery, able to force a stronger town then Nuys.

It was not sufficient for the Spaniards to have sacked and spoiled the town,
but they withal burnt it: and yet some to excuse it say that fire fell among
certain fagots and old dry wood that was prepared to rampar with, and so
took some near houses The Pope sends a halloued sword to the Prince of Parma.
Pope Sixtus the fifth, whether also were come the chief Noblemen and
governors: This Noncio (having on his right hand the Archbishop of Cologne
Prince of Lieg, and on his left the Prince of Cleues) brought from the Pope to
the Prince of Parma, a Sword and a Hat hollowed by Pope Sixtus own mouth, with
letters congratulatory unto the said Prince, for his happy success: in the
which there was an express clause that such as should assist at the Mass
which the said Noncio should say when as the Noncio made an oration to all the
Noblemen, Governors, Colonels, Captains and men of war there present:
exhorting them to carry themselves valiantly, and to die for the Romish
Catholic faith, with promise of all Apostolical blessings, and in the end
eternal life. Which being done he came unto the Prince, and put the Hat upon
his head, and girt him with the Sword, which was richly wrought. The which the
Pope sent him, (as the letters made mention) in remembrance of his valor and
virtue.

Whilst that the Prince of Parma was at his seege before Nuys, Prince Maurice
and Sir Philip Sidney Governor of Flessing for the Queen of England (to
provide work for him in another place) landed at the fort of Ferneuse, with
three thousand soldiars, to make a road into Flanders, thinking by that means
to divert him from the seege of Nuys; and the twenty five of July they took
the town of Axel not far from the Sas of Gant. This did somewhat trouble
them of Flanders and Brabant; fearing some greater mischief, so as they of
Flanders wrote very importunat letters to the Prince of Parma, entreating him
to come to succor them, saying that it was more reasonable and necessary to
defend their country then to beseege an imperial town lying out of the
jurisdiction and limits of the Netherlands: yet would he not forsake that seege
but sent la Motte Governor of Graueling, to go and beseege Axel: the which he
pretending to do, the states cut the dikes and drowned all the country
therabouts, so as with their shipping they forced them to leave the town. At
the same time la Motte by means of a Wallon soldiar, called Nicholas Merchant
sometimes Sargant to the company of Captain Brugnastre in the States service,
layded a plot to intrappe the chief Commanders 1586.
Colonels and Captains of English. This merchant adressing himself to the
Earl of Leicester, and some of the deputies of the Estates, giving them to
understand that he had good intelligence with many officers and soldiars of the
garrison of Graueling, and that under coullor of carrying of corn thither by
sea; bringing men into the haven, they might easily enter into the town. His
desseigne was found reasonable, and he had money given him to buy corn and to
imbarke it. This exploit was to be done by Sir Philip Sydney and other
commanders. But this merchant having bought and imbarckt his corn and brought
it into the haven, having assured them that those he carried with him and
those of the garrison which were of his confederacy, should open the port at a
certain hour appointed to Sir Philip and his men: he being come near the
town, and finding the port wide open sooner then he expected, he began to
doubt, for that some things failed which had been concluded in this
enterprise, the which stayed them from passing any further. La Motte and his
men (who attended them with great devotion) were greedy of their prey, and
thought it long until they entered, sending two or three soldiars to wish them
to make have, but their merchant kept still within the town, and never showed
himself, which made them to doubt the more, and in the end to retire. La
Motte seeing this, fell upon them that were entered with the merchant, who at
the first were well entertained by them of the counterset and deceitful
faction, but in the end they smarted for all the rest, being about some thirty
of the Englishmen

The affairs of the united Provinces were somewhat impaired by the loss of
Grave, Venlo and other places, the which the Prince of Parma had won, who
prospered more and more. There fell out among the said Provinces and some
particular towns a secret jar and disagreement (as it happens often in an
estate where as many command) the one seeking to be freed from chage to day it
upon his companion: And with all Colonel Schenke (during the time that he
served the King of Spain) had noted some men, who gave cause to suspect some
of the estates, as if they were not to be trusted, on the other side the Earl
of Leicester newly made governor The Earl of Leicester discontented.
of diverse Provinces, every one having several preuiledges and freedoms,

This bred a jealousy and distrust, the which was after-wards the cause of a
greater Paul Buys (sometimes advocate of the particular Estates of Paul (...)
Prisoner at Vtrecht.
Holland, and appointed a Councellor to the Earl of Leicester,) being at
Vtrecht, was put in prison, and there kept, without proceeding iudicially
against him, nor knowing who was his adverse party. The captains which had
taken him, said they had done it by the Earls commandment, the which he
denied. There were also some of the chief of the town, among others the
signior Nicholas van Zuylen Scout or Baylife, and some other private men, who
were dismissed and commanded to depart the town by sun setting; who retired
into Holland, from whence they sent their complaints in writing unto the Earl,
who made himself ignorant of all: so as no man could judge whether it, were by
his commandment or not. They of Vtrecht being more incensed against their Some
banished from Vtrecht.


The states of Holland seeing with what rigor they of Vtrecht proceeded
against 1586
any thing, many of these banished men past the Seas, some going to live in the
East-countries, and the rest in some other neutrall places: some careless of
this rigorous proscription, remained in Holland. In the mean time Master Paul
Buys remaining Paul Buys escapes out of prison.
still a prisoner, and no proceeding against him, by practice, or rather by
suffrance of some of the prison, found means to escape out of Vtrecht, and to
retire into Holland: whereas his enlargement was confirmed, being bound upon
the penalty of 25000 Florins, to appear and to answer to all that should be
objected unto him: but never any man came to accuse him.

During these losses which the united Provinces had sustained, and the
alteration in Thomas Wilkes with letters to the council of Estate, whereof I
have thought good to inserte the copy, as follows.

A Letter from the Queen of England, to the estates of the united Provinces,
sent by Mr. Thomas Wilkes the 19. of July 1586.
MY Masters, and our good friends, we have been advertised of late, that
not-with-standing the assurance which we have already given you by Sir Thomas
Hennedge, of our firm resolution to proceed in this action, wherein we have
so willingly imbarkt our selves for your defense and preservation: there are
some bad instruments among you, who neither well affected to us, nor desirous
of the public good of their own countries, have given it out, that we have
an intent to make an accord Wilkes, one of the Clerks of our council of
estate, expressly unto you: to give you a more ample and certain assurance of
our sincere and constant resolution, in any thing that concerns the good
defense and preservation of your country, the which we have so deeply
undertaken, as our fortune is inseperably conjoined to you. Wherefore it seems
expedient and necessary, that we be fully advertised from point to point of
Wilkes, to whom we have given express commandment to inform himself by
your means as particularly as he can: doubting not but you will confer
freely with him upon this subject, as it is fitting, seeing it concerns your
private and 1586.


ELIZABETH. R.

The same month her Majesty did write an other letter to the Prince of Parma,
in answer of one written by her concerning a treaty of peace, betwixt her
Majesty and

A letter from the Queen of England, to the Prince of Parma, in July 1586.
THe letters which your Excellency have written and sent by one Augustine
Graffigna, being accompanied by one William Bodenham, seems very strange, for
that mention was therein made, that you understood by the said Graffigna, how
that we had commanded him to make an ouerture of an accord unto you on our
behalfes, and that you had heard Graffigna, or any other of better quality,
should presume to begin any such matter in our name, or in our behalf, as if
we had in that manner (by messages sent unto your Excellency) sought to make
a peace with the Catholic King, who has in such sundry sorts recompensed
Graffigna being by our commandment demanded by some of our council, if he
had received commission from us, or if he had dealt with your Excellency by
order from any of our Council, he denied it peremptorily, as your Excellency
may see by his own hand writing, the which we have sent you here enclosed: and
for a greater proof has offered to return to justify the same. As for
Bodenham sent hither by you, we have caused some of our councellers to talk
with him, and to understand what he had to say on your behalf: Who great wrong
offered us therein, for such is our compassion of their miseries, as we will
1586.


Nuys being taken, the Prince of Parma delivered the empty town unto the
Bishop of Cologne, sending his troops to Alpen and Maeurs, and the castle of
Crako, belonging to the Earl of Nieuwenar and Maeurs, which he presently
took, and from R^inberg besieged by the Prince in vain.
thence they went before Rhinberke, whether he himself came in person the
thirteenth of August: where as Sir Martin Schenck and Sir Thomas Morgan an
English Gentleman, with about one thousand English, and some seven or eight
hundred other good Schencke, as the Prince prevailed nothing, only he caused
certain fortes to be built there-abouts. The Earl of Leicester meant to take
some course to deliver it: but as he had in the beginning of September planted
his camp above and beneath Elten, passing on, he went to besiege the town of
Dousbourg, lying upon the river of Yssel. The Princes men continuing their
desseigne upon Berck, after they had finished their fortes, subjected all the
fortresses there-abouts

The garrisons of Ostend, Sluice and Terneuse, after the taking of Axel did
great hurt in Flanders, cutting of the conuoyes that brought corn to Bruges,
Ipre, and other places, for that as then there was a general dearth of corn
throughout all the country, Dearth of corn in Bruges.
in such sort as the poor people within Bruges dyed for hunger: at which time,
notwithstanding their great want of corn, and dearth in the whole Province,
the hatred Peter van Hauterine, called Brouqsaulx was one, against whom
(because he was son to the Bourgomaister Brouqsaulx, that fled from thence
into Zeeland for the religion, whereof the foresaid Peter his son secretly
made profession) they sought all occasion to trouble and molest him, or else to
put him to death; and to that end at last devised (upon untrue and false
sugiestions) to charge him to have been consenting to a certain enterprise
that should Ioos van Peenen) began to complain of the alteration of the time,
whereby he had sustained great loss in his merchandise, and said most
plainly that it would be much better, if the aforesaid town weere united
again unto the Prouines of Holland and 1586
Peter de Bronsqualx and Ioos van Peenen beheaded in Brugges.
of, with the said Ioos Peenens, without any lawful proceeding, and against
all due John Norris and Sir Thomas Cicile to lie at Saint Seuenter by the Rein,
and upon the sixth of September went him self from Arneham, to Elten, in the
duchy of Cleue, accompanied with Don Emanuel Prince of Portingale, some to Don
Antonio King of Portingale, the elector Tucses bishop of Colen, Prince
Maurice Earl of Nassawe; Philip Earl of Hohenlo; William Earl of Nassaw, and
Philip Earl of Nassaw his brother (both sons to John Earl of Nassaw,) the
Earls of Solmes, and Ouersteine.

The Earl of Essex, general over the English horse, The Lord Willoughby,
William Pelham, Marshall of the English forces, Sir Phillip Sidney, and many
others of good estate and quality, where he mustered his army, and found it to
be seven thousand foot and a thousand four hundred horse, but knowing it
too small a number, to raise the Prince of Parmaes camp from before Berck (who
was reported to be twelve thousand foot and three thousand five hundredhorse)
he determined to set upon Doesborch, thereby to move the Prince of Parma to
leave Berck. This town of Doesborch belongs to the Earledom of Zutphen which
had the name of Duysborch or Drusus Borch (as some men say) The discrip^ of
Doesborch
long since given it by Drusius, (brother to the Emperor Tiberius,) that
brought the Rehin, from above Arnham, into Isell, to the town of Do bourch,
being yet called Fossa Drufiana, the town has high wales after the ancient
manner, and Sampson, and the townes-men that bare arms, were about three
hundred more. The Earl of Leicester sent the Earl of Hohenlo, the Earl of
Essex, Sir Phillip Sidney, and and others with five hundred horse, eight
hundred foot men by night to inuest the town, and upon the ninth of September
followed with his whole army, marching from a village called Elten and causing
his trenches presently to be made, so as within three days after, he had
planted ten pieces of ordinance, against the town, wherewith he made two
indifferent great breaches, but by reason that they within rampared then up
again, and made them strong, and also for that the dich was Doesborch wun by
the Earl of Leicester the 13. of September.
John Norris, with the Englishmen and freezlanders to second them; which they
within perceiving, sent word to the Earl of Leicester, that 1586
whereupon they yielded themselves, only with sauegard of their lives, and the
captains and officers to remain prisoners, and presently Sir John Borowes and
Sir William Stanley, entered into the town; Sir John Borrowes being made
governor thereof. After that, to draw the Prince of Parma from Berck, the Earl
of Leicester marched toward Zutphen, one of the 4. principal towns of the
Duchy of Guelders, and yet of it self is an Earldom, and has a special
government within it, being a very strong, and a good The Earl of Leicester
marches to Zutphen.
town, and for that he had intelligence, that the town had no great store of
victuals within it, he was in good hope to win it, or else to force the Prince
of Parma to come thither, as after he did. Within it there lay John Baptista
Taxis, a brave soldiar, lieutenant to Verdugo governor of Friseland, and for
that this town lies upon the river of Issell, and by that means troubled the
passage into the river of Velue, and Holland, the states long before had made a
sconce upon the other side in the Veluwe, but by reason of high floods, they
were forced to leave it; they of Zutphen took this sconce, and made it
stronger, raising two bulwarks and 4. sconces hard by it, which sconce, they of
Holland, 2. years before, had besieged ten months together, but could not win
it, and so were compelled to suffer the enemy to ouerrun and spoil the Veluwe.
The Earl of Leicesters forces being somewhat more increased, he brought his
army along by the river, right before Zutphen, and upon the 18. of September,
made a bridge of boats over the river, within less then half a mile from the
town, taking certain gentlemen's houses, as Hackvoort, and The Earl of
Leicester enters into Deuenter.
of bishop Trucse he got 400. foot and 200. horse, to enter into the town and
being there, news was brought him, that the Prince of Parma had left Berck,
whereupon he made have to return unto his army, which he presently caused to
be more strongly intrencht toward Zutphen.

The Prince of Parma fearing that the Earl of Leicester, might do some thing
against Zutphen, and finding that Berck was to well provided, having taken the
Island lying before The Prince of Parma ^aueth Berck.
it in the Reine and made it strong, and raised other sconces about it, all well
furnished upon the 12 of September he departed from thence, and marched to
Weesel, and took John Norris, and Sir William Stanley, with certain foot,
and others with some troops of horsemen. The 22. of September in the morning
betimes, the Prince of Parma, caused more victuals to be sent unto Zutphen with
the same conuoy of his vantgard, as they had before, being 6. or 700. horse,
and 2000. pikes and musketeers. They staying in a strong place, by a village
called John Norris, the Earl of Essex, the Lo. Willoughby, Sir William
Stanley, Sir Philip Sidney, Sir William Russel, and others road thither, with
about 200. horse, and 1500. musketeers and pikes, meeting with their enemies
before they expected them, by reason it was then very misty: they of the Prince
of Parmaes side, led by the Marquis of Guast upon their watchword given,
began to shoot furiously out of their ambuscadoes, being a place of great
advantage, as if it had bin a sconce, which they on the Earl of Leicesters
side manfully withstood, not any one once retyring out of his place, to the no
little amazement of the enemy, which being past, and the enemy not knowing how
strong the Englishmen were, and perceiving them George Cressier an Albanois,
which was presently overthrown, and the captain himself taken prisoner:
after that they sent Count Hanibal Gonzaga, with his cornet of horse, the which
was likewise valiantly charged, put to rout, and part thereof slain, and he
himself slain, or deadly wounded, they pursewed the rest close under their
shot, where the third cornet 1586.
Philip Sidney, being shot into the thigh, as he changed horses, whereof he
died within five and twenty days after: A young learned wise and valiant
gentel-man, and very for-ward, whose death was much lamented, he was governor
of Flessing, and the Earl of Leicesters sisters Sir Philip Sidney shot before
Zutphen whereof he died.
son, his body was conuaied into England, and honorably buzied with in the
Cathedral church of Saint Paul in London, whereupon the Englishmen not knowing
how strong the enemy was, withdrew themselves unto their camp, and so did the
Prince of Parma unto his.

The Earl of Leicester sought to get the sconses before Zutphen, and laid his
camp in the veluwe upon the Issell, there being an Island that lies right
over against the The Earl of Leicester besieged the sconce at zutphen.
town, from whence sometimes men might go dry-foote to the town, which was
kept but by thirty men in a small sconce, he caused it in the night time to be
assailed and taken, killing some and taking others of the soldiars prisoners,
the rest saved themselves by flight. This Island he caused to be fortified and
made strong, and so brought his camp, before the sconses by Zutphen, making a
bridge from the land to the Island, for that, from that Island he could hinder
and keep back any aid that should be sent out of the town to the sconces,
and presently made his plat-formes, and planted his Ordinance, The Prince of
Parma victualeth Zutphen.
somewhat sickely, he went from thence to Brussells, leaving the Marquis of
Renti, Barron of Montigni, of the house of Lalain, general in the camp, the
which as then was full of sickly souldiars, and diseased by reason of their
want.

The sixteenth of October, the Earl of Leicester, having battered the small
sconce, The Earl of Leicester takes one of the sconces by zutphen forcibly.
men that were in the great sconce, and two thousand in the town, the Prince
of Parma himself being then not above a mile or two from thence, he took it
by force, whereas an English Gentleman, called Edward Stanley, Lieutenant to
Sir William Stanley, behaved himself most valiantly, leaping into the sconce,
by means of one of the enemies pikes, wherewith the enemy thrusting at him, he
clasped it in his hand, and holding fast, (what means soever the enemy
wrought to pull it from him) got up with it, and being up, drew out his
courtelas, and began to lay upon the enemy, and with that other following
him, the enemy was constrained to retire, and so he was Sir Edward Stanley for
his valor made knight by the Bail of Leicester.
yearly pencion during his life; at the taking of this sconce there were not
above eight men lost, but the Earl of Hohenlo was sore wounded in the face.
The Earl of Leicester thereupon, began to make preparation against the next
day to assail the great sconce, for that this sconce lying Northward, and the
Island Southward, he should quite cut off the passage between the town and
the great sconce, which they The greatest sconce by zutphen forsaken by the
enemy.
in the great sconce fearing, fled by night into the town, before the Earl
had planted his Ordinance, leaving all their Ordinance within it, and so that
sconce was likewise taken, with other places there-abouts, as the castle of
Nienouer and Bocx-berghen

To besiege the town of Zutphen they thought it not convenient, in regard it
was too strong, and for that as then it lay enclosed round about by the
garrisons of Deuenter, Doesborch, Lochum, Deutecum and the sconce, it was to
be hoped, that in time by want of victuals, they should be compelled to yield
it up, and therefore winter 1586.
Parma had done his, placing his men in diverse garrisons, and honoring many of
his Captains with the order of Knighthood.

The sconce being taken, he took order for the fortifying thereof, placing
Rouland Rouland york made governor of the sconce before Zutphen
York governor therein, with eight hundred English foot, and a hundred horse,
to free the Velue, whereof the states disliked, because he had once before
served under them, and after with the enemy, and had been a double traitor,
and that therefore his faith was to be suspected. But the Earl of Leicester
(being light of credit, and having a great trust in his own nation) offered
his own person and honor for assurance of his loyalty. In Deuenter he placed
Sir William Stanley for their governor, with one Sir William Stanley made
governor of Deuenter.
which also the States were not well pleased, being one that had likewise
served the enemy. In Doesborch, he placed Sir John Borrowes governor with two
hundred horse, and eight hundred footmen, as also to keep the castle of
Brouchoorst, whereby the garrisons of Lochem, Deutecum, Sheuenbergh, and
Zutphen were in a manner blockt up.

The Earl of Leicester hearing that the Prince of Parma was retired, and that
it began to be deep in the Winter, and that the soldiers that should have
been levied in the East countries, (by some indirect means) being then out
of season to raise any more, were all dispersed, having forced the Prince of
Parma to break up The Earl of Leicester breaks up his camp in November.
Thomas Morgan was newly come) he went to the Hage, which gave many cause of
dislike, for neglecting so good an occasion when it was offered, seeing that
the Provinces under the Spaniards, were so sore distressed for want of corn, and
other victuals, by reason that the Hollanders with their ships had stopped the
passages of all the chief Havens, from whence they might get corn, but in the
breaking up of the camp his men that were in the Island by Zutphen, were set
upon by Taxis himself, but soon relieved, with loss of six or seven
Englishmen.

The Earl of Leicester being returned back unto the Hage, the States moved him
to take order, that their complaints and griefs (which in August last past,
and now

First they desired that the money received for contribution, might be put
into the Treasurers hands, chosen by the Estates, and that all the Commissions
for any payments The States request to the the Earl of Leicester
to be made, should be signed by the governor, and three of the counsel of
estate, of the three several Provinces aforesaid, which they said was only
done, and past through the hands of one Iacques Ringualt, whom they with many
others accounted to be suspicious persons.

That her Majesty's aid of Englishmen, being five thousand foot, and one
thousand horse, might be kept full and in their complete numbers, besides the
garrisons, and that they might be mustered, and paid, in the presence of some
one of the States Commissaries according to the contract.

That the leuying of new soldiers, according to the three and twentieth Article
of the contract, might be done by the governor, with the consent of the
States, that the Provinces and Towns might not be charged nor burdened,
above their powers and habilities.

That according to the four and twentieth Article, no governors of Provinces,
Towns, or places, should be chosen, or placed therein, before that three were
first

That he would observe good Marshall discipline, and let no soldiers be
suffered to go forth with out commissaries with them, to take a note of their
charges and expenses, which by the Provinces are to be paid, that the commons
from whom the 1586.


That the garrisons might be paid, which the Commanders over them complained
of, fearing mutinies, and reuolts, in regard that the fourth part of the
contribution gathered in Holland would suffice to pay their frontier garrisons,
and the half of the contribution of Zeeland, for the garrisons of Zeeland, and
that therefore the three parts of the Hollanders contribution, and the other
half of the Zeland contribution, would serve for the rest of the garrisons.

That no pioners nor laborers Wagons, should be forcibly taken out of the
country villages, contrary to the ordinances.

That according to their privileges, no man should be summoned to answer to
the law, out of the Netherlands.

That the authority of Magistrates which was much diminished and decayed, namely
of Vtrecht might be vpholden and restored again.

That Vtrecht might not be separated from Holland, but be again reduced under
the government of Prince Maurice.

That the proclamation, dated the fourteenth of August concerning traficke and
navigations, and the letters of the five and twenty of August, forbidding the
carrying forth of any kind of wares or marchandises, tending to the ruin and
overthrow of the Netherlands, might be called in again, and free liberty
permitted unto all men.

That the money belonging to the admiralty, should not be distributed, nor used
to

That concerning the contributions of Holland, Zeeland, and Friseland not
touching matters of policy, neither yet in the administration thereof, there
should be no audience, nor good credit given, unto any person what soever,
that had been any dealer in the treasory of Brabant, Flanders, or other the
enemies countries, not having any knowledge or understanding of the state of
these Provinces, and that his Excelency in all causes, concerning the
contribution, policy, or such like affairs, would use the advice and Council
of the said Provinces.

Unto these demandes and complaints, the Earl of Leicester made many excuses,
and diverse fair promises, that all should be amended, but that as now he
had some occasion to go into England, in regard that some matter of
importance, and great weight, was then to be handled in the high Court of
Parliament in England.

The states sought all the means they could to stay him from going, but it was
in vain, and so the reformation, was deferred tell his return again,
whereupon The Earl of Leicester at his departure commands the government of
the Neitherlands to the Council of Estate, by act dated the 23 of November.
they desired him to leave some good order for the government of the
Netherlands, during his absence, for which cause upon the three and twenty day
of November he made an act whereby he committed the government thereof to the
Council of prouiso that all dispatches, and commissions should be made and
under written, In his name (with his express commandment and authority,) by
his Cousin Prince Maurice Earl of Nassaw, and one of the Council of the Noble
Estate, being there for the Queens most excelent Majesty; or in their
absence, by two other of the said Council of Estate, and authorities of the
same, as also the passes, and lodging of the soldiers, in the champian 1586.
therewith, notwithstanding any commission or commandment to the contrary,
and that the war by Sea, and the moneys appointed to that end, should rest in
the disposition of the Admiral and the counsel of the Admiraltie. And further
for the ordering of the war, the said counsel of estate, should appoint a
sufficient and experienced man, that should sit and consult with them in the
said counsel, commanding all gouerners, Coronels and Captains of horse and
foot, both by sea and land, and all Magistrates what-soeuer, etc. to be
obedient unto the said counsel of estate, as if he were personally present,
and that during his absence, or till that it should be otherwise appointed by
the general estates, promising upon his princely word, to allow, maintain,
Robert Leicester, and under by order from his excellency.

Signed Gilpin.

The same day the Earl of Leicester made an other act of restraint, or
recalling of the counsel of estates authority aforesaid, the effect whereof
was as follows. An act of restraint made by the Earl of Leicester during his
absence.


That although his Excellency had committed the government of the country unto
the counsel of estate, with full power and authority both by water and by
land, commanding they should be obayed in all things, as his own person, as by
his act appeared, yet his Excellencies intent and meaning was, that
nevertheless, during his absence, he prouiso. They should not discharge any
prisoners, nor yet take any assurances.

Lastly, touching the nominating of the counselors of estate, they should have
a regard, that nothing should therein be added nor altered, to the deminishing
of the The Earl of Leicesters picture made in gold and given to his friends in
the Lowe-countries.
give unto his friends to wear it in remembrance of him, upon the one side was
his picture excellently well made, with an Inscription. Robertus Comes
Leicestrie and in Belgia Gubernator 1587. On the other side, there was a flock
of sheep feeding, whereof some Non gregem sed ingratos, and under the Dog was
written, Inuitus defero.

In September Anthony Perrenot Cardinal of Granuelle, first of all Bishop of
Arras, and afterward Archbishop of Macklyn, dyed in Spain, having many rich
Abbaies 1586
Nicholas Perrenot Death of the Cardinal Granuelle.
Lord of Granuell, one of the chief Counselors to the Emperor Charles the
fifth. This Cardinal by the quickness of his wit being very ambitious, would
govern the Netherlands alone, and overrule the Duchess of Parma that was
Gouernesse, and the Princes and Lords of the Kings council of State at his
pleasure: whereby there grew iealousies and factions among the great men, which
were covered afterward with the cloak of religion: so as to redress it (or
it may be to be better served with his council) the King called him out of
the said countries into Spain, where he did far worse offices then if he
had remained in the Netherlands: for he did so debase the country, and
disgrace the Princes and Noblemen unto the King, as by his unmeasured

The Earl of Maeurs was gone into Germany to make a levy of Reisters, which
The Earl of Maeurs leuies Reistres and they mutine.
they attended with great devotion in the Estates camp before Zutphen: with
the which he came down as far as Bremen in the East country, whether the
Estates had sent a great sum of money for their pay. These Reistres being
come to the Rendez-vous and place of muster, the Rytmaisters began to mutine
for their pay, for the service which they had not yet done. The Duke of Parma
(whose father was Plettenberg, and not daring return into Holland by land,
being too weak to make his way by force through the enemy, being assured that
he should be charged, he embarked with the rest of his men. Some Princes of
Germany (in whose countries these mutines had been levied) were wonderfully
incensed against them for this base act, and punished some Gentlemen as well by
prison, as otherwise by way of infamy and degradation of name, honor, and
arms, hearing that they had not wanted any pay, seeing

The Duke of Parma having avoided this storm, and dispersed these troops of
German horse without fighting, which the Estates had expected with such great
devotion, he caused his forces to return near unto Zutphen, and commanded to
take up all the corn in the country there-abouts, and to carry it into the
Town, the which was easy to be done, the Earl of Leicester having retired
all his army unto the other side of the river upon the veluwe, about the great
Fort which he had taken before, right against the Town: into the which he
had put three and twenty companies, Wallons, and natural Duchess of the
country, the which were soon after cast and reduced to six Ensigns, what
the cause was I could never yet learn. All this summer A great drought.
Devouring Snayles.
Till in Flanders, whereas all the ways were so full, as they caused a
lo^thing-in them that went upon them, by reason of their slimie viscositie,
which made men believe, that it was a punishment sent from God. It has not
been read of in former histories, nor seen since, that generally in whole
countries, a measure of wheat waighing two hundred An extraordinary dearth of
corn.
continued above a whole year, betwixt the year 1586. and 87. (so as in that
of 87. they had three pounds of beef for one of bread) many poor people dyed
for hunger and want, as well in Arthois (which is a great corn country) as in
Flanders where the plague was very violent, and withal they were much
tormented with 1586
Flanders punnished with three scourges this year.
afflicted this year with famine, plague, and with savage and cruel beasts.

At that time the Estates to keep the Esterlings from bringing of any grain
into the said countries, having aduertisment that there were certain ships
laden with corn at Hambrough to be transported to Dunkerke: they sent some
ships of war, under the command of Captain Ludt Iacobsen (otherwise called
the Great Luth) of the town of Medenblyke in West Friseland, toward the river
of Elbe to stop the passage. The said Captain was sent for to Hambrough before
the Magistrate, where being demanded what made him presume to enter into their
river to stop their navigations and traficke. He answered freely that he had
been sent by his Masters the General Captain Luth a prisoner and enlarged.
not without suspicion to have been first poisoned, for that at his release
out of prison,

In the village of Linter near unto Tillemont in Brabant, on the tenth day of
December in the night, it did rain blood upon the ice, in the ditches of a
Gentleman's house, the drops falling so hot, as the ice did melt, and they did
peerce almost a foot A prodigy of blood.
deep, as it was observed by many. The Earl of Leicester parted out of the
Netherlands in the end of this year, by commandment (as he said) of the
Queen of England, Deputies of the Estates sent into England to attend on the
Earl of Leicester.
the which they sent their deputies to him into England, to be nere unto his
person, as a Council of Estate: the which were James Valcke (at this present
tresorer general of Zeeland) William van Zuylen signior of Nyeuelt, Just
Menin Pensionar of the town of Dordrecht, Camminga of Friseland, and others,
with a Secretary, who arrived there in the end of January 1587. carrying him
from the general Estates a rich and stately present, which was a cup of the
height of a man, of silver and guilt, curiously wrought, in sign of
acknowledgment and gratuitie. During the discontent of the Netherlanders,

I thank God, that he has sent a wise and discreet Governor to command over
these united Provinces, who having no other design, but the glory of God, the
peace and tranquillity of these poor countries, and the service and greatness
of the Queen his A discourse of advise to the Earl of Leicester.
how wise, sufficient, and judicious in affairs soever a Prince, Governor or
Councellor 1586.


And although the cure of this disease dependes not upon the counsel and
advise of a young Physician, and that we may say with Tacitus. Non perinde
d^udicari posse quid optimum factu sit, quam pessimum fuisse quod factum est.
It cannot thereby be judged what is best to be done, but that it was ill that
was done. Yet there is some hope that we shall not heere-after fall into the
like errors, and that we will be no less circumspect then the mariner, who
does all he can to avoid the rock; where he was once in danger of
ship-wracke, for as an old doctor of the church Non nisi idiotis datur bis ad
eundem lapidem impingere, that is, none but fools stumble twice at one stone.
Whereunto I will add for my conclusion, the saying of an ancient Poet, Nulla
res tam facilis est, quin difficilis fiat si inuitus facias. Nothing is so
easy but it will prove difficult, if you do it unwillingly. The contrary is
true, that to a resolute mind nothing is to high, to great nor to difficult.
And we must say with Alexander the great when he incorraged his souldiars.
Nihil tam alte natura constituit, quo virtus not possit eniti, nature has set
nothing so high, whether virtue may not aspire.

The greatest error and the least excusable, is that the treaty has not been
duly observed; and the greatest advantage which these men have had to blame
us, is, Infeliriter egrotat cui plus est a medico periculi quam a morbo. He is
unfortunately sick

Secondly that the Physician which undertakes a cure must first do his duty,
and not be found in fault.

Thirdly this poor people rely upon you, and as I have said, neither can nor
will be delivered but by your means and succors. And you may well think seeing
that jealousy and liberty has brought them to that point as to revolt from,
and to incense so great and mighty a Monarch; that if they had any means to
preserve themselves by themselves, they would not have adrest themselves, to
any other seeing that this 1586.
end that being united with you they may do that which of themselves were
impossible.

But if neither the succors be complete nor the troops paid as we have seen
this winter, that all the English companies have not in five months received
one penny what may these poor people expect, but ruin, the which they have for
many years and with great toil sought to avoid? So as it seems they are in
their hands that will advance their ruin, rather then preserve them. If there
were question to pay thirty twenty or ten thousand men, but there are but
six thousand and not complet, the which are in as poor terms for their pay
as those that are entertaynd by the country. This does not only discourage the
soldiars which suffer, but does also bring unto despair, them who having
offered the Sovereignty with their liberty bodies and goods Lewis the twelth
suffered his friend and confederate the King of Nauare to be ruined when he
delayed to send him the succors which he had promised against the Catholic
King, who seized upon, and does yet hold at this day the Kingdom of Navarre,
for those which are bound to succor an other, and yet protract the time and are
slow to send it, bring their friends into danger and pourchase blame, and are
held unfriendly, and by their slackenesse overthrow the action which should
have brought honor and proffit to them all: for if they which call are whot in
their enterprises, and they which are

They complain much that Captains and officers of the English troops are
great gamesters, and convert their soldars pay to their own pleasures or
private proffit, the which is a manifest theft. That they are not as they ought
to be with their companies and charges, whereby there have grown great abuses
and inconveniences: yea the last day all the commanders, Colonels and
captains, and in a manner all the chief officers

That which has lost the hearts, love and affection, of the soldiars and men
of war of the one and the other party is, that they have been worse paid
this year then the former: and being accustomed to receive four or five
months pay in a year, they have for the most part received but two or three
at the most. And in truth if we look into the great and extraordinary charges
which have been made in this year more then in the former, we shall not
find it so strange: and the fault (if it be a fault) is in a manner
excusable, for the enterprise of Axel has cost a good sum of money: That of
Graueling (which failed) the camp before Nymegen, when as they bought at a
far less price, then they have been delivered in the Town to the
Comissaries: 1586.


The banishment of many Papists out of Vtrecht, has been found very strange
of many both without and within the country: For that most of them are old
Chanoins, and Clergy men, whereof some have neither the spirit nor the means
to hurt: and that this banishment is contrary to the pacification of Gant, and
to the Union of Vtrecht, and as they think against all reason and form of
justice: seeing that they had all in former time consented to expel the
Spaniard; and have since voluntarily contributed to make war against him: and
that without accusation or hearing they

They have always been employed in all affairs of importance, for their
Province and for the State, and they were never before taxed to have committed
any remarkable fault in the Estate: Nay it is most certain that they were
open enemies to the French party, and that they have allwaies labored to have
the succors of England: And when his Excellency came into these parts, two or
three of the chief of them, have employed their pains and done their best
endeavors they could, that his Excellency might have the general government
and all the authority, yea more then some other Provinces would have had.
Whereupon it is said that thereis manifest injustice in this fact, and a great
ingratitude: good, and to avoid a greater inconvenience through divisions and
factions in Vtrecht, 1586
Quia Ius et aequitas vincula et fundamenta sunt ciuitatum. For that Justice
and equity are the bonds and foundation of Cities, as Tully faith in his
Paradoxes; if they have committed a fault, let them be accused, heard,
convicted, and condemned: If they will not once hear them in their
iustifications, what can we think but that there is passion and violence in
this action? Besides conscience and the rules of Christianity will admit no
reply. Do we ill that good may come of it? If you do otherwise, and think by
this Injustice to preserve your Estate, you are Macheuells Disciples, who
teaches it, and not our Savior JESUS CHRIST and his Apostles who forbid it.
If you will now say the fault is past: but if we restore such men as are now
incensed, we shall commit an other soul and gross error in the Estate, for
they are heads of a party, they are of the chief of the Town: They would
return into their places and offices, and would trouble our whole Estate: And
by the communication which they have had with them of Holland, they will
happily favor the Hollanders disseignes which they practice secretly upon the
Town of Vtrecht. And what know we whether (through desire of revenge) they
will do as Salinator did unto the Romans who had wronged him? or as many
others in the like case, and for the like occasion. Heere-vppon intruth I am
much troubled to answer you, yet would I not heap one error upon another,
Aristides, who preferred that which was just and honnest, before the utility
and profit of the common weal; Then of Them^stocles, who had advised them to
make their best profit of that which was dishonest and unjust.

As for the imprisonment of Paul Buys, all men have seen the proceeding: The
which good men have found so far from Justice, as those which before held
Paul Buys to be worthy of punishment, for his misdemeanors past, and above all
for the crosses which he had given to the good and commendable disseignes of
the deceased Prince of Orange, and began now to do the like to the Earl of
Leceister, to whom he had showed himself light, inconstant, and
unthankful: Besides other crimes wherewith he might have been charged,
accused and convicted:

For as Tacitus said of the Emperor Galba, Dignissimus imperandi
nisiimperasset. Most worthy of ruling if he had not ruled. So we may say of
this man. Dignissimus Carcere, nisi eo Carcere fuisset inclusus. Most worthy of
prison if he had not been shut up in that prison. For besides the fault
which they have committed in Justice, suffering some Captains and factious
persons to use this authority; to ^eaze upon the person and papers of a
Councellor of Estate, the which does belong

Besides this error I say there is by the same means an other committed in the
Estate; which is, that such a man as Paul Buys is reputed to be, the head of a
party, turbulent, passionate, reuengefull and ambitious, should not have been
put in prison, but his process should presently have been made, or at the
least* he should have been better guarded then he has been heretofore: Every
one foreseeing, that if he once got out he would be revenged on those who
he thought had a door to such Injustice, and did abandon men of honor to the
rage and passion of private 1586.
Seneca says. Minatur multis vni qui facit iniuriam. He threatens many, that
does wrong but to one. And the fact cannot be honestly excused, that the
captains had not given aduertisment but an hour before, for all their oaths
and execrations shall never satisfy them who know how the said Captains, the
Sheriff Pottere and Master Web* (one of his Excelencies household) were then
in credit with his Excelencie, who at the same instant was in Vtrecht. Moreover
the said Pottere said to many before his death, that neither he nor any of his
companions durst ever have attempted such a thing, without the silent consent
of his Excellency, and that they found themselves to be well grounded. If
then the said imprisonment were done without the knowledge and against his
Excellencies authority, why have they not yet Paul Buys, has been the cause,
that he who before was held a wicked man, is now reputed an innocent, and that
they have done him wrong, Injustice, and indignity. Finally we must remember
the wise advise of Tacitus. Non vtendum esse imperio, vbi legibus agipossit.
We may not use violence where as the laws are in force.

The establishing of a Council of the treasor, without the consent and
contrary to the admonitions and express will of the Estates, has been the
more odious, for that his Excellency has appointed for chief thereof, a man
that is generally hated of all

But that which has most offended the Estates is, that besides the ordinary
and lawful means which were granted, they have consented that Ringault
should practice his own inventions. The which has made his Excelencie
unpleasing unto the said Estates* and to all the merchants generally throughout
all Holland and Zeeland, who were reduced to that Estate, as many talked of
going out of the country, Ringault would bring in upon all the merchants. For
although that the breach of Edicts and proclamations do much prejudice the
State, yet the course they would have held was so odious as in the judgment of
the wise it was sufficient to make whole towns revolt, as Amsterdam, Enchuysen
and the greatest towns of traficke in the country. Besides the terror which
Ringaults promise struck into them, by the which he should bind himself by
that only means in few months to find many millions of gold. The
Chancellor Leoninus was wont to say that such inventions did never profit but
to him and his like, when as the Duke of Alua or the Governors have demanded
their advise by way of consultation. Out of the which they were commonly well
paid for

You may not then advance to such charges men that are suspected and odious to
all the world, we draw out money by indirect or unusual means, for the
example of Ringault and of all that ensued, may give a good instruction; what
color soever 1586.


It has been formerly said, that one of the Articles of the union made
betwixt the Provinces, is, that all shall defend and maintain themselves
together, that they shall be entreated a like both of the one and the other
Religion, and shall jointly furnish means to make war against their
enemies. And although there be no exercise but of one Religion, yet no man
shall be molested nor troubled for his conscience: for that Religion is not the
only cause of this war, but their liberty and preuiledges, whereof they
are so jealous, as for the preservation thereof, the Chanoins, Priests and
other Clergy men, and all the Gentlemen that were Papists in these countries,
have made no difficulty to forsake the Pope and the exercise

And finally that it is not specefied in the treaties, nor in the Commission
given unto his Excelencie that he shall charge or Innouate any thing
concerning Religion: It follows then that they have been much to blame, not
only to offend many private persons, but also to with-drawe, the good wills
of whole towns, as Leydon, Goude and many others of Hollande (whereas the most
part are of that humor and condition) by the convocation of a Synod, and the
authorizing of many things for matter of Religion and discipline; the which
most good men of the reformed Religion in all other Estates, countries and
Provinces could not yet like of.

Doubtless every good and Religious Christian should wish and procure as much
as he may the advancement of Religion. And it is fit, that we should first
and above all things seek the glory of Almighty GOD and the everlasting
kingdom of Heaven, yet by the same law of GOD we must keep and observe the
contract and agreements which we have promised and sworn, yea if they were
with the Turks and Infidells, and herein as in all other things we must use
wisdom and moderation: not to innouate nor bring in any thing into an Estate,
that may cause the ruin of Religion and of the Estate together: first they
must do that which is most convenient and necessary in an Estate for the
preservation thereof: not to give too much credit to ministers in matters that
belong not to their charge and vocation: but Et cum sit vbique virtutis modus,
aeque peccat quod excedit quam quod defficit. And seeing there is a mean of
virtue in all things, that offends which does exceed, as well as that

And for as much as the people are so iealious of their liberties and
preuiledges, and so nice of the breach of the least point of them: that for
this only cause the Papaists themselves (as I have laid) have left the
exercise of their own Religion and altogether have shakt of the Spaniards
yoke, and endured a cruel and violent 1586
do usually make, is that they may be maintained in their liberties and
privileges, for the preservation whereof so many Noblemen and Gentlemen have
lost their lives, and so many families have been ruined: that in all the
contracts, treaties and accords, and in a manner in all their discourses, they
talk of nothing, but of their liberties and preuiledges: and that upon the
breach or dyminution of any of them, it is lawful for them to call an
assembly of the Estates, and to make their complaints unto their sovereigns
and Governors, and never to cease until they have redress and reparation. To
conclude if they have not endured it of their Sovereign, how will they bear
it at a Governors hands? It is therefore more then reason to preserve that
dearly for

Also they of the countries complain of the humor and disposition of the
English, who they say are proud: that the gentlemen do not apply themselves to
their manner of living, and that they are not familiar with the Noblitie of the
country: without doubt the ignorance of the tongue is the principal cause, as
also the dronkenesse of

And for that without good order and disposition, the affairs are never duly
managed, but rather breed trouble in the mind, and confusion in the Estate, as
we find daily in this: besides the coffeehouse which they have which
follow their own propper affairs, or those of their Masters, Princes and
commonweals: His Excelencie must of necessity do, as the deceased Prince of
Orange did, and all other wise Princes and Governors, which is to divide his
time and his hours, as well shall not discontent any for refusing or
neglecting, for they do not redily blame that 1586
Secretaries are for the most part strangers, and ignorant of the Estate and
language of the country, every one of which should have his charge distinctly
appointed, according to their skill in the tongues, or according to the
affairs, or else according to their capacities.

That his Excelencie, should not imploie so much time to write letters and to
make despatches him-self, for that it hinders the expedition of other affairs
of greater importance, and greatly discontentes the Noblemen and others: which
demand speedy audience, it being the Office of a Secretary and not of a
Governor. That he rely not so much upon one or two for the affairs of an
Estate, giving credit to the

When as the Earl of Leicester was first made Governor general of the united
Provinces: the Earl of Hohenlo (or Holock) was requested by the Estates (in
regard of the great credit he had with the souldiars, being most of them under
his command) Haultaine Governor of Walchren, unto Sir Philip Sidney then
Governor of Flessingue, most of the Colonels, as Philip Earl of Nassau, the
Earl of Solms, the Earl of Ouerstein, with many other Colonels of horse and
foot, to the number of two and twenty, fearing that according to their
ancient customs, made a request in their souldiars names to the Earl of
Hohenlo, praying and 1586
The complaints of the States soldiars
there might not be daily murmurs and discontents in their troops, complaining
that one of the regiments of the Netherlands, and other places that were void,
had bin already, given unto strangers, which they said would be very
prejudicial unto them, as though they were not to be trusted as well as they
had been in former times.

This petition being delivered to the Earl of Hohenlo, he presently offered it
to the Earl of Leicester who was much discontented therewith, persuading
himself that Aqua^ll betwixt the earl of Hohenlo and Sir Edward Norris.
betwixt they Earl of Hohenlo and Sir Edward Norris (Brother to the General
Sir John Norris) as they were at dinner, whereupon Sir Edward Norris sent a
letter of chalendge offering to fight with him body to body (lying then sick of
a hurt which he had received before Zutphen Sconce) which the Earl took
disdaynfullie as coming from his inferior, pretending that no private Captain
might (upon pain of life) send any such challendge unless it were with the
Generals leave, and for that the Earl of Leicester did seem to allow
thereof, he was much discontented: The Estates themselves did also much
dislike it. Of this and many other discontents,

In the beginning of January 1587. the Estates men found means secretly to
undermine the wall of Buriche a town lying upon the Rhine right against Wezell
1587.
and being held by the Spaniards: where they had laid certain barrills of
powder A vain enterprise upon Bu^ich.
to blow it up, and so to surprise the town and the Garrison within it, but a
miller having descouered it, gave notice thereof and so this enterprise
succeeded not according to their desseigne. All this winter the Duke of Parma
made great provision both for men and money, having assembled the Estats of
Arthois, Henaut and other Provinces of whom he demanded some aid of money,
and obtained his desiers Merchant, who had Wouwe castle sold to the Spaniards
by a French Captain.
been before in garrison in Grave: who whether it were in revenge of a private
quarrel which he had with captain Firenine (who had iustefied himself at
the Hage before, the Estates, of that wherewith Captain Merchant had charged
him) or whether it were through ambition or covetousness, having corrupted his
soldiars with a promise to make them sharers of the booty, he sold the said
Castle of Wouwe to the Duke of Parma for twenty thousand crowns: And from
thence these treacherous About the same time Sir Martin Schenck seized upon a
little Town called Roeroort, 1587
Truchses name: being so called, for that it stands at the mouth of the river
Roero ort surprised by Schenck.
of Roer (which comes out of the country of Mark and Westphalia) where it
enters into the Rhine: which his men held until April following, that the
Spaniards forced them to abandon it.

Frederick King of Denmark, a Prince desirous of peace, sent Caius Ranson, one
of his privy council, and a man of great knowledge and authority, to
Brussels, to make an The King of Denmark seeks to make a peace betwixt the
King of Spain and the states.
ouerture of some means of a peace betwixt the King of Spain and his
Netherland Provinces, remaining in the union general of the pacification of
Gant, and the treaty of Vtrecht. To whom answer was made, that neither for the
King of Denmark, nor for any Prince in the world, the King of Spain would
never suffer any change of religion Ranson returned with letters unto his King,
making only mention of a peace betwixt Spain and England Being on his way
homewards, he was incountred in the wood of Soigne, three leagues from
Brussels, by some of the States soldiers of the garrison of Berghen up Zoom,
who finding him in the enemies country, took him prisoner, and (being at the
first unknown unto Caius Ranson being unknown is taken prisoner
them) rifled his baggage: but upon discovery of his person and quality, they
carried him to the Hage to the Estates, who made it known sufficiently how
much they were discontented for that which their men had unadvisedly done unto
him: excusing it as much as they could, and causing all that had been taken
from him to be restored again, as well his papers, as his gold, silver,
jewels, and other things, or else the value of that Ranson complains unto his
King.
Freezeland, as he arrested above six hundred of their ships in the Sound,
upon color of the injury that had been done unto his Ambassador Ranson: the
which he set at thirty thousand Florins ransom, with the consent of the
Estates themselves (who had sent their deputies unto his Majesty to excuse the
fact) being loath to contest with him for so small a matter, forbidding their
ships to use any force to free themselves from this arrest, as they might well
have done if they had would, and had been licensed by their masters and
superiors. Of these thirty thousand Florins, Ranson had above a thousand for
his share, which paid all his interests.

The Earl of Leicester before his departure into England, had made sir William
Stanley Rouland York of the great Fort before Zutphen. Stanley had in his
garrison 1200. Stanley seeks to berray Deuenter to the Spaniard.
foot and about two hundred horse, English and Irish, the which was much
displeasing unto the estates, for that he had served the King of Spain he had
long desired to yield the town unto the King of Spain, and to that end had
held correspondencie with Collonell Taxis, governor of Zutphen. Neither could
he not so modestly contain himself, but it was descouered that he had some
bad intent. Yet the estates of Oueryssel knew not how to help it, nor to
prevent the danger which they feared, having no means to get him out of the
town. For the Earl of Leicester at his departure had charged him not to
depart out of that place without his express commandment, besides Norris (in
whom they trusted more then in any other, for the good services which he had
done to them, and to the Prince of Orange) to go with his regiment, about
Deuenter as if he would winter there, and so to find some means (which 1587.
Stanley being suspicions of his approach, or it may be having some aduertisment
thereof, made have to agree with Taxis to deliver the town to the King of
Spain, for a certain sum of money and other promises of great rewards (which
were afterward ill performed) for the effecting where of she went early in the
morning before day, to the Bourguemaistcr of the town, desiring him to open
the port of Neurenbercke, meaning (said he) to go forth with his men, to do
some exployt upon the enemy, whom he had descouered. Being gone forth, he
Stanley yields Deuenter to the Spaniard.
returned presently before day, bringing with him Colonel Taxis with three
Companies of foot, and three of horse, marching directly to the market place
where they put themselves in battle, after that Taxis had placed gardes in
all parts of the town: the which was don so stilly and with so small brute as
the townes-men heard not any thing; Taxis having placed all his gards, began to
be more assured, for before he was not without great distrust, having with so
few men trusted unto Stanleys word and thrust himself into a town where
there was a good garrsion, and a number of brave Bourgers well armed, where he
might have been taken like a mouse in a trappe. Being thus assured, he
presently caused it to be proclaimed at the sound of the trompet, that all men
might remain freely within the town, without any wrong done them either

Hereupon Stanley made his excuse both to the magistrates and the soldiars, and
sought to justify this treacherous fact, saying, that he neither was, nor could
be accoumpted Stanley seeks to excuse himself.
atraitor, in respect that he had done no wrong, unless they would hold it
treason to deliver the town to the King of Spain to whom of right it did
belong, being long before moved thereunto (as he said) in conscience; alleging
many other such like reasons: saying more-ouer that if any of his soldiars
would serve there, they should be well paid by a most bountiful king, and the
rest might freely depart, whereupon many, but most of them Irish-men staid
with him, every one having a monet^es pay Taxis pasport, among the which there
wore two Preachers. The Bourgers houses were not spoiled that they might draw
other towns to do the like, only a few were ransackt, among the which the
preachers houses were not spared. Stanleys regiment was dispersed into sundry
garrisons, and he himself was left still governor of Deuenter.

At the same time Rouland York, (being made governor of the great Sconse
before Zutphen, by the earl of Leicester, wholly against the liking of the
Estates, with eight Rouland Yorkes life and treason.
hundred foot and a hundred horse) did in like sort sell it to the Spaniard:
This York had long before served under the States, although not with the best
credit. In Gant he John van Imbise, with whom he had conspired to betray
Gaunt and Dermond to the Prince of Parma, for the which Imbise was beheaded,
and he sent prisoner to Brusselles, where at the last by the taking of the
town he was set at liberty, and after that employed by the Duke of Parma upon
the water in the river Scheld, at the bridge before Antwerp: at length by the
means of friends he was reconciled, and returned into England with credit, and
from thence came with the Earl of Leicester into Holland, and there was so
recommended by Sir Philip Sydney, as the Earl of Leicester his uncle put him
in great credit, and gave him this government of the Sconse, who the same day
that Deuenter was battered told his soldiars, that it would be but lost labor
for them to stay there, York went to Zutphen, where he received a reward from
the King, and for a time kept company with Sir William Stanley, but without any
credit, Taxis like-wise got the sconce. 1587.
Thus the credulity and light belief of the Earl of Leicester, was the cause
of the loss of this goodly and strong town of Deuenter, which is one of the
Hans towns, and of that important fort of Zutphen, the which the summer before
had cost so much to win and fortefie. It was not without cause if they began
to murmr against the Earl of Leicester having at his very departure placed
these two gallants in such important governments. It was no marvel then, if
the Noblemen, Colonels and gentlemen of the united Provinces, were
discontented, and complained unto the Earl Certain speeches used in the
counc^ll of State.
of Leicester, to see themselves rejected, to advance such traitors, to the
government of such important places, as Stanley, York, and Patton were, of
whom we will speak here-after.

After the loss of this town of Deuenter and of the fort of Zutphen, the
Estates of the united Provinces were much perplexed, fearing that all the
English garrisons which lay in any other towns and forts, would do the like,
and deal with them, as the French in the time of the Duke of Aniou and Brabant
had determined to do, all in one day. On the Sunday morning, being the first
of February, the council of estate being assembled to provide for their
affairs, and to prevent the alterations which the loss of Deuenter and the
forts before Zutphen might cause: thither came the general estates and the
advocate Barnevelt for their part, who declared in their names, that
considering the necessity and in what terms the State then stood, they held
it more then necessary that the Gouerners of Prouincesshould go into their
Governments, Barnevelt saying, Is this the way to serve the country? whereunto
the Lord of Brederode answered, that if they were not contented with the
services and toil which the Lords of the council took, but they must daily
receive bad words and reproaches

He was also demanded wherein it was so ill governed and ordered, and what
were the causes there of? Barnevelt like a man full of passion and choler,
answered, that it was the council of the Cabinet, where-as many things were
done, which none but they of the council knew, as of late appeared by the Act
of restraint, which was made there by some private persons, without the
knowledge of the council, whereby the authority of the council of estate in
the absence of his excellency was quite cut of; And so the council remained
here and the authority in England, the Barnevelt replied crying out that they
had been never so deceived by the french as by the English, their government
being incompatible. The which Loozen said could not be inferred, having
received so great favors and benefits from her Majesty, and that he knew not
wherein the said pretended deceit might consist. At which words the Secretary
Gilpin also said that it 1587
Barnevelt to exclaim so against the nation, and that he did wrong both her
Majesty and his Excelency, in using such words, the which he at the first
began to deny and then began to speak of the fact again, as if that had
been the cause which moved him, seeking to excuse his indecent words. But
Gilpin replied, that it was not the act he made question of, but at his
indiscreet words, calling (if need were) the Seignior of Loozen and all the
Noblemen there present to be witnesses. Master wilkes hearing these speeches
which past betwixt Gilpin and Barnevelt, being in French, began to say that he
was sorry to hear, that all the favors and benifits received from her Majesty
were in a manner forgotten, considering the small respect which it seemed they
bare unto her Majesty and consequently unto his Excelency as her Leiutenant

During this general murmuring against the English there grew daily factions
and partialities, some inclining to the Estates, and to the generality of the
united Provinces; and others to the Earl of Leicester and the English, either
party having many Stanley and York. The tenor whereof follows.

A letter written by VVarmond of Stochelen a Gentleman of Germany to a friend
of his, touching the betraying of Deuenter and the fort before Zutphen.
SIR coming from Franckfort, I arrived in these parts at the same time when as
the town of Deuenter and the fort before Zutphen were betrayed and yielded up
unto the enemy. I assure you I found a strange alteration generally by reason
of this loss: and there was nothing more feared then a revolt, like unto that
which was made against the French, after the enterprise of Antwerp, yet such as
are ill affected have hitherto contained themselves, and been content to
revenge themselves with their tongs, blaming generally all the English Nation,
and taxing his Excelency with a thousand reproaches, yea they have been so
impudent, as they as if this Estate were ruined, and that the loss of these
places (whereof the one has 1587
Stanley, and his Excelency by York, they will impute the subjects fault to
their Prince, and the servants to their Master. By what law, reason or
custom will they prove that this blame is well grounded? and with what art
will they keep her Majesty's love to them, in taxing in such a sort both her
and all the Nation?

As for Stanley it is well known that in former times he had done good
service in Ireland, and even since that he came into this country, he has
given good proofs of his valor and loyalty. And although that York had
heretofore committed a gross error, yet he has since carried himself
corragiously at the enterprise of Axel, and in these last exploites before
Doesbourg and Zutphen, having so often hazarded his life in the view of all
the world, as he had given the General good cause to trust him. Neither is it
the first time that a Commander has trusted after a fault confessed, nor any
new thing to see treasons, treacheries and reuoltes in these countries, but it
is a new thing, strange, and beyond all reason, to impure unto Commanders and
Princes the faults of their souldiars and servants: and for the wickedness of
some to Simpel delivered the town of Liere. And to come to this Nation of the
Netherlands, how many places, towns and whole Provinces have been lost, by
the treachery, treason and revolt of Noblemen, Gentlemen, Captains and
others, who have made merchandise of them, as of the Earl of Rennenberg who
delivered Groningue; the signior of Stakenbroek, Breda: the Lord of Berwoets
who thought to have betrayed Berghen up Zoom: the Lord of Bours who delivered
the castle of Antwerp, and afterward Macklyn. John d'Imbise who would have
betrayed Gant and Denremonde; the Baylife of Pottelberg, who delivered Courtray
by treason: Roeck, Corpets, Cauwegem and their consorts, who delivered the
town of Brusselles: Colonel T^er who betrayed Die. Captain Vlyet who
delivered Westerloo: Captain Coenen who delivered Hoochstraten: the Earl of
Lalain, Vicont of Gant, the Lords of Montigny, Gognies, la Motte and many
others, who were the cause of the defeat of Gemblours. 1587.
The Lord of Auchy (brother to the Earl of Bossu) who delivered Alost:
Gertrude, Manolles and others, who betrayed the Estates: Some of the Council
of the Estates of Brabant who delivered Herentals. The Prince of Chymay who was
the cause of the revolt almost of all Flanders: and Stryeland Baylife of Waes,
who delivered Ruppelmonde and all the Land of Waes, whereby the enemy came to
besiege Antwerp etc.

Wherefore it is against all right and the rule of Christian charity to think
or say that the whole nation is to be blamed in the which there are some
traitors, is it likely that she who so willingly did yield to that which other
Princes could not or refused to do; who has employed so great sums of money
for the succor of this country

And as for the money which they have granted for the charges of the war,
they of his Council and some of the country having had the managing thereof,
I

It is said in an ancient Latin Proverb: Ingratam qui dixit, omnia dixit. As
if all wickedness were comprehended under this name and vice of ingratitude.
How much her Majesty his Excelencie, and the whole nation have bound this
people unto 1587
will judge better of it. We cannot express the miseries and want which so
many poor English souldiars have suffered: which have come into these parts.
It will be proved by some Commissaries of musters, honest men and of credit that
the souldiars of the fort before Zutphen, were in December last during the
great frost, six days together without any other beuerage then ice water to
drink: and yet the fort was not besieged nor in danger to be lost: but only
through their default who had charge to supply this place and others: befides
the other discomodities of hunger and cold which the said soldiars have suffered
there, and do yet suffer els-where: which breed either death or diseases.
Besides is there any one so ingrate or malicious, that will say the English are
not good souldiars, for that they cannot endure all these discommodities?

Wherefore I hope that no good man in these parts will give ear to these
wicked spirits which disperse these scandalous brutes; some to reduce the
people to the necessity of an accord with the King of Spain, and others for
that they would not loose the credit, commandment and authority which they
have in these Provinces, nor see any other Nation here that does exceed them
in valor and prowess:

To conclude, the resolution of this people to defend their liberty is much to
be commended and admired who have so virtuously for many years sustained the
indignation of a King of Spain, and resisted the oppression which should fall
upon their have heard some discourse, that they which have the managing of the
money and of 1587


Your humble and affectionat servant and friend. WARMOND of Stochelen.

IN the beginning of Winter the Prince of Parma had caused the Earl of
Mansfield, 1587.
The town of Grave besieged by the Prince of Parma.
had made a bridge over the river, and shut it up both above and beneath the
town, thereby to keep it from victuals and other necessaries.

In those sconces he placed 1500. men, and appointed 5000. Spaniards to lie
about the town, and with the rest of his army he lay half a mile from
thence, yet notwithstanding the governor, Monsier van Hemert sallied daily
forth, and did much hurt to the enemy. The town of Grave having in this sort
bin 3. months besieged, the Earl of Leicester went out of the Hage, to Harlem
and from thence to Amsterdam, and so to Vtrecht, sending his horsemen being
1400. to Niekerke in the Veluwe, to aid the town of Grave, giving charge to
the Earl of Hohenlo, and to Sir John Norris, general of the John Norris side
being half English, half Netherlanders) there was 130. or 140. slain, Sir
John Norris himself being hurt in the breast with a pike, and Sir John Borrowes
had one of his fingers cut off. After that the Earl of Hohenlo, by means of
his great piece, wan the castle of Batenborch, and an other sconce, and the
house of Empel and cut the ditch and let the water run into the land, for that
the Meuse by reason of the land waters, was very high, so as he entered into
the town with scuits van Hemert.

The Prince of Parma, being certefied that it might be won by assault, upon
the twefth of May, went in person before it, and placing a battery of 24.
pieces began to play upon the town, both from over the water, and at both
the ends, where he spent two thousand shot, and with a falce alarm made a
show to give an assault to see what they within would do, who were therewith
somewhat amazed, and began to faint, whether it were by the advice and
Council of some affected to the Spaniards, or by the towns men's means, who
feared by an assault to loose the lives both of themselves van Hemert seeing
the Prince of Parma prepare to give a general assault, the day after to the
battery with certain captains, made signs to The town of Grave ye^lded up
the 7. of July.
parle, and sent a trumpet about some honest capitulation, which many captains
disliked, (having but the day before written unto the Earl of Leicester, that
they doubted not, but to keep and defend the town well inoughfrom the enemy,)
and by that means the town of Grave was delivered over to the Prince of Parma
upon the seventh of July, upon condition that the garrison should issue out
armed and such of the towns men as desired it, had liberty to depart the town
with their wives and

The Earl of Leicester understanding the Prince of Parmaces intent touching
the town of Grave, leaving his enterprise, against Zutphen and Doesburch,
resolved (although 1587.
Martin Schenck to take the Island called Sgrauenweert, lying by the Tolhuis,
where the Reine deuideth it self in two parts, the one part still holding the
name of the Reine, and runeth along by Arneham, the other part called The fort
of Sgr^uenweert built by Schinck called Schenks sconce.
the Wale, passing before Nimeghen, where he willed him to make a great
sconce, thereby to free the Betuwe; which done, when as he thought to have
passed over the Wale, and so to have set upon the Prince of Parmaes camp,
news was brought him, that the town of Grave was yielded up to the enemy,
whereat he was somewhat amazed,

When as Mounsire Van Hemert came to Bommel, the Earl caused him with other
captains, to be committed to prison, and so sent to Vtrecht where their
process being made, they were condemned to die, which most part of the
Commanders seemed to dislike, in regard that they were no traitors, nor yet had
any intelligence with the enemy, but for that the town of Grave was given
over, through want of understanding and Marshall policy, contrary to the will
and intent of the governor General: The Lord of Hemerr beheaded in Vtrecht.
openly to be beheaded, with two captains, Du Banck, and Korf, which
execution was by many men thought to be very rigorus, in regard that Mounsire
Hemert was a very wise and a brave young Nobleman, and one of the chief houses
in the Netherlands, who besought the Earl to grant him his life, and that he
might serve the Queen of England, either by sea or by land, at his own
charges, and by his valor and fidelity make recompense for his falt committed,
but this rigor was the more borne with all, through hope that thereby better
marshall discipline would be observed, which nevertheless The Nobility of the
Netherlands fall in dislike of the Earl.
they saw, that an English captain called Wells whom the Earl of Hohenlo
had taken, (being a traitor, and one of the actors to sell and betray the
town of Alost unto the enemy) was not executed, but retained into service and
put in credit, as also that the fugetiue and traitor Rowland York, was
likewise in much estimation, and put in credit with many great services.

The Prince of Parma having gotten the town of Grave he was soon master of
Megen and Batenborch and then he presently beseiged Venloo, a town both by
nature and art veric strong, with double ditches, lying upon the Meuse in
Gelderland, and went before it with his whole army, lodging most of his men on
the other side of the Shenck had his wife, and her sister, and all his
household, with seven hundred men of his own regiment, for which cause Sir
Martin Shenck, and an English knight called Sir Roger Williams, with a hundredth
horse, sought all the means they could to get into the town, but found Venloo
besieged by the Prince of Parma and won the 28. of June.
all the passages so well guarded, as they could not enter, nevertheless the
gave a great alarm by night in the Prince of Parmaes camp, and past so far
through his gards, as they came to the Princes own Tent, and slew very many
of his men, but finding the ways round about all stopped up, and perceiving
(day beginning to break) that all the camp began to go to arms, they
turned back again to Wachtendonck,

The twenty day of June, the Prince of Parma caused the Earl of Mansfield, to
assail the strong village and house of Arsen which was presently taken, and
upon the six and twenty day of June he caused a sconce to be placed upon
three points or 1587.
Meuse before Venloo) which by them of the town was made strong, and a sconce
made therein to defend the same, which he presently took; whereupon the
townsmen (notwithstanding the strength of the town, having once resisted the
whole power of the Emperor Charles the fifth) began to be some what amazed,
and to speak of yielding up of the town, but the souldiars refused so to do,
for which cause they set upon the souldiars that were upon the walls and in
the Courts of guard, Venloo yielded to the Prince of Parma.
and compelled them to deliver the town over unto the Prince of Parma, which
they did upon the eight and twenty day of June, with reasonable conditions,
the souldiars to depart with their swords by their sides, with Schencks wise
and his household: from thence the Prince of Parma went to Nuys, as hereafter
we

By reason of the great dearth of corn and other victuals in the countries
lying under the Prince of Parmaes command, they were enforced to bring corn
from many places far distant from thence, and that with very strong gardes
and good conuoies, yet many of their conuoyes were often set upon and
overthrown, and this year in the month of May, four hundred Wagons being
laden out of the countries of Iulliers, Cleues, and Liege, with corn and other
necessary provisions, being conuoied with a strong guard of one thousand
souldiars horse and foot were assailed and set upon as the past before
Antwerp, by the Noble Lord Willoughby William Pelham, Marshall of the army for
the States, made a great road into Brabant, and spoiled Langstraet, and had
certain secret intelligences upon some of the forts there aboutes, but they
took no effect.

The ways (by reason of the daily spoils and robbing of the souldiars)
being A conuoy of 3000. strong going to Colle^, cut off by their own soldiars
and many of them slain.
(which on all sides was sore plaged) for that cause a great number of
Gentlemen, Merchants, Country people, and others to the number of some three
thousand strong, being assembled at Berghen in the country of Iuilliers, to
go to a Fare as then to be holden at Cologne, with many Wagons and great
store of merchandise, were set upon by the souldiars of the garrisons of
Bobert, and Ghenadeneal, most part of them were Spaniards serving under the
Bishop of Colen, which conuoie being (as I say) three thousand strong, had
divided themselves into three parts, and had with them about the number of a
hundred and fifty souldiars out of Iuilliers to conuoy them, who marching in
good order with their Carts and Wagons by Truxis,

The like disorders and insolences were committed in many other places of the
1587.
Martin Schenck, and captain Cloet, made many roades into diverse places, and
almost upon all the towns of Westphalia, and the Diocese of Colen, burning and
spoiling all the country round about, whereby at one time there might have
been seen, standing upon the walls of Collen at the least fifty villages
and places on fire altogether, besides the robbing, spoiling, and murders by
the highways, which was committed by their own souldiars, that ran through
the country spoiling and wasting all the towns and villages.

In this great perplexity, there was a general assembly of the Estates held
on the sixth day of February, at the Hage, to redress their affairs, least
they should grow Prince Maurice gouernes in the Earl of Leicesters absence.
desperate. Wherefore by virtue of the authority which they had reserved to
themselves, Maurice of Nassau, son to the deceased Prince of Orange their
Governor (whom from the death of his father they had taken care to bring up)
to take upon him (in the absence of the Earl of Leicester, at that time
Governor general) the managing of the Government with the council of Estate,
commanding all Colonels, Captains and Officers, (especially those that were
in pay under the Generallity of the said Provinces and not of the Queen of
Englands,) to take an oath of sidelitie and obedience unto the said Prince
Maurice, as unto their captain general: sending their deputies to that end
into all parts, to receive the oath. Not that they meant thereby any way to
blemish or dyminish the Maurice in the particular governments of Holland,
Zeeland and Vtrecht, as his father had been: for that by reason of these
occurrents some things had been altered in the said Gouernmentes, against the
constitutions and ancient customs of the said countries, which by his means
they would have restored: whereby they might hold the other Estates and towns
in good terms with them, and the English souldiars in their fidelity and
obedience, for that some had murmured (by reason of the treasons of Stanley and
York) that they must make a distinction betwixt the good and bad English,
whom they must not mesure all a like, to the end that the faithful and
virtuous (from whom long before as from Colonel Norrys and others they had
drawn

The Estates seeing this dangerous alteration of their affairs, had on the
fourth of February written letters of complaint unto the Queen of England and
to the Earl of Leicester, with an ample relation of the causes of their
complaints, and a representation of the poor estate, into the which the
united Provinces were reduced, and the great and apparent inconveniences, if
they were not speedily prevented: which letters by reason of their tediousness
I thought good to omit, being very ill taken by the Earl of Leicester, who
thought himself wronged in his honor and reputation, making them to seem
distasteful unto the Queen; who being better The Barron of Buckhorst s^nt
into the Netherlands.
and of great authority, into the united Provinces with Doctor Clarke a civil
Lawier, to the end that with the advice of Colonel Norris and Master Wilkes
they might pacesie all controversies, and reform all errors to the best
contentment of the parties.

The Lord of Buckhorst being arrived in Holland, about the end of March, in
the assembly of the general Estates, he required in the name of the Queen
his Mistress a more ample declaration of certain points mentioned in their
letter of the fourth of February. The estates entered unwillingly into it, and
would have wished that all those complaints 1587.
Ringault and Stephen Perret: whom he did so countenance, as he believed what
soever they said, giving no credit to any of the council of State: They had
possessed him, with such a jealousy and distrust of them so as without the
advice of the said council he caused Rose-nobles Rose nobles coynedat
Amsterdam.
to be coined in Amsterdam, where as they had never been before any mint or
sworn officers, against the privileges of Dordrecht to whom this right does
only appertain, as to the first and most ancient town of Holland. The Noble
was allowed two florins above the value according to the course of other
coins. All which was done not only without the advice of the council of
States, but also without taking council

That the Earl had neglected to cause two thousand German horse, three
thousand foot and a thousand Pioners to advance, the which being joined with
the Queens army and the States, he might have made himself master of the
field, and driven a way the enemy, not-with-standing that the money was ready,
and so many aduertisments which came: so as instead of making an offenciue
war, as they might have done, they the country but two paies, the which has
not been but with the prejudice and great 1587


That the Earl by the advice of his flatterers, had erected a tresor chamber
against the advice and consent of the general Estates, and of the council of
State, making Jacques Ringault tresorer general thereof, one that was a
Spaniard in heart, and worthily suspected. That he had also put men into the
admiralties at his own devotion, who had no knowledge of Navigations,
strangers, not of Holand nor Zeeland, nothing acquainted with sea causes and
much less with war by sea and provision for fleets: which had been the
cause that the ports of Dunkerk, Graueling and Nieuport had done much more
harm unto the Estates, that year then in all the precedent. And withal that
he had given commission unto Ringault, to use a kind of inquisition against
the merchants, serching not only their stoore houses and packs,

More-ouer the said Sicophants did incense the people much against their
Magistrates, as in Vtrecht where they have chased away the chief of the
country, the like they did unto Master Paul Buys, a councellor of Estate,
casting him into prison, without doing him right, not knowing his adverse
party. The said Earl had also suffered himself to be so persuaded by these
Sicophants, as to call in doubt the disposition of the Dericke Sonoy of the
government of Northolland (otherwise called West-Freezland) of Gorcum to
captain Claeragen: of Vianen to the Seignior of Locren, of Muyden to captain
John Bacx, to govern them absolutely under the Earls authority without the
advice of the Council of Estates.

As also there were other private Governors which were put into the towns of
Gelder, Vtrecht, and Oueryssel, all which governors would never in the least
point yield unto Prince Maurice governor of Holland, not unto the Earl of
Maeurs governor of Gelder, Vtrecht and Oueryssel: so as he has brought in
diverse governors with equal power in one Province, the which could not be
without confusion: Yet there was no redress, not-with-standing many
admonitions that were given unto the Earl. They complained also that that the
town of Deuenter and the great fort before Zutphen (which were two of the
keys of the country) had been committed to Stanley and York, contray to the
liking of the Estates, who held them to be no beter then traitors: And
although the Earl had engaged his person and honor for their The Nobility and
towns (to discover the ground of all) had seized upon the person 1587.
Stephen Perret, whereby it was known that the said Ieames Ringault was S^phen
Perret a prisoner.
the chief motive and conductor of all the troubles, a mortal enemy to the
Estates and the country, secretly reconciled to the Spaniard, and making
profession to overthrow all good dessigns and advise, and to break of all good
correspondency betwixt the Estates and the Earl: as it appeared sufficiently
by the banishment of the best Bourgers of Vtrecht, whom he called, vetus
fermentum.

All which having bin imparted unto the Earl by the deputies of the private
Estates of Holland, and finding it true, he decreed that Ringault should be put
in prison, promising to do good Justice, and commanding the Provincial
council of Holland and west Freezland to make his process, yet he wrought so
by the means of his adherents Ringault was discovered by the papers that were
seized on, being a very hipocriticall Spaniard, and a dissembling counterfeit,
seeking but to enrich himself with the countries money, then to play
banquerout and so retire to the enemies party: As he did since, where they
scorn him, suffering him to dye in prison at Brusselles like a beggarly
rascal, being deteyned for his old and new debts: Finally to the end their
counsels and practices should Stanley refused to obey the counsel of Estate,
producing the said act for his defense. They declared also that after the
yielding up of Deuenter and the forts of Zutphen, if the fidelity of general
Norris and some Englishmen that were of the council of State, had not been,
it was Stanley and York) had done the like, considering the familiarity they
had with the enemy: to whom the English soldiars fled by troops, leaving
their Sentynells and Corpse de guard.

Whereupon amidest so many doubts and distrusts, so many practices and
factions among the commons: so many complaints of soldiars for their bad pay
considering, also the danger that might grow by the want of a Commander, the
general Estates of the united Provinces thought it expedient (having no other
means to be assured from so mighty an enemy) seeing that the respect of her
Majesty of England and the Earls authority failed them then, to take some
course themselves: restoring the gouernor's Paul Buys, concluding in the end
that the letter of the fourth of February, had been written advisedly and with
mature deliberation by the estates, who have been always accustomed to
proceed roundly and plainly and without any dissimulation, to impart
slanderous and false practices might induce them to believe, and so abuse them,
to the 1587.


This answer and ample declaration was made by the general Estates the
seventeen of June: with the which the Ambassadors and some other of the
English nation, after many disputes and replies, had cause of contentment. But
the Earl of Leicester was not well pleased therewith, as he showed afterward
by his justification, the which he caused to be printed at his return from
England, coming to succor Scluse: being much discontented with the Lord of
Buckhurst, Doctor Clarke, Master Wilkes, and especially with general Norris,
whom he caused to be called home, to be sent into Ireland to his government:
the Estates were very desirous to keep him still (having done General Norris
called home into England.
them good service after the loss of Deuenter and Zutphen, and well maintained
her Maurice, and the Earl of Hohenlo, but of force he must go as he did, with
great commendation, and testimony to her Majesty, both from the general
Estates, the Estates of Holland, the Earl of Hohenloo, and others, of his good
and faithful service.

The Queen her self was not well pleased with the declaration made by the
Estates as she let them understand by her letters of the thirtith of June, to
them. The The Queen discontented with the Estates letters.
which were sent by Sir Henry Killegrey and Master Robert Beale, whereunto the
Estates answered with all mildness and modesty, excusing themselves, and
informing her Majesty better. The Duke of Parma prepares to besiege Scluse.
he thought it now time to provide them some work toward the Seacoast: for
the effecting whereof he had caused great leauies of men to be made in Italy,
under the leading of the Marquis of Guast, Camillo Capisucca, Carlo Spinella,
Alexandro de Monte, and others, making show as if he would go to the Veluwe.
Some of his men had lain about Bruges ever since May, and now and then
increased their numbers, seeming as if they had lain there, only to stop the
incursions of them of Ostend and Scluse. His soldiers being come all together,
on the seventh of June, he marched out of Brussels with nine companies of
horse, and the next day came to Bruges, all his army following him to besiege
Scluse.

In the mean time Arnold of Groeneuelle, a Gentleman of an ancient house in
Holland, Collonell of a regiment of foot, and governor of the said Town and
Castle of Scluse, feeling this storm approach, and doubting it would fall upon
him, or upon Ostend, seeking to provide for it and prevent it with all the
diligence he could: on the The Seignior Groenevelt governor of Scluse.
William Russell, son to the Earl of Bedford (who had succeeded sir Philip
Sidney in the government of Flushing for the Queen of England) as to his
nearest neighbor for some help: sending him word that after diligent search
what provision was in the said town, he found not sufficient to hold out
long: whereupon Sir William Russell dispacht his Secretary wtih Nicholas of
Meetkerke his 1587.
Maurice, and to the Estate of Zeeland, requiring them to succor Sluice with
men, victuals and munition of war. But having no comfort from them but
promises, the Zeelanders not holding the danger so great, as the Seignior of
Groenevelt made it by his letters: Sir William Russel commanded his Secretary
and his Lieutenant Meetkerke, to gather together, with the help of the
Magistrate, all the grain they could within the town, and to send it
presently to Scluse. So as the same day a ship being laden with corn, parted
from Flussing and entered into Sluice Sir William Russel Lord gou^nor of Flussing
sends corn to Sluice and men.
without danger, whereof the Governor Groenevelt was very glad. And by the
means of Sir William Russell, there came from Berghen up Zoom and from Ostend
three companies of foot to Flussing, to the which the Governor added a forth
drawn out of Roger Williams and some English Gentlemen to Ostend: but being
^ere arrived, and hearing that the Spaniards camp was planted before about
Sluice, they went to Flushing to join with the said four companies, and the
twelth of June they entered with certain ships laden with corn, arms,
poulder, boullets and other munition into the haven of Scluse, but not without
great danger of the enemies Supplies of men and munition sent to Scluse.
cannon, who the day before had taken one of the forts without the town,
called Beckeaf: and held the mouth of the haven, where he had planted great
store of Groenevelt did write again unto the Estates of Zeeland requiring
great succors of Victuals and espetiall of munition of war: but the ships
going forth to carry this message, were taken in the mouth of the Haven, so as
after that time, none could go in, nor get out. The Duke of Parma had one part
of his army lodged in the I Will of Cassandt right against the Haven of the town,
at a place called Ter-Hofsted and another part at Saint Anne Termayden, right
with the which he forced a fort which the Estates had built upon the sea shore
at Blankenberg, by the which he freed his camp; and the vittualls that came
unto them from the courses of them of Ostrend.

The beeseeged behauing themselves very valiantly, made many gallant and
furious Nicholas Meetkerke Lieuienant Collonell, son to the president of
Flanders: Charles Heraugiere at this time governor of the town and Castle of
Breda, Nicholas of Maude, son to the Seigniour of Mausart and others: among
the English there was Sir Francis Vere now governor of the town and land of
Bryele: Sir Roger Williams; Collonell Huntley, Captain Thomas Baskeruille and
others. The forth of July, Patton Collonell of a Scottish regiment, and
comanding in the town of Geldes in the absence of Collonell Schenke, following
the steps of Stanley and York, sold the Patton a Scottish-man yee^ds Gelders
to the Spaniards.
town unto the Lord of Haultpenne, for the King of Spain, for thirty six
thousand Stuart in his place: he to prevent this and to be revenged of the
disgrace, having treated and concluded with Haultepenne, he gave them of the
town to understand, that Collonell Schenk had sent him order to keep his men
ready in arms that coming the night following with his horsemen they might go
together to an enterpize the which was easy to be believed, for that Schenk
was often accustomed to make use of the garrison of that town in that manner.

His men being thus in arms, Patton instead of Schenk drew in Haultepenne: The
Bourgers descouering this to soon, put themselves in defense, but it was in
vain, many flying into the castle which they were forced to yield, paying
their ransom. By this treason Collonell Schenck lost his horses, arms, and
all his moueables and 1587.
Patton seized on: And as the Proverb says. From the Devil it comes, and to
the Devil it goes. For all this wealth which Schenck had, came by spoils. This
Patton by the means of his great wealth gotten this ways, married the poor
widow of Ponthus of Noyelle, Lord of Bours, who helped to pull the Castle of
Antwerp out of the Spaniards hands as we have said before. This Lady was of
the house of Bieure whom the Lord of Champaigny thought to have married, but
his gout, and Pattons money hindered it, the very same night that he should
have been made sure to her.

Prince Maurice of Nassau having (as we have said) the government of the
United Provinces, committed unto him, in the absence of the Earl of Leicester,
being Prince Maurice m^kes a road into Brabant to divert the siege of Sclu^e
the Earl of Hohenlo his Lieutenant, to make a road into Brabant with a small
army, which his men did spoil; and burnt twenty two villages, and two small
Towns, making a show as if they would besiege Boisledu: which he then thought
easy to be done by reason of the high waters, and the dearth of corn,
wherewith the Towns were as then but badly furnished. But the Duke of Parma
having more men then he needed before Scluce, he sent Haultepenne (Barlaymonts
son) with two and forty companies offoote, and twenty five troops of horse,
who encamped at Bixtell, not very far from Boisleduc. In the mean time the
Estates protracting the succors for Scluce, they began to feel the want of the
Earl of

The which the Earl understanding, supposing that this should recover his
honor which had been interessed by their former Imputations and reproaches:
Having obtained leave from her Majesty, he parted from England, and returned
The Earl of Leicester returns into Zealand.
into Zealand the sixth of July, with many soldiars which he brought with him,
where he was attended with great devotion; where he made preparation to
succor Scluce, and to raise the Duke of Parma from the siege. Prince Maurice
hearing of his coming went unto him, accompanied by General Norris (who was
then to go into England) Collonell Schenck and other Collonells, with their
troops, Haultepenne being come to raize the siege, was incountred by Hohenlos
horsemen and defeated: He was by mischance hurt with the bough of a tree
which fell upon his neck, being broken down with a piece of great
Haultepenne defeated and slain.
Ordinance from the ships, whereof he dyed the fourteenth of July in the
town of Boisleduc.

The Earl of Leicester being returned into Zealand for the releeuing os
Scluce, the General Estates came unto him, unto whom Doctor Leoninus made a
speech in his Excellencies behalf: Giving them to understand that he was very
glad of D. Leonlnus sp^ech to the general estates in his Excellencies name.
their arrival, hoping that by his presence he should be assisted in the
executions of some millitary exploits that were in hand, and required
expedition, the which (especially the relief of Scluce) his excellency did so
much affect, as neglecting his own private affairs he had made have to
return into these parts for the preservation of the general: VVhere-vnto his
Excellency has brought so great an affection, that although he finds his
honor interessed by reason of some scandalls which have been raized during his
absence, and certain letters which were sent into (...) conuoied to Bresque,
where they were received by the ships of Zeeland and transported 1587.
Roger Williams in his book called a discourse of war, makes a brief
relation of the service they did within the town, and to justify their
proceedings, the which I have thought to insert here for the Readers better
satisfaction of the particularities.

I protest (says he) by the faith of a soldier, that what I write is true;
As near as I can remember we kept the town of Scluce some three score days:
diverse think it Sir Roger Will^ams words in his discourse.
no time, for that Harlem, Mastricht and others were kept longer: little do
they think Henry Palmer and his

The third tide Sir Charles Blunt (afterward Lord Montioy and Earl of
Devonshire) offered fifty pounds (besides the commandment his masters and
mariners received at his imbarking) to carry us in some necessary provision
from Sir William Russell, then Lord Governor of Flussing, who indeed was the
causeof our entry, resolution and quick dispatch, sending unto us a good
quantity of victuals and munition; and to say the truth without his
importunity and diligence, we had not entered: and then the world knows the
town had been lost without blows, as a number were in those countries, far
better then Scluce.

The better sort do know, had I and my companions made merchandise of our
lives as tradesmen do of their wars we had not entered into Scluce, for our
directions were but for Ostende we were battred with thirty Cannons and eight
Culuerins on Saint Jacobs Eve, from three of the clock in the morning, until
five in the afternoon, whereas they discharged above four thousand
Cannon-shor. By the Dukes own confession he never saw so furious a battery
in one day. We were made saultable above two hundred and fifty paces betwixt
sieve of the clock and seven: we were above five times at the push of the
pike for our breach, where we spoiled the enemies in great numbers: who
descouering our trenches within overthwart the breach, quieted their furies:
afterward we kept the town eighteen Baskerville, who standing before him,
I showed him, whom he embraced, and turning toward his nobility, he said:
there serves no Prince in Europe a brauer man: true it is that at one sally
captain Thomas Baskeruill had the point dol Campo: indeed he was seconded by a
number of others; but himself was principally known by certain prisoners,
and his great plume of feathers: Sir Francis Vere was also noted by his red
mandillion, who stood always in the head of the armed men, at the assaults of
the 1587.
Heart most valiantly swame in and out to acquaint the Estates, with our wants
and dangers: the world does know what pickes and iarres there was betwixt them
at that time, such as none can deny there was a full resolution taken to enter
in by water. The world does know our army by land retired at midnight from
Blankenborough to Ostend. Let envy and malice speak what they list, truth may
be blamed, but it shall never be shamed. We were lost men but for our own
wits and resolution: our poulder was all spent so far, as we had not to
maintain half a days fight, the enemy had gotten so far into our rampar,
as their shot flanked into our trenches: La Motte lost his arm, and Mounsire
De Stripigny Colonel of the Bourguignons was slain, with diverse captains and
officers: besides by their own report they had slain at that assault about
seven hundred men, and as many hurt: we had hurt and slain at that assault
above a hundred and fifty: Huntley, Sir Edmond Vdall, Sir John Scot, Captain
Ferdinando Groge, Master Sentliger, Captain Nicholas Baskeruille, with diverse
other Gentlemen and Officers behaved themselves most valiantly, both at that
assault and at all other services. During the said siege, Captain Francis
Allen swamme in with Captain Heart after the breach was made, and during his
time none showed greater valor. Truly all the Dutch and Wallons with their
companies, showed themselves constant, resolute and valiant, especially those
brave and valiant captains Metkerke and Heraugier: We were but four English
bands, near two hundred men strong a piece by reason that we divided amongst
them some two hundred and fifty Musketeers, who by the means of the Governor
of Flessingue came with us from his garrison,

In respect of our losses our captains asked pay for the whole numbers:
wherefore the Estates and others would not confess our losses to be so great:
from the first hour of our entry until our going out, none came to us but
such as swamme in. The duke of Parma himself asked me in the presence of
many, what our losses were? I answered him the truth as nere as I could. He
himself with diverse others assured us that he had lost before Sluice five and
forty Captains, besides other Commanders; and more souldiars then he had lost
at Nuys, Bercke, Grave and Venloo.

Some objected also, if they had been in such danger at Sluice, why did the
duke of Parma yield them so large a composition? I know no reason but this,
six days before we gave over the town, all the captains and officers met
in Council, having seen our dangers and some finding the heat of our succors,
we assigned the Articles of our composition, and swore all to have them
granted unto us or to die, and to bury the town and castle, and then to
escape as we could through the drowned lands. The coppie of those Articles
with other letters we sent unto the Earl our General and to the Estates, the
which fell into the enemies hands, by reason the messenger was slain in
swimming by their boats and palissadoe on the river. This is well known unto
all our companions, for the Marquis of Renty out of his trench told Owen a
Welsh Gentleman had much ado to put my foul hand into Italian for the Duke.
We also made a sallie where we lost two Officers, who showed them our
resolution, the which we maintained being face to face with the Duke in our
parle, and returned once from him into the town, thinking that he would not
yield to some of the articles: but his own wisdom, 1587.
Roger Williams own words to iustefie the yielding up of Sluse.

After this loss of Sluice, the Earl of Leicester determined to stop up the
mouth of the haven, but the officers of the admiralty and others were of
opinion that it could not be done, yet the Englishmen thought otherwise:
wher-vpon suspecting the Zeelanders, he sent into Holland for certain old
ships, the which were granted, yet it was not done: but on the other side
sense that time the haven is much bettered, by reason that the sea has scoured
the sand away. The loss of this town made them to murmr much against the
Earl, (especially the common people) who hearing of the The Earl excuses
himself
accord, retired himself into Zeeland; imputing the loss of this town to
the want of Martin Drooghe, whom he caused to be put in prison, where he
continued six months until that the Earl being retired the second time into
England (having justified himself of that wherewith he was accused) he was
set at liberty, and restored to his credit.

Those that were affected unto the Earls party, excused him and laid all the
blame upon the Estates, accusing them, that they sought to take his authority
from him and to command themselves leaving him but the vain title of a
Governor. The Earl passing by the Island of Zeeland arrived the seauenteene of
August at Berghen up Zoom, (a town held also by the English, where as the Lord
Willoughby was governor) from The general estates held at Dordrecht where the
Earl excuses himself.
the general Estates of the Provinces assembled. The Earl being in the open
assembly of the general estates, made a long speech: by the which he first
excused himself and grieved much for the treasons of Stanley, York and
Patton, by whom he complained that he had been basely deceived: the which he
said might have happened to any captain, general of an army or governor of a
country and state, were he more pollitike and of greater experience then he
was. That they were not the first traitors which had deceived their masters in
the said united Provinces. As for the releeuing of Sluice, he would maintain
that it was not his fault, having there in employed his best endeavors.

That the three thousand or 2500. men which had been promised him for
supplies, and the hundred thousand florins had failed, of the which (calling
the tresorer general to witness) he had received but thirty thousand in ready
money. That the said Estates knew well themselves, how ill he had bin served by
the sea captains and officers which had been given him: who made him believe
(to divert him from these succors) that if they had past on, being before the
town the enemy would from the other side of the Sluice of Bruges sink all
their ships with his Artillery, not-with-standing they were sufficiently
informed three was an other depth under the castle, where as they might lie
without any danger as he said it appeared by the report of captains and
soldiars that were come from them of the town. So as he could not put in
execution the desire

Whereupon, after they had laid before him the letters written by him in June
before out of England to secretary Iunius, tending to fortefie and incorrage
such as he 1587.
Charles and King Philip his son had done, and if he should be restrained of
that authority, that he would abandon the Netherlands quite, and retire
himself into England. Whereupon the Nobility and towns of Holland, Zeeland
and Friseland presented a declaration unto the Earl in writing dated the
twentieth day of August, which they intended to have given him before, but for
some The States declaration to the Earl of the Leicester.
good considerations they had forborne to offer it till then. Declaring thereby
(as duty bound them) how much they held themselves bound unto her Majesty,
for her great care of Religion, and the good of those countries, and that it
had pleased her to employ Charles the fifth or to any other Prince whatsoever:
but for that they did find by experience, that there are diverse seditious and
busy headed fellows, which labor to sow dissension, and to breed
discontents, betwixt the Estates of these countries and his Excelencie, seeking
to blemish and disgrace the authority of the Estates, and to make his
Excelencie absolute Governor in all respects. They let his Excelencie
understand (to the end that all iealousies, and distrusts might be laid aside
and forgotten) that they did and do yet understand, that for want of a natural
Prince, the sovereignty of those countries returned unto the Nobility,
Gentlemen For want of a natural Prince the government returns to the Noble
gentry and towns.
Charles the fifth had: or the like in every respect that the Governors of the
Netherlands (which are by them appointed) ever had: They besought his Excelency
to understand, that although the Estates, Governors, Officers and Ministers of
Justice, in the time of the Emperor Charles the fifth, and of other Princes his
predecessors, were not by oath bound unto the Governor Charles the fifth did in
times past, when as he made the Duchess Lady Marguerity; Queen Mary, the
Duchess of Sauoie, and others, Governors general, yet he committed not the
sovereignty unto them, but reserved it unto himself: and so it was now with
those countries, ever excepting that which has been since altered, by the
contract made with her Majesty.

And they likewise understood, that all matters in the time of the Emperor
Charles the fifth were at the disposition of the General: so should they now be
at his Excelencies disposition and of the council of Estate, according unto the
act of transferring the government unto his Excelency, understanding that in
making any dispatches the instructions which were given, or any thing else that
was accustomed to be decreed and published Charles his name, shall now be
made, decreed and published in the 1578.
name and under the seal, counter-seale and signet of the general estates, in
such causes as concern the whole Estate of the united Provinces in general:
but if they touch any particular Province, they shall be done in the name and
under the seal of the same The form of the oath made by the men of war.
Province. Also that all Governors of Provinces, general or particular,
Colonels, Captains and other officers and men of war, shall be bound by
oath to be obedient to the united Provinces in general: to his Excellency as
governor general thereof, and to the Provinces and Towns of the same, wherein
they shall be particularly employed: and that all of them in general shall be
obedient unto your Excellency as governor general, and the Colonels,
Captains, Officers and soldiers to the Governors

Touching the absolute power which is given unto his Excellency in matters of
war: the Estates understand that the same shall extend and have power over
all soldiers and men of war both by sea and land, as well her Majesty's
succors, as those that are otherwise in pay, and entertained by these
countries, to command them when time serves to march against the enemy, or to
go upon any other enterprise or service, and to execute justice and martial
law, provided always that his excellency shall not levy any more soldiers,
then may be well entertained and paid out of her Majesty's succors, and the
contributions which are raised in the country, according to the resolution

To this declaration made by the Estates, the Earl of Leicester made answer to
the first six articles, upon the margent thereof, saying that he neither
sought nor affected The Earl of Leicesters answer to the declaration of the
first of September.
any greater authority, then what the general Estates had given him by the
foresaid act, wherewith he was well content, not seeking in any sort to
diminish the authority which belonged unto the Estates, neither yet desired he
to make any question thereof, but

As touching the oath, his Excellency held it not convenient that the soldiers
should take an oath to the particular Provinces or Towns, neither yet to their
governors or lieutenants, but it was not only a new invention, but to be
feared, that so many oaths would breed both confusion and contempt among the
soldiers, and that it ought to be and that they should not do nor practice any
thing secretly that might be prejudicial 1587.
The estates seek to reconcile the Earls of Leicester and Hohenlo.


Besides this alteration, there was at that time a great heart-burning betwixt
the Earls of Leicester and Hohenlo which the Estates sought to reconcile:
whereupon they sent on the eigh-teene of August, the Lords of Capell and
Noortwick, the counselors Cooper and Camminga, William Bardesius, and Jacob
Walck of the council of estate, unto the earl of Hohenlo (being a man much
esteemed and beloved of the soldiars to whom the Estates were greatly
beholding for many good and valiant services) who was then at Campfeere in the
Island of Walchren, entreating him to come to Midelbourg to the Earl of
Leicester, to end all controversies betwixt them, and to acknowledge The Earl
of Hohenlos answer to the estates.
Maurice, whose Lieutenant he was, had acknowledged him for the governor, and
had promised him faith and obedience. To whom Hohenlo answered that he was a
free Earl of Germany, and no way subject unto the Netherlands, nor tide unto
them by oath, and that he had before refused the Archduke Mathias, and the Duke
of Aniou and Brabant, and therefore he was not yet resolved to subject himself
unto his Excelence having some reasons not to trust him, not only in regard of
the difference betwixt them two, but also for the quarrel betwixt him and Sir
Edward Norris to whom he imputed the only cause, or at the least that he did
mainetaine him therein, and made him a knight. More-ouer he said that he

And that some which did openly bandy themselves against the sovereignty of
the Estates, and did thereby pourchase great credit among the people, should
be first punished and then banished from court, which done and the Estates
restored to

The Earl of Hohenloo being entreated to say so much himself unto his
Excellency, Maurice had done, he said that for that time he could do no more,
1587.
desiring them not to trouble him any further, until the authority of the
Estates were restored, and the lawful privileges of the Provinces maintained
as before: and touching Prince Maurice, he said he was a vassal and subject,
but he was a free German Earl, and that they could not compel him, unless
he would freely of himself consent thereunto: and yet he would continue a
friend and well-willer unto the united Provinces, wherein he had already
served fourteen years together, and had spent a hundred and fifty thousand
Dollers above his entertainment in their service, entreating them to report
favorably of him: and so after many other words and honorable protestations,
the Deputies took their leaves. This conference was the twenty of Great
consusion by mistaking betwixt the Earl of Leicester and Hohenlo.
English soldiers, which (above her Majesty's ordinary succors) were sent unto
them. In the mean time he was advertised that the Earl of Hohenlo about the
nine and twenty and thirty of September, had assembled a great number of
soldiers about Williams-stat, intending to dislodge his said soldiers from
Delfs-hauen, as one of the chief men in Delft had advertised him, whereof he
was not informed by any light reports, but by men of such credit, as he could
not choose but believe it: whereupon he desired them to take some speedy order
therein, saying, that he would no longer endure any such indignities, that
every man should in that sort have soldiers by himself, and that

After that he sent an other advertisement unto the Council of Estate, how
that the Maurice being demanded what it meant, and they remembering themselves,
they found that the Earl of Hohenlo had gathered these soldiers together at
William-stat to do some great exployt upon the enemy about Lillo near
Antwerp, whereof Prince Maurice advertised the Earl of Leicester, whereunto
upon the sixteen of September, he before he could have any intelligence of
the Earl of Leicesters consent where-by it 1587.
The Earl of Leicesters declaration to the estates.
The Earl of Leicester being much moved with the declaration delivered him at
Dordrecht, and with some other occations which past; he made an answer in
manner of a replycation to the estates, being then at Dordrecht, bearing date
the seventh of September. Showing, that whereas the Queen of England, and all
other Princes had refused them, pitying their estate, being zealous to
relligion, and affecting the ancient law and league betwixt England and the
house of Bourgongne, had been moved to aid and assist them, whose Majesty at
their instant su^e had sent him over into those parts, upon whom they had
imposed the government thereof, the which he (preferring the love he bare unto
those countries, before his age which required rest) had taken upon him and did
his best endeavor for the good of the common cause, but being called The Earl
complains of their letter to the Queen the forth of February.
him thereby in those countries, but also to bring him into disgrace with her
Majesty beingful of false and sla^derous reports: yet having reconcyled al with
her Majesty, he was now returned over again. He then excused the loss of
Scluis through the want of men and money, which had bin promised, laying the
blame upon the officers of the admiralty If the estates means were not
sufficient there was bope of a peace.
of his authority, contrary to the act, and the letters sent from Middlebourg
unto her Majesty; by which their show of small esteem, and cross proceeding,
there was great loss to be expected in Gelderland, the which he protested
ought not to be imputed unto him, being ready to do his best endeavor to
impeach it, so as he might have the men and money that were promised at
Middlebourg. But understanding that the want of money, and deferring of the
soldiars, was by some imputed to the need and poverty of the Provinces, as
unable to bear so great a burden: by others to the treaty of peace appear by
her Majesty's sending of Sir Francis Drake into Spain; and his own return
1587.
was not restrained by the contract, from any treaty of peace, although she
be content not to seek any for these countries, without their priuity and
consent. But if they could not raise sufficient means to maintain their
wars, he demanded what they would have him to do therein with her Majesty, or
what they desired more.

If they thought good to continue the government in him (according to the act)
with the ordring of their contributions, to be at his and the council of
Estates disposition: and that they could make it apparent unto him, that with
her Majesty's ordinary aid, they were able to continue the wars, he was
content they should use him therein, so as they maintained him in the same
authority, which until that time he had inioyed. The Earl desires m^re
contribu^ion.


And if they understood by their act of the ordinary contribution of two
hundred thousand Gilders the month, to give him leave and limmit thereunto, he
would not take the charge upon him, not holding it sufficient to pay the
garrisons, according to the Estate set down by him, much less to maintain an
army in the field; wherefore if the could make no better means, nor raise any
greater contribution, he knew no reason for his stay there, nor how he should
do them any good; whereupon he desired their resolution, to advertise her
Majesty, that she might provide for her own affairs.

Lastly he said he had in charge to tell them, that her Majesty was moved to
aid and assist them, not only by reason of the ancient leagues betwixt
England and the Princes of those countries, but also and especially for the
contracts made for the intercourse of traficke of both countries, as it
appears by the Charters and Instruments made by diverse towns and Provinces
of the same, as of Dordrecht, Delft, Leyden, Amsterdam, Bryel, Middlebourg,
Campheer, Zeerickzee and others, which Instruments, were yet extant to be
seen, and for that cause her Majesty was pleased to aid and assist them at
The Queen desiteth to entertain the ancient contracts.
their requests, to the end that seeing her Majesty's royal intent toward
them, they for their parts should endeavor to do that which were requisite, not
only in regard of good dealing, but also in respect of the contracts,
entercourses, instruments and former conditions

They showed how that in the year 1572. they had lawfully begun war
against the King of Spain, for the preservation of those countries, the
maintenance of Religion, The Estates answer to the Earl of Leicesters letters.
Dauison and others, they offered the sovereignty unto her, by their
Ambassadors, from whom they obtained a gracious aid, as appears by the
contract, for the which they most humbly thanked her Majesty, and were the
more highly bound unto her, in that it had pleased her to from the full
performance of the contract, nor of the act of delation of the Governors 1587.
authority, nor yet with-drawne the contributions, nor once failed in any
point of their The ^states compl^ine of the act of restraint.
discovered) followed, but by reason of that act it could not be prevented. The
Estates to avoid the like practices, yet not to blemish his authority, but for
the restoring of the authority due to the governors of the said Provinces, were
forced to take some order therein. That which was written by them unto his
Excelencie after the betraying of Deuenter and Zutphen, procceded of mere
grief and necessity, and yet was done so secretly, in regard of his honor, as
it was not known to the common people, before that the coppie thereof was sent
out of England to Vtrecht, (and a motion made unto the Estates that had written
the letter to disavow the same) with certain other letters They excuse the
bitterness of their ^etter of the 4 of February.
her Majesty, was to no other end, but to have her Majesty's Ambassador that
was to besent over the better instructed: but hearing that it was hardly
censured, they said that they meant not thereby to charge his Excelency but such
as had wronged and abused them, desiring him withal to impute the sharpness
of their letter, to their office, and the oath they had taken, the free liberty
of the Estates of those countries, but especially to the treason then
committed, rather then to any evil intent in them. They thanked his Excelencies
for showing his noble courage and disposition, notwithstanding the precedent
misfortune, in that he was resolved, not only to be an earnest intercessor for
those countries, but also to come over again, and that he had done his best
endeavor for the Maurice, touching their war by sea, hoping and desiring that
it might go forward. That the Nobility and States of Holland had presented a
certain declaration unto his Excelencie being in Dordrecht, desiring some
conference, and that there might be a good correspondencie betwixt his
Excelencie as Governor and Captaime general, the general and particular
Estates, and the governors of particular Provinces; that the charges of the war
should not exceed, as nere as might be the means of their contributions: that
order might be taken for the repayring of that which had been done the year
before contrary to the contract, and for the punishing of such as sought to
sow dissension betwixt his Excelency charges of the wars within the country,
besides the wars at sea, and diverse particular 1587.
The Hollanders contribution in two years.
known and unknown charges have brought in, and paid at the least thirty nine
hundredth thousand gilders; they may easily suppose that so great a sum of
money could not be levied without great difficulty: so as there was no cause
of complaint against them of Holland, having brought in much more then was
spoken of in England, notwithstanding their great losses by sea, and otherwise
by their shipping and trade of merchandise: which made them to wonder that such
a motion should be made, to look into their Estate, and to consider if their
contribution with her Majesty's aid, were sufficient to maintain the wars, as
they ought to be. The Prince of Orange with the help of God, and without any
great aid from her Majesty (the towns and forts being then The Estates hoped
that the Queen would make no peace without them.
the dealing for a peace, they had so great considence in her Majesty and in
his Excelencie, that according to the contract, they would do nothing therein
without the consent of the general Estates. They had herd what the King of
Denmark had propounded in anno. 1586. and what was done therein: as also of
her Majesty's answer touching the imploiment of Andreas de Loo. They had bin
likewise advertised by word of mouth from Walck and Menin counselors of
Estate, the which was secretly imparted unto the Estates of the country, to
have their advise therein, where her Majesty was not spoken of, but with all
honor and due respect, giving no cause whereby any suspicion might grow, that
they should report her Majesty had sought a peace without their consents; and
therefore they which had invented such false surmises, deserved to be punished.
That the Estates of Holland, determined to observe the contract made with her
Majesty, to put to their helping hands for the maintenance of his Excelencies
honor and authority, and were likewise content to contribute the monthly sum of
200. thousand gilders, to be at the disposition of his Excelencie and of the
Council of State, with condition that the other Provinces should do the and so
by the help of GOD, with her Majesty's promised succors, being complete and
1587.
Another declaration made by the Estates to the Earl of Leicest^r 16. October.
points propounded unto him at Dordrecht the 16. of October. Showing that the
Estates desired to continue his Exelency in the same authority, which by the
contract made with her Majesty and the act of the general Estates was given
him: desiring him that (for the ceasing of al controversies) it would please
his Exelency to keep the oath which Iunius, bearing date the 10. of July, the
authority of the Estates was brought in question, they thought it convenient to
make a more plain declaration thereof, containing the force of their
authority, the which they said they were bound by oath to justify and
maintain, for if they were not lawfully authorized in the sovereignty by the
Provinces, then had they no power nor authority, to put the King of Spain from
his Inheritance, nor to make war against That the Estates have lausu^l
authority over the Provinces.
him, nor yet to deal in any sort by contract or otherwise, with the French
King and the Queen of England, neither yet to confer the government to his
Excelency which Charles the fifth who although they were great personages and
Princes of his own blood, yet he always reserved unto himself, to make
peace or truce, to begin a new war, to make leagues and alliances with
foreign Princes and countries: the making of proclamations and decrees
concerning the Estate of the land. The altring and changing of the minte and
standard, the restraint of traficke, and dealing with neutrall and foreign
countries, proclamations whereby neighbor Kings, Potentates and commonweals
should be Charles the 5. And that in the Estates name, which did usually pass
under the name of the Emperor Charles the fifth which would in no sort be
contrary to the contract made with her Majesty, neither yet against the act of
declaration of the commission,

The second point of controversy, was the oath of fidelity to be made by the
soldiars, The Estates desire an oath of the soldiars according to the contract.
and the authority of the particular Governor of Provinces; and for that they
found some mistaking of the oath to be made, they desired that according to the
contr^ct the soldiars should swear fidelity and obedience to the Provinces in
general, and to his 1587.
members thereof, where they shall be employed or placed in garrison: And that
they shall obey his Excelencie as Governor general; and that the chief
Colonels, Captains, Officers and Soldiars, shall in like manner swear to be
obedient to the particular Governors of Provinces, and to their Lieutenants,
wherso ever they shall be employed, and this for the maintenance of the rights of
Provincial Governors, saying that the change of garrisons, and distribution of
soldiars, ought to be done by them, for if they had had that authority, and
the form of oath before recited had been observed, they had not lost the town
of Deuenter, nor the fort by Zutphen, but (being discovered long before) it
had been prevented by the Governor: and for that cause the Estates were The
Estates desire to have the authority of particular Governors maintained.
Maurice (in regard of the honorable services done by the Prince of Orange of
famous memory, who neither spared life nor living for the defense of their
preuiledges) of the authority which of right belongs unto him, and by oath and
promise was given him, before his Excelencie came into those countries.

They were likewise compelled to see that the soldiars pay, and all martial
causes were so governed, as the charge might be borne out of the contribution
of the Provinces: and out of the particular contribution of every Province, the
charge of the same Province, for the which they stood bound, should be paid,
for otherwise great confusion might grow. They said that they were summoned by
the second member of the Estates A declaration of the Estates of Holland and
Friseland touching their preuileges.
of the said Provinces, have (upon mature deliberatio^) according to their
oaths and duties, thought it fit and necessary by this their declaration to set
down the true and lawful Estate of the countries of Holland and Westfrisland,
hoping that every man that shall read the same, will censure it as favorably, as
the troblesome Estate thereof requires. It is evidently known that the
Provinces of Holland, Westfrisland and Zeeland, for the space of 800. years
hitherto have bin governed by Earls and Countesses, to whom by the nobility,
gentry and towns, representing the Estates of these countries, the inheritance
and sovereignty thereof was lawfully given, who behaved themselves with such
moderation and discretion in their governments, as they never undertook any
war, or the advice and consent of the gentlemen and towns, whereunto they were
by writing 1587.
William the second of that name,

It is also manifest that the charge and office of the Estates was to be
careful to prouidetutors, governors and gardians for their Princes in their
nonage, as the like was done for Earl William the fifth of that name, being
distracted of his wits. Lastly it Charles and the Duchess Mary his daughter,
at which time Maximilian seeking by force to innouate and alter many things
contrary During the minority of the Emperor Charles the Estates had the
sovereignty.
to the authority of the Estates, he brought the whole state of the country
into great extremity and danger: and the Emperor Charles the fifth himself
during his minority, was by the authority of the States provided of Tutors, and
the country of fit and convenient The contempt of the Estates cause of the
troubles.
to compel these Provinces to that which the States being assembled (in regard
of their preuiledges) held inconvenient, especially in matters which concerned
the Estate of in outward show do merit and deserve, and of the causes and
serious matters therein 1587.
From whence the authority of the Estates is derived.
How the town of Holland and Zealand are governed.
which manner of making such assemblies is as ancient as the towns themselves
be: Such as are once chosen, continue so while the live, or as long as they
inhabit there, and when any one dies or gives over his place, the said
assembly with the consent of the Burgers chose an other to make up their
number. This assembly has all power and authority to consult, resolve and
dispose of all matters concerning that country, and their The Council chose
the Burguemaisters and Schepen.
towns those elections are absolute, in some by nominatio^ of a double number,
of which the ordinary number is made full by the State-holder or the Princes
Lieutenant. The Burguemaisters officers to govern in all pollitick causes, as
well concerning the treasor and revenues of the town, as the welfare and
preservation of the same, being committed to their charge and government. The
College of Schepen attend only upon the ordinary administration of Justice as
well cryminal as civil, and have authority to execute description of the true
form of government of the towns of Holland and Zeeland. 1587.
The form of government.
intelligence of all the proceedings of the country) matters may be resolved,
nor their resolutions with more unity, consent and authority better executed:
so as it is no wonder if these Provinces have continued so inseparable, and as
durable as any State whatsoever. Now to bring these particular councels of
nobility and towns into one assembly, it cannot be done but by deputies
appointed by them to supply their places; to which end, when as any matter of
importance (concerning the estate of the country) What the Estates be.
Inter munera necessaria. And all those that have had any intelligence of the
affairs of this country, can witness, what dissension many times grows, and
with what difficulty the deputies are brought to accept of those commissions,
who returning home again from these assemblies, make report unto the
Magistrates of the towns and places from whence they were sent, of all matters
that had past.

Wherefore you must understand that those which affirm the sovereignty of the
country to consist in the Estates, their meaning is not of any private persons,
or deputies Whence the sovereignty of the Estate^ proceeds.
of the commons, cannot be overthrown: and that the Estates have as great
authority 1587.
C: de Rechter.

My Author has with your patience, made this digression to show what the
Estates be, and what their authority is, for that it is a very material point
to be understood, and a great question in this history.

After that the Prince of Parma had taken Scluse, he turned all his disseignes
to fortify himself upon the Sea, with an incredible charge, causing new
chanells to The Duke of Parmas new disseigne.
The Ministers persuade the Estates to reconciliation with the Earl of
Leicester.
The Estates answer.
bring them into hatred, dislike and jealousy with the common people, as it
happened in Flanders to the Prince of Orange of famous memory, to the total
ruin of the Churches there; and that now by the means of strange and
unaccustomed government CHRIST his Church; and to let the Churches of Flanders
be a glass for them to look in, and to pray unto GOD for their hedde and
other Magistrates; with many other admonitions.

Upon the same subject the Scout, Burguemaisters, Schepen and Council of
Vtrecht; writ very earnestly unto the Estates of Holland, the one and
twentieth of September, The Magisstrates of Vtrect write unto the Estates.
charging them in a manner, as if they meant to shake of the Queen of England
Their answer.
to cover their contentious factions, by bringing the Estates of Holland into
jealousy: assuring them of Vtrecht that they would carry themselves in such
sort as their neighbors 1587.
The Earl of Leicester seeks to seize upon Leyden.
refusing to acknowledge him, or to receive him or his men any more. And he on
the other side sought to draw some unto his party, as well by the persuasions
of his servants and his creatures of the same country, as by surprises: as
among others they sought to seize upon Leyden, whereas diverse of the
inhabitants, most part strangers fled out of Flanders and Brabant, with
Captain Cosmo Pesarengis, a Piedmonto^s, and Captain Nicholas de Mawlde,
son to the Lord of Mansaert (who had a company within the town) sought to
make themselves masters thereof, to imprison all the magistrates Andrew Schot,
whereupon they apprehended one Jacob Volmar a Fleming, and Captain Cosmo
Pesarengis, and committed them to prison. Maulde escaped, but he was afterward
taken near Woerden by the Lord of Poelgeest, and brought back to Leyden, where
being examined, he confessed the enterprise without any torture: wher-vpon the
Magistrates of Leyden to maintain Prince Maurice his authority, being governor
of Holland, and of the Estates of the contry, on the 26. of October, they
condemned the said Volmar, Pesarengis and Maulde to loose their heads; holding
it according to their laws to be an Act of treason, Mawlds head (in regard of
his honorable house and family) was buried. He was much lamented (even of the
judges themselves) by reason of his youth, his good disposition, and the
services which he had done to the Prince of Orange, and for that of late he
had carried himself so valiantly within Scluce during the siege. The Earl
disavowed this enterprise, and purged himself before the Queen, who was not
pleased that he should so far exceed his Commission, as to attempt upon any
Towns, seated in the heart of Holland, as Leyden is. At Vtrecht there was a
book made and put in Print, tending to the excusing The Estates do wisely
conceal the cause of the execution at Leyden.
Leyden it was expressly forbidden to be bought or sold within their town and
jurisdiction, upon a great penalty, as being a seditious and scandalous
libell, yet many disliked of this execution, for that the Estates during these
divisions did not make known the reasons that moved them thereunto, the which
not-with-standing for great and weighty considerations they did wisely
conceal, in regard of the Earl of Leicester, which reasons were not then to
be laid open, yet the Estates were the worse spoken of: but all men of
judgment, especially such as had seen the process, and the offenders own
confessions, esteemed this execution to be just and necessary, whereon the
estate and welfare of the country depended.

The 11. of September a Captain of the Estates horse, being with his company
in Meppel surprised by the Estate^.
the country of Westphalia near unto Lengen, about the town of Meppel, he
sent 12. of his men on foot, to crave leave of the Magistrate of the town,
that they might enter to buy victuals and other necessaries: being at the Port
and letting them know the cause of their coming, and that they desired not any
thing but for their money: the 1587.
Verdugo having a fort at Hassel, half a league from it, which might hinder
the passage. They thought it best to abandon it, having profited nothing in
that quarter, which is neuter, but only made poor families.

Whilst these factions were in Holland, there grew a great quarrel betwext
Colonel Diricke Sonoy geuernor of North Holland, and the town of Enchuysen,
for that he Sonoy sought to secure and settle himself in his government,
causing captain Duuenuord with his company to leave the town, and to bring
other companies thither, to which end he had persuaded his Excelency to come
to see the towns of North-Holland, meaning under color of his presence and
authority to assure himself of the government: the which being disliked by
the Bourguers, for that long before they and other towns with the Noblemen and
Gentlemen of Holland by force of their Union, were bound by oath to defend and
mayntaine the priuiledes of Holland and The town of Enchuysen desire the earl
of L^icester to forbeate to enter into their town being jealous of Sonoy.
that the government of West-Freezland, should be in that sort separated from
Holland and Zeeland, and consequently (against alorder) taken from the house of
Nassau: whereupon after diverse assemblies and conferences, they found no better
means to prevent all inconveniences, and to maintain the peace in
North-Holland, then with due respect and reverence, to entreat his Excellency
to defer his coming into their town, till a more convenient time, when as
they might receive him with more security, greater joy, and full consent of all
the Bourgers, humbly beseeching him not to mislike thereof, so as for that time
there was not any thing done, but after they grew to further William Lewis of
Nassau, son to Cont John governor of Freezland for the estates, married the
Lady Anne of Nassau daughter to the Prince of Orange, and sister to Prince
Maurice who lived but three years in marriage and died of child. About this
time there was much speech in England touching the affaiers of the Netherlands,
as also about the Earl of Leicesters authority and government and of the
proposition of peace, many holding with the Estates and others against them:
some thinking that with two hundred thousand gilders a month, well governed,
together with her Majesty's aid of Speeches in England touching the
Netherlands.
five thousand foot and a thousand horse complet and well paid by the Queen,
besides that which might be gotten by booties in the frontire towns, and by
conuoyes and wealth of the said Provinces, being joined with Spain, were
dangerous for England, as 1587.
The Earl of Leicester called home into England.


THat he was much grieved, that her Majesty was so displeased, with their bad
carriage The Earl of Leicesters letter at his departure out of the Netherlands.
Harbert had in her Majesty's behalf to show them. Subscribed, Your good
friend ROBERT LEICESTER.

THis letter came unto the Estates hands the second of December, whereupon the
The estates write to the Earl of Leicester.
next day after the general Estates wrote unto the Earl of Leicester how that
they understood of his going into England, beseeching him to recommend the
estate of the country unto her Majesty, saying they had written unto the
estates of the particular 87.
Harbert her Majesty's Ambassador, to solicit the general Estates toyeeld
unto a peace.

The Earl of Leicester being returned into England, the Queen commanded him
to resign his government of the Netherlands into the hands of the general
Estates, from women he had received it, the which he did the seventeenth of
December by an Act under his hand as follows.

ROBERT Earl of Leicester Baron of Denbighe etc. Lieutenant for the Queens
The Earl of Leicester resig^ his government of the Vni ted Provinces.
Majesty of England, Governor and Captain general of the United Provinces:
To all to whom these presents shall come greeting. As it was her Majesty's
pleasure to give us the charge to be her Lieutenant general of all the
forces, sent by her for the aid and assistance of the united Provinces,
according to a contract made with the Estates concerning the same: where-vppon
the said general Estates had also imposed upon us, the government of the said
Provinces, both for matters polliticke, and of Justice, according to the
commission, and Act of declaration of the same government, Dated the first of
February, 1586. And for that the present Estate of this Kingdom requyring it,
we were commanded to return home into England, for her Majesty's

This Act was presented to the Estates by Sir Henry Killegrey upon the first of
April 1588. being Agent there for her Majesty: With excuse that it came no
sooner to his hands: Which Resignation the Estates caused to be generally
proclaimed throughout all the Provinces, to the end that every man might know
he was discharged of his oath to the Earl of Leicester, remaining only bound
to the united Provinces, States and Towns etc. So as after that no man would
acknowledge any government of that of the Estates and the soldiars no other
Captain general then Prince Maurice, and the Earl of Hohenloo his
Lieutenant.

The twentieth of December Collonell Schenck being at Rhynberghe, having
gathered out of the neighbor garrisons some four hundred foot and three
hundred horse; Schencks enterprise.
he marched near unto the town of Zulpich in the Diocese of Collogne upon
the frontiers of Iuilliers, where he lay quiet for three days, doing wrong to
no man, until that his troops were fortified No man could judge what his
disseigne was: many thinking it was but to spoil the Territories of Collogne,
against the which he had a great spleen. But on the two and twentieth day,
being risen with his troops, he made a show to march toward the quarter of
Eyssell, the brute whereof came presently to Bonne, being four leagues from
Collogne. But turning head, he past at noone day through a wood at the Village
of Rhybourg, and so marching on, he advanced to the he sent certain horsemen,
before who staid all those they met. Approaching 1588.
Schenke surp^seth Bonne
great a blow, as not only the Port, but a part of the wall was overthrown,
by the which the soldiars entered in a throng unto the second port, the which
was not so strong as the first, which they beat down suddenly with hatchets and
pikeaxes. Being entered into the town some of his men ran unto the rampars and
the Boulwarks, and others unto the Market place, the which they seized on
without any resistance, there be ing neither captain nor commander to put the
soldiars and Bourgers in order for their Hans Wichman, and soon after the said
canonier was overthrown with a small shot. This being done they beat down
Stockem port, by the which the Ritmaister Gerard van Balen entered with his
cornet, the other horsemen being already entered by the posterne. The colonel
who was entered at the first with the footmen went then to horseback, and
ran throughout all the quarters of the town, placing his sentinels and corpse
de guard, forbidding upon pain of death to spoil, until they were well
assured. The Bourgers hearing this great noise and terror of the petard, the
trompets sounding and the drommes beating an alarm with the soldiers cries,
kept themselves close in their houses, for wheresoever the soldiars discovered
any light, Schencke placed his horsemen in the Bishops Palace to preserve the
chancery. So after that he had set all things in good order, being master of
the town he abandoned it to his soldiars, who spoiled it and put the Bourgers
to ransom, entreating them no other-wise then it it had been an Bonne spoiled
and ransomed
enemies town taken by assault: Charles Bille governor of the town hearing
the noise which the petard made, and the alarm, escaped half dressed and fled
toward Confluence. He had been advertised two days before that Schenks men
were lodged about Zulpich, whereupon he sent a good part of the garrison to
keep the neighbor villages from spoiling, yet he was sufficiently warned that
there were mad lads would come to visit him: whereunto he answered: that he
must take the care of it: for the which Schenck did afterward flowt him.

This town of Bonne being well assured for Truchses, Schenck resolved to keep
it, causing it to be rampared and fortefied in all places, and then did furnish
it withal things necessary for a town of war: withal he caused a fort to
be presently built right opposite on the other side of the river of Rine. The
Duke of Cleues and Iuliers advised Ernest of Bauaria, Bishop of Cologne and
Liege, to make a friendly accord with Schenck, or at the least (to get more
time to make preparation to beseege it) that he should make a truce with him.
As touching an accord which was propounded by the Duke of Cleaues
commissioners, Schenck would willingly have given ear unto it, except some
points concerning the contribution: But it seemed Ernest that this accord,
would be some blemish to his reputation authority and greatness: and that
there-by he should incense the King of Spain: so as nothing was done,
desiring rather to call the Duke of Parma to his succors, to his great charge,
and his subjects ruin: who afterward sent the Prince of Chymay 1588


The second of December, some of the Estates men surprised Ville-woord, two
Leagues from Brussells, the which they spoiled but being situated in the
champian Ville ^orde surprised by the estates.
country and not able to keep it, they abandoned it; in their retreat, some
lewd persons se^ fire of it, so as many houses were burnt. The Queen of
England being importuned by the king of Spain to make a peace (who under this
pretext sought to lul her a sleep until that his sea army were all ready) was
resolved to give ear thereunto and to enter into some conference with his
Deputies, the place of their assembly being appointed Deputies from the Queen
unto the states
at Bourbroue in Flanders: and to that end she sent in October past unto the
general estates of the united Provinces, Doctor Herbert one of her Masters of
request Ioachim Ortels agent in England for the said estates, to understand
their disposition and resolution toward a peace: giving them charge to protest
openly that either they must send their Deputies with hers to treat of a peace
or else she would call back her troops into England.

The Estates having assembled all the Nobility, gentlemen and towns,
not-withstanding all foreign and homebred troubles, the mutinies of their
soldiars: civil factions: and the threats of the great Spanish Armado, which
they were well informed was coming with so great a power, waighing all
circomstances with a constant and firm resolution, they absolutely rejected all
treaties of peace with the enemy. And although they had given the Queens
Ambassadors a very resolute answer, yet this year 1588. Deruties sent from the
estates into England.
Sebastian Loze and Leonard Cazembroot two counselors of estate, unto her
Majesty to dissuade her from all treaty of peace, for the which these were
partly their reasons. That in respect of her Majesty's honor they were to
conform themselves to any thing that should be pleasing unto her: yet they
thought it fit to advertise and fore-warne her, that she could not expect any
firm and assured peace from the king of Spain being the head of the holy
league, which all former acts and contracts do plainly testefie, for there is
no disposition in the King of Spain to yield to the free exercise of the
reformed relligion: wherefore they besought her Majesty to surcease al treaties
of peace for a while, saying that time would soon teach them more experience:
desiring to know what conditions the Duke of Parma propounded, and what her
Majesty The contributions of the Provinces in two years.
of two years, (whilst the Earl of Liecester was governor) they had levied
four score hundred thousand gilders, which amounts to eight hundred thousand
pounds starling, only for the extraordinary charges of casual war by sea
and by land, and that the Prounices being well and orderly governed, were able
not only to contribute the like sums; but to raise more, so as they had no
reason to despair of the success

In regard of the situation and strength of the Provinces which are united:
that there is no country in the world stronger then it, having yet above sixty
towns and forts able to resist the enemies forces, where by they were not
afraid of the enemies approach, neither yet doubted to make head against him,
wherefore their countries cause was not to be held desperate. As for the
divisions and factions that were within the said Provinces, they would
presently cease, the treaty of peace being broken of, and that her Majesty's
resolution might be openly delivered, that for the mayntayning and preserving
of those countries in unity and concord, she would appoint some Nobleman of
quality (according to the contract which they had made with her) to govern The
treaty of peace would bring with it a despair both in the maintaining of
religion 1588.


Many of the reformed religion and good commonweals men, would presently make
difficulty to contribute their money, as thinking ready money their best
merchandise to take with them, when they shall be forced to forsake the
country. And they of the Romish religion would refuse and hinder the
contribution, there-by to press them to a peace. The chief Colonels,
Captains, and Soldiers both by sea and land would be the worse paid, and
would fear that a peace being concluded, they would be little esteemed: and
for that cause they would practice private mutinies and

In the first three months there will be a hundred occasions offered to revenge
themselves for matters past, as well upon the inhabitants of these countries,
as upon her Majesty and her subjects, to the apparent ruin of religion, not
only in these countries, but also in England and in other nations. And the
wars continuing, the affairs in France concerning religion may be the better
secured. The King of Spain may dye, and after his death a better peace may
happily be obtained. In maintaining this just and upright cause, we ought above
all things to rely upon the grace and assistance of God, maintaining his
honor, glory and holy word, and the rather for that we have so often felt his A
necessary consideration upon the treaty of peace, with this sentence, as a
most assured means to deal with the enemy, to have him in Jealousy, Vna
salus victis, nullam sperare salutem. In which book the Author (besides many
ancient Histories) produces the examples of our time, of the Protestants in
Germany, the Duke of Saxony and the Lansgraue of Hesse: and of the
Protestants in France, all which were circumuented by their too much trust and
confidence, and on the contrary side, they which opposed themselves valiantly
in arms trusting in the power of God, and the equity of their cause, as those
of Magdebourg and of Rochell, not only held and maintained their religion, but
also were the causes

He showed likewise that kings and Princes do not easily forget nor forgive
such as have borne arms against them, and these Provinces have not only borne
arms against their King, but have rejected and wholly forsaken him, altered
religion, and have dealt with other Princes against him, with many other
reasons which he set down to dissuade 1588.


About the same time the Estate minted a certain coin for a perpetual
memory, upon the which there was a Lion graven tied to a pillar, (whereon
stood the image of A certain coin made by the Estates.
the Duke of Alua) with a collar termed the inquisition, the which a Mouse
gnawed in pieces, with this inscription Rosis Leonem loris mus liberat, that
is, the Mouse sets the Lion at liberty. On the other side stood the Pope and
the King of Spain, with signs of peace, flattering him to stand still until
he were tied again, but the Lion refuses it, with this Motto. Liber, vinciri
Leo pernegat, which is, the Lion will be no more bound,

These declarations before said notwithstanding, the Queen of England pressed the
Estates very earnestly by Sir Henry Killegry, to have their resolute answer,
who desired Commissioners sent out of England to treat with the Duke of Parina.
them on the second of March, to send their deputies to Ostend to meet with her
Majesty's Ambassadors, who were already gone thither, to treat with the Duke of
Parma, he showed them likewise that her Majesty took their long delays in
evil part, for that she could not with her honor protract it any longer, nor
excuse her self any more unto the Duke of Parma, as if she had mocked him.
She gave her Ambassadors express commandment, to treat of a good peace, for
the sending away of foreign souldiars; the permission of Religion, and the
continuance of the preuiledges and liberties

Thus was the Queen of England resolved to treat of a peace, moved thereunto
by The reasons that moved the Queen of England (...) treat.
charge would grow very great to continue her aid, having been in hope at the
first, by a good defensive war, to make a speedy end of their troubles. On
the other side, the peace which she should make would be profitable for the
trade of merchandise and shipping in her countries. But the chiefest reason
that moved her thereunto, was the earnest motion made unto her by the Duke of
Parma, with whom she had proceeded so far as she could not with her honor
refuse to give him audience. The Duke for his part (like a good practitioner in
the art of dissimulation)

The English sought to sound the Duke of Parmas meaning and so by a parle of
peace, to alter their deseigne for the sending of this great Armado, or at
least to stay the proceeding therein for that time, for that the hearing thereof
could not be prejudicial unto them, thinking Champigny meant sincerely in that
he spoke, touching a particular peace being affected thereunto, as it seemed
afterward, by the quarrel which grew between 1588.
Richardot concerning the same.

But before we relate what past in this treaty, and of the Spanish army, we
will first discourse of what happened in the mean time in the Netherlands. Upon
the 26. of February a Spanish garrison lying in Deuenter and the towns
there-abouts (it being Hattem atempted by the Spaniards with great loss.
a violent hard frost) thought with plankes laid upon the Ice, and with
ladders to surprise the Town of Hattem in Gelderland; coming thither in the
night, and having planted their ladders against the walls, some of them got
up, crying victory, the rest followed after, with such a press, as the Ice in
the ditches brake, and many of them were drowned.

Verdugo Governor of Freezland for the King of Spain, about the same time,
caused Verdugo arms s^ps of war at Delfziel.
to keep the River of Ems in subjection, and to take all ships that should
pass to Embden; but especially to have an assured Port for the Spanish fleet
if need were, but they stayed not long there, after that the Spanish army was
past.

Although the Earl of Leicester had resigned his government to the United
Provinces, yet there remained many of his favorites in the country, who hoped
to be advanced by his means, and therefore they did what they could to have
him return thither again, and in the mean time to keep his resignation from
the Estates knowledge, whereby, and by other practices they set great
division in the towns, stirring up the people to mutinies, and most part of
the soldiars that lay in garrisons: As at

In Medenblicke there lay Collonell Dericke Sonoy, who had been long governor
of North-Holland, and had carried himself faithfully and valiantly in all
services for those countries. He having had a new commission for his
government from the Earl A mutiny at Medenblick^.
of Leicester, the which was held to be an injury done unto Prince Maurice of
Nassau, governor of South and North Holland (to whom it belonged to give him
that commission, as to his Lieutenant) being after the loss of Deuenter and
Zutphen, required to take a new oath to Prince Maurice, as his Governor, he
refused to do it in Maurice sent Captain Aert van Duvenuoords company to
Medenblicke; but they misstrusting something would not receive them:
Whereupon Prince Maurice and the Earl of Hohenloo, (having no other company
but their household servants) went thither, but they were likewise shut out
of the gates, this notwithstanding was also pacified, for that Sonoy said he
was sorry for it, and that he had no cause of any misstrust, but much
controversy growing there-vppon till January 1588. Sonoy still made use of his
commission, which he had received from the Earl of Leicester, over
North-Holla^d: saying, that as he had it in times past from the late Prince of
Orange, so he would hold it still, and that although Prince Maurice was called
Governor, yet had he as much Maurice himself, as it might appear by his
commission. The Estates of Holland holding this to be a great blemish to their
authorities, commanded him to keep but a 150. soldiars within Medenblicke, and
to send the rest to be employed for the service of the country, where they
should appoint; but he having only 5. or 600. men, made answer, that he could
not spare the^, being to use them for the defense of himself and his
government: whereupon the Estates (persisting in their resolution) produced
two letters from the Earl of Leicester, whereby he was commanded to yield up
his authority to the Estates, in regard that by the contract he could not
dispose of that government, whereupon the soldiars began to mutine, saying,
Sonoys house, and compelled them to give them their pay weekly. This caused
mutines in other towns, being of the same regiment to whom they writ, lying
in Gelderland, Friseland and Ouerysselle. Sonoy being incorraged, by the
English 1588
Peter Kies Bourguemaster of Harlem, and Master Adrian Anthonis Bourguemaster
of Alckmar, who offered them their account and reckoning, and better pay then
they had formerly had, but they would not hear any man that was sent unto
them, but fetched their pay from the villages round about, whom they used like
enemies: so as in the end the matter grew to partakings, for that the general
Estates would not allow any such authority to be given to private governors, as
by their resolution made 1577. plainly appeered, when as they made the Prince
of Orange their governor, which Colonel Sonoy would not hear of, pretending
his Commission to be made otherwise. Maurice, who thereupon brought some
troops before the town, with some armed Burgers of the towns there aboutes,
and some ships of war, under the command of the Marshall Villiers, who had
not been long before that time delivered out of prison. He kept them
straightly in, which made Medenblicke besieged by the Estates.
the soldiars begin to bethink themselves. In the meane-time upon the second
of Henry Killegray put up a certain declaration unto the general Estates, in
favor of them of Medenblicke, and upon the fifteenth of March the Lord
Willoughby confirmed the same, complaining of their rigorous proceeding against
the said soldiars, and others well affected to her Majesty, the which was
nothing else, but a sign of thankefullnesse for many favors received at her
hands: and therefore he said her Majesty could not refuse to countenance them,
and had commanded him to let them understand, that she was resolved, (if they
would not cease their quarrel with them of Medenblick) to withdraw all her
forces and aid into England, and let them defend themselves, as well as they
could, without troubling himself any more with their affairs. These speeches
being delivered with some vehemence, made the Estates to bethink Maurice had
written letters dated the first of March, showing the ground of that division;
The Queen upon the 27. of March wrote her letters to the Lord Willoughby,
commanding him to reconcile The Queen refuses to speak any more for them
(...) Medenb^ke.
Prince Maurice and Sonoy, for that she could not expect any good, by the
accepting of such offers from diverse towns, who sought to yield themselves
into her hands, whereby rumors might be spread abroad, that she sought
cunningly and underhand to get towns into her power, and so to deliver them
over unto the enemy, and thereby to seek to make her own peace, or else to
force the Estates to such an agreement, as she pleased; and therefore she
willed the Lord Willoughby to persuade all such towns to be obedient unto the
general Estates, and that he should not meddle with any Maurice his souldiars
entering into their places. Colonel Sonoy went to Alckmar to make his excuse.
To whom afterward they of Medenblike and others did great harm, spoiling his
house and goods: and afterward in the year 1590. he went into England to make
his complaint unto the Queen, as you shallhere after hear.

In Westfriseland there arose great troubles, for that diverse sought to
persuade the Doctor Ielger Aysma, a worthy and a zealous (but yet a very
violent) man, and committed 1588.


About this time in March, the garrison of Geertruydenberg began to mutine,
under pretense of service for the Queen of England, and would neither accept
of the A mutiny in^ Geertruyden berg.
Estates, Prince Maurice, nor of any other governor, neither would they treat
with any man but with the Lord Willoughby, general of the English forces,
tearing their Cornets, Ensigns and Banderolles in pieces, carrying themselves
in all sorts like traitors, and sworn enemies of the country, taking and
ransacking the boats and ships which past along betwixt Holland and Zeeland,
but at the last by the mediation of the Lord Willoughby they had two hundred
sixteen thousand Gilders paid them in ready money, upon certain conditions,
the which were not well observed by them,

Collonell Sehenck, Marshall to the Prince Elector Truhcses, having surprised
Bonne (as you have heard) Ernest Archbishop and Prince of Cologne and Liege,
having rejected all treaties of accord which the Duke of Cleues did labor, he
sent to the Duke of Parma for succors to besiege it, who (having charge to
attend the great army that Bonne besieged by the Prince of Chymay.
was coming out of Spain, against England) sent the Prince of Chymay (the
only son of the Duke of Arschot,) with diverse troops both of horse and
foot. And for that most of the Commanders lay then in Flanders, with the Duke
of Parma, being ready to pass over into England, (as they thought) Verdugo
Governor of Frizeland, Taxis his Lieutenant were appointed to aid them. Don
Manriques de Lara was also sent thither, to give them instructions, as being
well acquainted with the situation of the country, but he stayed not long
there, but returned into Flanders, to do some exployte against the English.
Schencke seeing this storm approache, and that the Princes of Germany had
refused to meddle in these Princes quarrel, the one having sued for succors
of the Protestants, the other of the Romish Catholics and of the Spaniards;
he went as Marshall to Truchses, to an Imperial diet held in Germany. Where
he declared that by commandment of Prince Truchses, he had Schinek goes to an
imperial diet.
seized upon the Town of Bonne, having wrested it out of the Spaniards hands,
for that it is an Imperial town the which the King of Spain did seek to
incorporate Schenck sought by these speeches, and other reasons which he
propounded, to stir up the drouzie spirits of the Germans. Whereunto
answer was made him; That experience had made them sufficiently wise, in the
assistance An answer made to Schenck at the Imperial diet.
which they had given unto France and the Netherlands: and that the present
That they had sufficiently known, what advancement the assistance of the
French King 1588.
to Don Anthony King of Portugal against the King of Spain, at the conquest
of the Island of Asores: and that the Queen of England had succored the said
Don Anthony with men and ships, all without any profit, wherefore it seemed
expedient to the Princes of Germany, not to oppose themselves against so mighty
a King who is also one of the Empire, being more fit to entertain his love and
friendship. Being very well known that some Princes of Germany had been
forward enough to succor the Prince of Orange against the said King; whom they
would no more incense, nor bandy themselves against him, seeing that he
pretended not to wrong them, but only to succor a Prince and Archbishop
elector, And the rather for that the French King sought Truchses pleasure, to
oppose themselves against him, knowing how their army had sped which they had
sent unto the King of Navarre.

Whilst that Schenck was at this diet in Germany, the Prince of Chymay was at
the seege of Bonne where in the beginning John Baptista Taxis, an old soldiar
was shot, whereof he died, and was honorably interred at Cologne: they within
the town defended themselves valiantly, there commanders being Otto Baron of
Potlits, Christopher Bonne yielded up again.
Wolf and others; at the last having been half a year beseeged, and finding
that there was no means to be relieved, and that more forces came against
them under Sir William Russel entertaines them of Campuere in the Queens
obedience.
any other superiors then the Queen of England and the Earl of Leicester as
her Lieutenant, wherein Sir William Russell Lord governor of Flusshing and of
Ramekins William Russel (now Lord Russell) had conceived against the estates,
for that presently after the death of Sir Philip Sydney (before he was chosen
governor) they had given away the Regiment of Zeeland to the Earl of Solms the
which (said they) he expected, for that Sir Philip his predecsseor, had been
colonel thereof: whereupon Maurice, and the house of Nassau as much as any man.

And whereas at that time there was some doubt that the Duke of Parma would
come into the Island of Walchren with a great number of small boats and Pinaces,
which he caused to be built in Flanders; the Estates thought it fit to send a
cornet of horsemen into the Island. Whereupon the said Sir William Russel
required the Estates of Zeeland, and after that the council of estate being at
the Hage that his compaine of William Russel, as he sent to Scotland and over
all the Island, putting it to their own choice whether they would have his
company or that of the 1588.
St. Willia Russel writes to the Council of Estate.
corrupted, so as they freely make choice of his company, where-vppon he
writ letters unto the council of Estate, by the which he complained much of
the wrong was done him, in preserring an other company before his: which gave
him just occasion of distrust, and to believe confidently that they practiced
something against him: For which consideration he would not suffer that any
garrison should enter into Walchren so near the places of his government:
saying that they had no reason to wonder, if in so turbulent a time he stood
upon his guard, seeing that both his government, his honor and his life
depended thereon.

To the which letters the council of Estate made answer that they were sorry
that the sending of the Marshall of Villiers company had given him any cause of
distrust: seeing The Council of Estates answer.
Maurice and not by them, having proceeded therein according to the order of
his pattent, and the authority which he has, as Governor of Holland and
Zealand, only for the conducting of the Peasants and them of the champian
country, to the guard of the Seacoast, fearing least the enemy should attempt
something: For the which service three score horses were sufficicient, which
small number could not attempt any thing against the places of his Maurice
return) to speak unto him to call them back: Entreating him therefore not to
importune them any further to have his company there. They said also that the
protestation he made by his letters, not to endure any soldiers in Walchren,
nor about Flushing, and Ramekens, had much troubled them.

Having also forbidden at Sooetelandt, not to receive any of the Estates
soldiers: Wherein they would advertise him, that he opposed himself directly
to the Contract which they had made with his mistress the Queen of England,
extending his authority and command over the Champian country of Walchren,

This troop of Villiers horse being arrived in Walchren, the Estates of
Zealand They of Campuere and Arnemuyden refuse to obey the Estates.
Campuere and twelve at Arnemuyden The Magistrates of Campuere and Arnemuyden
refused to receive them, protesting not to receive any soldiers, but such as
should be sent by order from the Earl of Leicester, their Governor general.
But not content here-with, they made a contract with the Captains of the
garrisons, the which they confirmed by oath, signed and sent it into England to
the Earl of Leicester who was very well pleased with this message. The Estates
of Zealand seeing the unwillingness of these two towns, sent the 18. horse
which should have been at Campuere, to a village called Haek and the 12. of
Arnemuyden to Middelbourg, until they were employed elsewhere, Here-vpon as
well the General as the particular Estates of the united Provinces, in March
Prince Maurice into Zeeland, only with his household train. Being but newly
1588.
Charles Howard, high Admiral of England, with nine or ten ships of war,
bringing with him two hundred and twenty thousand florines to pay the English
troops. This sudden arrival of so many ships of war in such a jealous
season, Prince Maurice retiers himself notwithout cause.
made them presently to murmur, that he might make himself master of the
Island of Walchren, and carry Prince Maurice into England. Whereupon the Prince
retired suddenly from Middelbourg, and went to the ships of war which the
Estates do commonly entertain in the river of Antwerp, lying before the fort
of Lillo, whether he might safely retire himself when he pleased.

The Lord Admiral (hearing that the Prince was departed) sent Sir Edward Hobby
and Peter van Heyl^ with charge from her Majesty, to treat with him, to remove
all iealousies, and if it were possible to raise the siege of Medenblike.
Whereof the Prince excused himself honestly, referring that business to the
general Estates, and to them of Holland. They of Campuere and Arnemuyden were
exceeding glad of the Lord Admiralls coming, hoping that he would make
himself master of Walchren and raise the siege of Medenblike. But being come
to no other end but to conuoy the money safely, having a fair gale, he
returned five days after. Then came Prince Maurice presently back to
Middelbourg; From whence he did write unto Sir William Russel by James Valcke
a Councellor of Estate, to consider of the means how to remove all these
distrusts, to the service of God and of the Queens Majesty, the prosperity
of the united

The signior of Valcke, (who was a man of judgment) being entered into
conference with Sir William Russel, he sought to purge himself of all that had
been done, saying: That he had not done any thing but by express ^rant.
that for his part he was ready to do all good offices. Whereupon Valcke went
to Campvere (whereas Mandemaker the treasorer general of Zeeland, with some
others, were detained prisoners) promising them all good and favor, if they
would acknowledge and obey Prince Maurice as their chief and Governor, but the
Captains would not give ear to any thing until they were first assured of
their pay, and to continue still in their garrison, with some other conditions.
Sir William Russel excused himself

In the meane-time the Queen by the instigation of some that were about her
Majesty, The Queens letters to the Estates.
who were enemies to the Estates, did write unto the general Estates, charging
them that they entreated them of Vtrecht ill, and had cruelly proceeded against
them of Leyden, growing also very bitter against them of Medenblike, whom
they held besieged, wondering why they should be so rigorous against all those
that showed any love and affection to her Majesty, which proceeded only from
a true fealing of the benifits which they had received from her, with many
other like reasons, set down in the said The Estates answer to the Queen.
best Burgers, and committed the government of the town to strangers, who had
nothing to loose in the whole country. As for the matter of Leyden, that they
had proceeded iudicially, as upon a notorious crime. And for Medenblike, the
malice of them of the garrison was the cause thereof, and therefore they
deserved to be punished. Prince Maurice did also write unto the Queen,
complaining much that the towns of his inheritance (out of the which both he,
his Brethren and Sisters and all those of the Prince Maurice writs to the
Queen.
house of Nassau, had their maintenance) as Campuere and Geertruydenberg, (the
which alone was worth forty thousand gilders a year rent) were fallen into
mutiny, William Russel had charged him, to have meant to attempt against the
town of Flussing, and to wrest it out of his hands, wherewith he held himself
to be much wronged, desiring that it might be honorably repaired, and that
speedily, considering the exigence of the cause. 1588.


The Queen considering the danger which consisted in these discontents, seeing
the Spanish army at Sea approaching, and ready to fall upon the one or the
other: the which they could not resist, nor preserve the Estate of the country,
but by good union and mutual correspondencie: (division being like to cause
the ruin of both) she sent a very kind answer by her letters to Prince
Maurice, giving him all contentment, dis-auowing all mutinies, as well of the
English, as of other soldiers that sought to shroud themselves under the
cloak of her service: and to that end she did also write expressly unto the
Lord Willoughby, to Sir Henry Killegrey, to Sir William Russell, and others, as
also to the general Estates. By reason whereof the garrisons of Campuere and
Arnmuyden were pacified, with a certain sum of money Mandemaker a long time
prisoner, and committed many partiallities begin to cease.
Insolences) and after-wards cast: and the resignation of the Earl of
Leicesters government being published: all factions and partialities began to
cease, and the general Estates to recover their first authority.

The Captains of these mutinies in Campuere and Arnemuyden, being cashierd
and discharged from their garrisons by the Estates, thought themselves to be
very hardly dealt withal, after their long service, for the which having long
solicited the Estates who little regarded them; In the end in the year 1590.
they sent a petition A petition by the Captains discharged, to the Queen for
recompense.
unto the Queen of England, showing the many years they had spent in the
Estates service, and how faithful they had continued; till that upon the
seventh of William Russell they had increased their comp^ies twenty five and
thirty men a piece, for the which they received money of Sir William Russell to
bestow upon their soldiars, all for her Majesty's service, who by her letters
of the twenty William Russell, who had also both by word of mouth and by
letters (which they showed) desired them to continue constant in their
resolution, as they had done, and were yet ready to live and dye in her
Majesty's service. After which it pleased her Majesty by the Lord Willoughby
and Sir Henry Killegrey to discharge them of their oath, with command to be
obedient unto the Estates of the united Provinces: So as they entered into
treaty with Prince Maurice and the Estates, which contract was not held with
the Captains, her said supplyants, but to the contrary they were discharged
from their garrisons, and their companies, entertainments, and after-reckonings
taken from them, and all for the faithful service they had done unto her
Majesty: Maurice and the Estates, forgetting all their former services,
whereby they had as then lost all their credits, honors, and reputations, in
regard whereof they desired her Majesty's favor and aid, and to be accepted
into her service. This petition was signed by Captain Ioos vanden End, Cor
nellis Palant and Peter de Costere: the like was made by the other Captains as
Ambrosio le Duck, Adrian Ost and others, all desiring to serve under the
English Colonels, but they obtained small recompense from the Queen, who
thought it not to stand with her honor, to intertaine such Captains against
the liking of the Estates, for that her own English soldiers were (by virtue
of the contract) bound by oath unto the Estates, yet she gave her Agent
commission, to entreat the Estates for them and to deal in their behalfes:

The Estates of the united Provinces beginning now again to flourish in their
authorities and thereby to resume their superior command, as in former times:
the Earl of Leiceister having resigned his place of Governor: And for that
there was scarce any 1588
Opinions on both sides touching the government of the Nether lands.
in civil causes and to make war against so mighty an enemy: wherefore many
in England were of advice, to suffer the Netherlands to govern, and to follow
the wars themselves, and the Queen only to aid them with money, or else to
pay her own soldiers, whereby they might maintain their own Provinces in
unity: But others (especially such as had intertainment in the Netherlands,
under the Earl of Leicester) sought to persuade the Queen, that the united
Provinces by means of the confused government among them, decayed daily more
and more, and went to ruin, so as all her money would be lost, and she her
self left in great hatred with the King of Spain, unless she would take the
sovereignty, or absolute protection upon her, by her Lieutenant, John Norrice,
but they were not held capable for so great an office of State: Yet the Earl
of Leicesters favorites persuaded themselves that all things would be well
governed by some English Governor, and the Council of Estate, having two
English Counselors in it, and certain Englishmen also in the tresory, all
under the Queens authority, according to the contract made in the year

But the general Estates duly weighing all things (although at that instant
they were engaged in great difficulties) held that kind of government to be
very uncertain, knowing the English to be unacquainted with the affairs of
that State: The Queen being a woman, and then of good years, that her
majesty was not ambitious, but only sought to govern well and wisely, and to
secure her self and her own Estate: And if that they should rely only upon
the assistance of her Majesty and her followers who had nothing to loose
within their countries, they feared that upon some sudden serui seruorum,
whereupon they resolved to continue in their authorities, and to maintain the
same as well as they might.

But news came daily of the coming of the Spanish fleet, which made both
parties to incline to a good union in these dangerous times: they were incited
thereunto by certain counters that were made: On the one side whereof there
was graven two Oxen plowing, parted with the arms of England and of the
Netherlands, with this inscription; Trahite aequo iugo: That is, draw euenly:
On the other side were two earthen pots driven upon the waves of the Sea, with
this inscription: Frangimur si collidimur: If we strike one against another we
break.

Thus the disorders and divisions began somewhat to decrease, the Lord
Willoughby (being a good and well minded Nobleman) had at that time appeased
the controversy in Naerden, and labored to do the like in Vtrecht, which the
Estates seemed desirous to requite, preparing their ships of war for the
common service of her Majesty and the country, against the coming of the
Spanish fleet, and more-ouer (the which was more then the Queen her self
desired) they agreed to take up a thousand sailors in the Netherlands for her
Majesty's service.

We have before made mention, how that the Queen of England, had very
earnnestly pressed the united Provinces not only by the Earl of Leicester, but
also by her Ambassadors, to join with her in the treaty of a peace, and what
reasons had moved her (notwithstanding their resolute denial) to proceed
therein, and to attempt it whilst that the coming of this great army of
Spain was bruted over all Europe. 1588.
John Conway. The Commissioners names were, Henry Earl of Darby, the Baron of
Cobham, Lord warden of the cinq Ports, both Knights of the garter, Sir James a
The commissioners sent to treat with the duke of Parma.
Croft Knight Comptroller of the Queens house, and all three of her Majesty's
privy council, Doctor Dale, and Master John Rogers, both Masters of
Requests. For the Duke of Parma, and in the Kings name, were sent Maximilian
Earl of Aremberg, Knight of the treasury, and governor of Antwerpe; Monsieur
Richardot, President of Arthois, councellor for the State, and of the privy
council: John Mace Doctor of The commissioners for the King of Spain.
the law, Councellor and Advocate fiscall in the council of Brabant, and
Blaminius Greiner, Secretary of the council of Estate: these came to Bruges in
March after, where by messengers sent from one to another there was a long
disputation about the precedence, and where they should meet, and whether
hostages should be given of either side, for their securities: after which
they met in certain Tents set up under Ostend, where the Spaniards gave the
English the precedence. After three months question, the English yielded to
go to Bourbrough in Flanders, without any hostages, where upon the sixth of
July they began to enter into treaty.

Among many propositions and disputations, on both sides touching the Spanish
Commission, and other things, the Queen of Englands demands were: To have a
present truce or surceasing of arms, being thought necessary for both sides,
thereby The Queens demands.


The King of Spaines Commissioners made answer to these propositions that they
were content to revew the contracts, but it would ask a long time, and
therefore The Spaniards answers.
they desired to proceed to the concluding of a peace: Touching the sending
away of strange soldiers, the King could not resolve thereon, until that the
Hollanders and

Whereunto the English commissioners replied, that the contracts might be
renewed prouiso, and afterward reformed or made better, by Commissioners
appointed The Queens replication.
by both parties: for the sending away of foreign soldiers, it was the only
cause that had moved her Majesty to enter into the treaty, foreseeing the
dangers incident thereunto, if strangers should continue still in the
Netherlands, the which remaining in that estate, the Queen for her own safety
and assurance could not leave 1588.


Touching the money which the Queen had lent, and that she then demanded from
the Estates, the King himself was bownd for it, by his Edict made at
Brusselles, as well for that which was lent unto them before the said edict as
for that which was sense or that should be lent: yet the Queen sought not that
money from the King, but only that the Estates might have liberty from him, to
collect money for the payment thereof: concerning the privileges of the contry,
her Majesty said she had a special interest therein: first in regard of
Neighborhood: Secondly for that she was especially nominated in several
pacifications, and thirdly for that it was not possible for her

And for the point of religion, if the King would not hear of any tolleration
Charles permitted unto the Germans: and by other Princes, and namely by
himself in his perpetual Edict, and that by the advice of the best and the
most learned Doctors in divinity and counselors of estate, the breaking
whereof had been the cause of all the tumults and troubles in the Netherlands,
as also in France and other places, and was likely to bring many more
inconveniences

To all the points of this replication, the King of Spains commissioners, made
none but dilatorie answers to no effect. In the mean time the Queen of
England was advertised of an English book printed at Antwetp, written by
Doctor Allen, who Cardinal Allens book against her Majesty.
not long before had been made Cardinal at Rome, being an admonition to the
Nobility of England and Ireland to execute the Popes sentence against her
Majesty, which executions the King of Spain had taken in hand (as Allen said)
and the Duke of Parma was appointed by the King chief Commander in that
action. The Queen was also advertised of a Bull sent forth by Pope Sixtus,
containing many false and The Queen sends to the Duke of Parma about the in
vading of England and his answer.
Queen being made aquainted with these things during this treaty of peace,
she commanded Doctor Dale one of the commissioners, to go and speak with the
Duke of Parma in person, and to charge him in good sort with the things
contained in these aduertisements, and to know his direct answer, whether he
were not appointed to be general over the army that was then preparing in
Spain, and of the enterprise

The Duke of Parma made answer to Doctor Dale, that he knew of no such book,
neither had he any knowledge of the foresaid Bull sent forth by the Pope:
neither had 1588.
The last answer of the Spanish comissioners.
plainly touching the religion, that the King of Spain were better to give his
one and only Son unto them of Holland, then to allow them the exercise of
their religion: And that the Queen had no more to do to trouble her self
with the religion of his countries, then he had to meddle with the religion in
her Dominions: As for the pacification of Gant, they would not hear of that,
for that it had been broken by the makers thereof; saying that the Prince of
Orange had received a just reward James a Croft (riding privately to Bruges)
showed secretly unto the President Richardot and to Mounsier Champigni,
certain articles concerning a peace, but much to the prejudice of the united
Provinces, which Champigni seemed to like well of, being very desirous by that
means to have the use of the English Havens, for the harboring of their
Spanish fleet, for the which after-wards there grew great dislike betwixt him
and the duke of Parma.

Before the departure of the English Commissioners, the Earl of Darbie (to
discover the Spaniards intents) asked them if they intended to have the
cautionary The treaty of peace broke off.
his Princely word and faith (as the English reported) that the army came not
for England, if they could agree upon the foresaid articles of peace
propounded But the Queen observing the constant resolution of the united
Provinces, and seeing the fleet of Spain already before her door, she called
home her Commissioners, whereupon they desired a conuoy to conduct them safely
from thence, being in some fear for that they had no hostages: but after
fifteen days stay, they got a passport with certain wagons and a conuoy to
guard them to the Frontiers, whether the Kings commissioners

Now I come to that great Spanish fleet, whereof although there have been
some petty discourses written and published in our own language, yet for that
it concerned the united Provinces as well as England, I have thought good to
make a brief relation in this history, for posterities sake, both of the
preparations and the success.

The King of Spain having long forecast and sought by what means he might
bring the Realm of England into subjection, and so to re-establish the
Catholic religion Netherlands, together with the traffic and commerce of the
said contries. Whereupon 1588
The King of Spain prepares to invade England and the Netherlands.
England was then his enemy, the situation of which great Island is such, as it
may hinder all traffic and negotiation in those parts what-so-euer.

Whereupon he was fully resolved first to invade England, which Escouedo
Secretary to Don John of Austria; and many subtle Spanish and Netherland
spirits, with some English rebels, held more easy to be conquered then
Holland and Zeeland, persuading the King that it would be much more profitable
to invade both England

Portugal did furnish to this great fleet, under the conduct of the Duke of
Medina Sidonia General of the whole Army, ten great gallions, two small
ships, thirteen The description of all the ships. sailors and soldiers.
hundred Sailors, three thousand three hundred soldiers, three hundred fifty
pieces of great ordinance, and all other things necessary. Biscaie under the
command of the Admiral John Martinez de Richalde, brought ten gallions, four
pinasses, seven hundred Sailors, two thousand soldiers, and two hundred and
fifty pieces of ordinance. Guypusco under the conduct of Michael de Oquendo
furnished ten gallions, foure-teene pinasses, seven hundred sailers, two
thousand sailors, and four score pieces of ordinance. Andolozia under the
command of Pedro de Valdez, ten gallions, one pinasse, eight hundred Martin de
Bretendona, ten gallions, eight hundred sailors, two thousand soldiers, and
three hundred and ten pieces of ordinance.

Castilia under the conduct of Diego Floris de Valdez, fourteen gallions, two
pinasses, a thousand seven hundred sailors, two thousand three hundred
soldiers, and three hundred and four score pieces of ordinance. And under the
command of John Lopez de Medina, there were three and twenty hulkes, seven
hundred sailors, two thousand three hundred soldiers, and four hundred and ten
pieces of ordinance. Under the leading of Hugo de Moncado, there were sent from
Naples four galliasses with 1200. slaves to row in them 480. sailors, 870.
soldiers, and 200. pieces of ordinance. Out of Portugal Diego de Medrana, were
sent four galleys, with 880. slaves, 424. sailors, 440. soldiers, with
ordinance accordingly.

There were two and twenty pinasses, and other small ships, under the
government of Don Antonio Buccado de Mendoza, with 574. sailors, 479. soldiers,
and 193. pieces of ordinance. Besides all these, there were twenty Carauels
laden with owers, ready for the great ships if need required, so as they were
one and other a hundred and fifty sails, well provided, in the which they had
above 8000. sailors, and 20000. soldiers, besides the commanders, officers, and
voluntary gentlemen, and 2650. pieces of ordinance. Their ships being so
great as they might have carried three score thousand tons in burden.

The gallions being above 60. in number, were exceeding great, fair, and
strong, and built high above the water like Castles, easy to be fought
withal, but not so easy to board as the English and the Netherland ships,
their upper decks were Musket proof, and beneath they were four or five foot
thick, so as no bullet could pass them. Their Mastes were bound thick about
with Ocham or pieces or fazeled ropes, and armed 1588.


In this great fleet were one thousand six hundred great brass pieces, and
above The description of the ordinance and munition.
one thousand Iron pieces, to the which were two hundred and twenty thousand
bullets, four thousand six hundred Kintals of powlder, one thousand Kintalls
of Lead, one thousand two hundred Kintals of Match, seven thousand Muskets and
Caliuers, ten thousand partisans and halberds, with murdering pieces, double
canons, A Kintall is a hundred weight.
and field pieces, with great store of furniture for carriages; mules, horses,
and whatsoever was necessary for an Army either by sea or land. There was
bread and Description of the victuals and other necessaries.
month. Wine for six months, Bacon six thousand and five hundred Kintals,
cheese three thousand quintals, besides flesh, rice, beans, pease, oil and
viniger, and twelve thousand pipes of fresh water: they had great store of
torches, lanthornes, lamps, canuas, hides, and lead to stop holes made with
great ordinance, and other things needful for their use. This army cost the
King thirty thousand ducats every day, as Don Diego Piementell confessed,
reporting the same to be two and thirty thousand strong.

In this army were five regiments of old Spanish soldiers, of the Tertios of
Naples, Sicilie and the Terceraes commanded by five Masters del Campo. The
first was Don The Commanders of the army.
Diego de Piementel, brother to the Marquis of Taueras, and cousin to the
Earls of Beneuent and Calui, he was a Knight of the order of Saint John, and
was allied to many of the best houses of Spain. The second Colonel, was, Don
Francisco de Toledo brother to the Earl of Orgas. The third Don Alonso de
Luson. The fourth Don Nicholas de Isla, or Patritio Anselmo. The fifth and last
Augustine Mexia, (brother to the Marquis de la Garda) who was afterward made
governor of the castle of Antwerp, each Collonell having in his regiment two
and thirty companies, besides the Italian and Portugal bands. No women nor
whores were suffered to enter into any ship, upon pain of great punishment, but
such women as were with them, hired ships and followed

The General of this mighty army was Lodouicus Perez, Duke of Medina Sidonia
and Baron of Saint Lucas, a Knight of the order of the Golden Fleese, (the
Chief officers and gentlemen.
Marquis of Sancta Cruce, who was named for that charge, being dead not long
beford) John Martinez de Ricalde, a wise Gentleman, was Admiral. Don Francisco
Bouadille Marshall: And for chief counselors in the war, Diego Pimentel,
Flores de Valdez, Pedro de Valdez, Michael Oquendo, Don Alonso de Lieua, Don
Diego Maldonado, Don Georgio Manriquez, and many others. Don Martin Alarson was
Vicar general of the holy Inquisition, and with him above a hundred Monks,
Jesuits, and other religious men. There were many Noblemen, and above one
hundred and

Whilst this army was in this sort preparing the Duke of Parma received
commandment from the King to make ready his forces in the Netherlands, to
join The Duke of Parmas preparation to join with this army.
with this army, whereupon he sent for ship-writes and worke-men out of
Italy, to build ships, setting many thousands on work, to dig and deepen
rivers, especially the river of Iperlee, to bring certain ships from
Antwerpe to Gant, and so to Bruges, where he gathered together above three
hundred small Boats, with bridges made to ship and vnship them. There were
also two hundred flat 1588.


Near unto Nieuport, he had lying under the command of Camillo master of the
camp, thirty companies of Italians, two of Wallons, and eight of Bourguignons,
His forces.
every company being a hundred men. At Dyxmewe he mustred four score
companies of Netherlanders, three score of Spaniards, three score of high
Duchess, and seven of rebellious and traiterous Englishmen, under the leading
of Sir William Stanley and others, which were ready to take ship. In the
suburbs of Cortricke there were four thousand lodged, and at VVatene nine
hundred horse with the Cornet of the Marquis of Guast who was general of the
horse. To this great enterprise Great noble men came into Flanders.
Out of Spain came the Duke of Pastrana, who was said to be the son of Ruy
Gomez de Silua, Prince of Mileto, but he was held to be the Kings Bastard
son: the Marquis of Bourgou, one of the Archduke Ferdinands sons, by
Philippina Welserime, Don Vespasian Gonsagua, of the house of Mantua, a great
soldier, who had been Viceroy in Spain: Don John de Medices, bastard of
Florence, Don Amedeus bastard of Sauoy, with many such like, besides others of
meaner quality.

Sixtus Quintus Pope of Rome, forgot not likewise to send forth his Crusado (as
he uses against the Turks) published by his Bulls for the furthering of
this great The Popes help toward the conquest of England and the Netherlands.
enterprise, with great persuasions, the which were Printed in all places. The
Englishmen Charles Haward, Lord high Admiral of England, Henry Seymor, son
to the Duke of Sommerset. The united Preparation made by the Netherlands.
Provinces first of all (in regard of the shallowes and flattes of their
coast) made provision of twenty small ships, to keep all the havens of
Flanders, from Lillo in the river of Scheld, unto Graueling by Calais, putting
great garrisons into their sea Towns: and when as this great army of
Spaniards should be ready to come, they sent forth Captain Loucke of
Rosendale, with five and twenty or thirty ships, to join with the Lord Henry
Seymor, but when as the ships were forced by a storm to leave the Flemish
coast, and to sail back into Zeeland: it being past, Justinius of Nassau the
Admiral, and Ioy^ Moyer, vice admiral of Zeeland, being in all about five and
thirty ships, from a hundred and sixty to five hundred tun burden a piece;
very well appointed with great store of good sailors, and 1200. old soldiers,
all Musketeers, chosen out of the regements, and well acquanted with the sea,
being fully resolved to fight, and to keep the Duke of 1588.


Upon the nine and twenty day of May 1588. this great and mighty army of
Spain, put to sea, and sailed from Lisbon to the Groine in Gallicia where they
took in more The army of Spain puts to sea.
men and munition, it being the nearest haven to England. Being at sea they
were scattered by a tempest, the Duke of Medina entering again into the Groine
with four score ships, the rest following as well as they could, except
eight of them which had Dispersed by a tempest.
spent their Masters. Of the four Galleies which came out of Portugal, one
by great fortune was saved in that haven, the other three were driven into
Bayon upon the coast of France, whereas one Dauy Gwin an English slave with
diverse French and Turkish slaves, first overcame the one, and then won the
rest, whereas Don Diego de Mendiana was slain, the slaves saving themselves in
France with these Galleies they thought to have driven the Zeeland ships from
the coast of Flanders, and so to have drawn the Duke of Parmaes ships out of
the havens.

The Spanish army being refresht, and their ships rigged again, receiving
daily commandment from the King to put to sea, on the one and twenty of
Iulie, they They put to sea again.
went out of the Groine, and sailed till they came to the entry of the English
channel, from whence they sent certain small Pynnasses, to the Duke of Parma,
to certefie him of their coming and to will him to make himself ready to
join with them. The Spanish fleet being discovered by an English pinnasse and
the Lord Admiral being

On the thirty day of Iulie at noone, they had a sight of the Spanish fleet,
the wind being then fouth-west, holding their course (as it seemed) directly
for Plymouth, but perceiving the English ships without the haven, they sailed
along the coast, wherein many of good judgment thought they committed a great
error; but they The Commission of the Spanish army was to join with the duke
of Parma.
John Martinez de Ricalde, Diego Flores de Valdez and other's, showed great
reasons, and said that it could not otherwise be, but that great difficulties
would arise in their proceedings, having such limmited instructions, alleging
many things that were to be observed in such actions, as whether, wind and
tide to get out of the havens of Flanders, and to enter upon Difficulties for
the effecting of the Spanish commission.
the coast of England, as also dark and light moone-shine nights, roades and
depthes, all being subject to the winds and other several dangers: but
their

And as the Spanish fleet past along by Plymouth, the English army made
presently toward them and got the wind of them. On the one and thirty day
the English bare up close with the Spanish fleet within musket shot, the
Admiral shooting very hotly against the Vice admiral of Spain, which when
the Spaniardes was wonderfully battred by the English ships and they sailed
so close and nere together 1588.
Don Pedro de Valdez, Don Basco de Silua and Don Alonso de Sayas with other
Gentlemen were, brake her mast against an other ship, whereby it was not able
to follow the fleet, neither would the army stay to help her, but left her
behind, which the Admiral of England descrying (being loath to loose the sight
of the Spanish fleet) past by her in the night, with as many ships as could
follow her, for that Sir Francis Drake (who was appointed that night to bear
the Lantern) had five great Hulkes in chase, the which were separated from
the Spanish fleet, and found them to be merchants ships of the East
countries: so as the English Admiral did all night follow the Spanish
Lantern, and in the morning found himself to be in the midst of his
enemies, whereupon he made all the have he Francis Drake Don Pedro de Valdez
ship taken.
met with Don Pedro de Valdez ship, having four hundred and fifty men in her,
whom he sommoned to yield; after some parle, Don Pedro (understanding that it
was Drake, whose fame was so great) yielded himself, and was well entreated.
In this ship there was some part of the King of Spaines treasor, about fifty
five thousand ducats, which was all made prize.

The same Vice Admiral Oquendos ship was set on fire, in the which there was
great store of poulder and munition, it was burnt down to the water, and very
few of the men saved, this ship was also taken and carried into England with
many poor men, miserably burnt, yet the poulder being under the hatches, was
miraculously preserved. Don Hugo de Moncado General of the Galleasses, did
press the Duke of Medina to give him leave to charge the Admiral, which by no
means he would grant, in regard of his limmited commission.

Upon Twesday the second of August, the Spanish fleet was thwart of Portland,
and then the wind came Northward, which was against the English, but they
recovered it A fight before Portland.
soon again, for they were small ships and of better sail; that day there
was a very great fight between them, but the Spaniards seeing the English
ships maintain it

The third of August the sea being very calm, the fight continued only
between the Galliasses and the English ships, who for that they went with
owers had some advantage Thomas Howard, (now Earl of Suffolk) the Elizabeth
Jonas, commanded by Sir Robert Southwell; the Bear by the Lord Sheffeld: the
victory by Sir John Haukins, and the Gallion Leicester, wherein was Captain
George Fenner, the Spanish Admiral was then accompanied with the best of his
ships and in the midest of them, where there was a dreadful noise of
Cannon-shot, within three or four hundred foot thither came the Lord Henry
Seymor, with his fleet of ships, the which had lien at the 1588.


The Duke of Medina advertised the Duke of Parma of his being there, and many
Noblemen and Gentlemen went to land, to refresh themselves, and among the rest
the Prince of Ascoly (who was held to be the King of Spaines Bastard son) a
gallant young Gentleman, who by good fortune was forced to stay on shore, for
that he could not get aboard, whose ship withal the men was afterward
drowned in Ireland. The Duke of Parma having heard of the coming of the
Spanish army upon the coast of The duke of Parma prepares himself.
England, made all the have he could to employ his person in this exploite,
and to that end had given the government of the country unto the old Earl of
Mansfield, going himself in pilgrimage to our Lady of Hall in Henault: and
from thence to Brugges,

Upon Twesday being the ninth of August, he returned again to Dunkerke, even
as the army past by, not one of his ships daring venture to put forth, by reason
of the five and thirty ships of Holland and Zeeland, commanded by Justin of
Nassau their Admiral, which lay there to keep the passage, that none should
come out of the haven, neither any of the smaler ships of the Spanish army
aid and assist them, for they had no cause to fear the great ships, by
reason of the shallonesse of the water: But the His troops are not ready shipped.
Duke of Parmaes men were neither shipped nor yet ready, only the runnagate
souldiars William Stanleys regiment being seven hundred strong, were already
shipped: thinking at the first entrance into England to be the leaders, the rest
of the soldiars seemed unwilling to set forward, finding their small number of
sailers to be very backward, and their provision of bread, beer and
victuals not all ready and wholly vnshipt: the sailers did fear the ships of
Holland and Zeeland, which they found did both brave and threten them, which
made them hourly to run away, fearing they should have bin forced by the
soldiars to put forth, and to adventure that which could not be done; then they
wanted the Spanish Galleies which were lost upon the way, with the which they
might have driven the ships of Holland and Zeeland from the coast. The Spanish
fleet lying thus at anchor before Callais, staying to hear from the Duke of
Parma, for the A notable stratagem used by the English to drive the Spanish
fleet from their anchors.
them, and they beginning to burn) they sent them before the wind and tide
right Frederik Innebell, had used three years before against the duke of
Parmaes bridge upon the river of Scheld) as they cried out the fire of Antwerp,
the fire of Antwerp, so as every man did presently cut his cables, and setting
sail put to sea confusedly. In which fearful cry, the great Galliasse fell
foul upon the cable of an other ship, and could make no way, and by that means
her rudder slipping out was lost, so as for want of a helm to govern it, it
was driven by the force of the sea upon Callais sands, the which was followed
by their Pinaces, and in the end boarded by the English long boats. Don Hugo
de Moncado General of the four Galliasses, making Don Antonio Manriquez the
countroller General with a few others escaped, and were the first that carried
the certain news of their success into Spain.

The great Galleasse having in it three hundred slaves and four hundred
souldiars, 1588
Gourdan governor of Callis would not suffer them, finding it to be hurtful
both for the town and haven, wherefore he shot from the town and drove the
English from thence.

The same morning, as the Spanish fleet (after their great fear and disorder)
had again put it self into Battle: the English army began to charge them
valiantly before A sight before Graueling the 10 of August.
Graueling, but they chose rather to pass a long with a forewind before
Dunkerke, then to open themselves, or to alter their ranks, standing wholly
upon their defense. The Spaniards loss in the last fight.
men in all. There were so many of the Spanish shipes shot under the water,
as in the night and the next day, two or three of them sounke, among the which
there was a great ship of Biscaye, whereof some of the men were saved, who
showed that the commanders of that ship had stabbed one another, for that one
of them persuaded the rest to yield, so as the other thrust him into the body
with his poiniard, whose brother revenged his death in stabbing him, and
therewith the ship sounke presently.

The same night two great gallions of Portugal of fourteen or sixteen
hundred tonnes a piece, were forsaken by the fleet, the one called Saint
Phillip, the other Saint Matthew, being shot so under water, as they could
hardly keep themselves upright. In the Saint Phillip was Don Francisco de
Toledo, brother to the Earl of Orgas, and one of the 5. colonels with other
gentlemen; whose mast being shot down; they sought Two Gallions brought into
Zeeland.
to save themselves in Flanders, but finding it impossible, the chief men
escaped in boats, and the ship was taken by the Flusingers. In the Saint
Matthew was Don Diego de Piementel, an other of the Colonels, being brother to
the Marquis of Taueras with many other gentlemen and Captains: having a great
leake before Graueling, the Duke of Medina sent a boat for him and some of the
chief to save themselves, but he to preserve his honor resused it, then he
willed him to stay by him, the which he could not do, by reason that the water
came in the night time so fast into the ship as they Peter vander Does, who
brought the ship into Zeeland, with the other, the which (when as most of the
goods were taken out of them) through negligence sunk under the water. An
other small ship being forced to run a shore about Blankenbergh in Flanders,
Sir John Conway manned out 2. or 3. fisher boats (for that the Spaniards were
retire themselves, so kept together with small sails until they were past
Dunkerke, being 1588.
Henry Seymer with the small ships back again, to join with the
Netherlanders, who lay before Dunkerke to keep in the Duke of Parmaes forces,
and he with the greatest ships followed the Spaniardes, but the wind
rising, and the Spaniards bending their course toward Norwaye, making show as
if they sought means only to get away, and to commit themselves to a
dangerous Northern navigations, the English fleet, (wanting both poulder and
shot) returned back into England, leaving some small pinasses to follow them,
and to bring advise what course they took.

The Spanish fleet being in the North seas took a fisher boat of Zeeland,
with The Spanish army in despair.
Biscay, and he himself with twenty or five and twenty ships, which were
best provided of fresh water, kept his course very high into the sea, which
brought him directly into Spain, but the rest being above forty, under the
leading of the Vice Admiral, held their course nearer Many of the Spanish
fleet cast away upon the coast of Ireland.
unto Ireland, making toward Cape-Clere hoping to refresh themselves there,
but the wind being contrary, a great storm arose out of the South-west, about
the second of September, and cast most of them upon the coast of Ireland, where
many of them perished, and amongst others the Gallion of Michaell d' Oquendo;
one of the four great Galliasses, two great Venetian ships, called la Ratta
and Balanzara, with many others, to the number of 36. or 38. ships and most
of the men. Some having a Westerly wind Sidonia (a wise and provident Prince,)
who had taken The Duke of Medina excuses himself.
this charge upon him much against his will, excused himself by his pilotes,
and upon the want of aid from the Duke of Parma, who was not ready, so as he
had leave to return home to his house to rest himself, yet many spoke very
hardly of John Martinez de Many Spanish Noblemen and Gentlemen died soon after
their return.
Ricalde, who died soon after his return, and Diego Floris de Valdez, Michael
d' Oquendo, Don Alonso de Lieua, Don Diego de Maldonado, Francisco de
Bouadillo, and Don Georgio Manriquez, all of the Council of war for the
army. Many were drowned, as Thomas Perenot of Granuelle, Earl of Canterroy,
Cardinal Granuelles 1588.
Don Diego de Piementel Colonel of two and twenty companies of Spaniards, with
others were taken prisoners in Zeeland.

In Ireland many Gentlemen of good account were drowned, and diverse of them
were slain, by the Irish and by Sir Richard Bingham, at that time Governor of
Conocke. There were brought out of Ireland into England, Don Alonso de Lucon,
Colonel of two and thirty companies of the Neapolitain bands, Don Rodrigo de
Lasso and two Gentlemen of the house of Cordua, whom the Queen set at
liberty, to have Mounsire Teligny released, being then a prisoner in the
castle of Dornicke by Antwerp. To conclude, there was no great house of any
account in Spain, but that lost a brother, son or Nephew in this action.

In the Netherlands, the blame of this unfortunate success, was laid upon the
Duke of Parma, as General, upon Mounsire la Motte, (who had the greatest
charge to provide for the Arimie) and Comissary Drinckweart, countroller of the
provision: who excused The Duke of Parma and la Motte being blamed excuse
themselves.
themselves, saying that the Spanish fleet came to soon, and that it was
impossible to ship all things necessary for such an army in fourteen days,
the ships being scarce ready; and that the Earl of Barlaimont who had
twelve ships appointed him for his men, found them so unready and leaking, as
many of them were half full of water, the fault whereof was put off from the
one to the other, so as the Duke of Parma caused some to be hanged which had
not discharged their duties, and being badly spoken of by many, he blamed the
Spaniards delays, saying that they perceiving many

Thus did the great GOD of battles fight miraculously for the preservation of
The duke of Parmaes deseigne to besiege Berghen.
which was quite wasted) into Brabant, and being very melancholy and
discontented for this disgraceful success, he resolved (contrary to the advice of his Council at war, and especially of Colonel Mondragon) to go
and besiege the town of Berghen up Zoom, whether he sent the Marquis of Burgau
son to Ferdinand Archduke of Austria, with his Regiment of Lansknetchs, newly
come out of the country of Tyrol. Peter Ernest the old Earl of Mansfieldt, the
Duke of Pastrana and the Prince of Ascoly.

The seventeenth of September he came thither in person: where being arrived,
he commanded the Marquis of Renty (before Lord of Montigny) to attempt the
Island of Ter-Tolen with his Regiment, at a place called Vosmeer which divides
Tolen from Brabant, and so to besiege it as well by sea as by land. The Marquis
(being accompanied by Octauio Earl of Mansfield) thinking to enter it with
eight hundred men, through the favor of two thousand musketeers which lay upon
the dike of Berghen, they were repulst by George Euerard Earl of Solms,
Colonel of the Regiment of Zeeland, so as having given two furious charges and
prevailed nothing, they retired with the loss of four hundred men, all shot
in the head, the which only appeered above the Octauio Earl of Mansfieldt
sticking so fast in the mud, as they could hardly be drawn out. The Zeelanders
had but one man slain and two hurt, having a good parapet upon the dike for
their defense.

About that time they of Arthois and Henault made a truce (the which continued
some years) with the Lord of Balaigny governor of Cambray, to be freed from
the 1588.


We have made mention before, of some division grown betwixt the towns men A
declaration of the troubles in Vtrecht.
of Vtrecht, and the spirituality, who would be esteemed the chief members in
the said Town, which the Bourgers would not yield unto, fearing they were too
much

The Estates of the united Provinces fearing that the enemy was a great means
to maintain this division in Vtrecht, hoping thereby to breed some greater
faction and disorder among them, finding that diverse of the chief actors,
were strangers in the town and territories of Vtrecht, in the which they had
no lands to loose, whereby they had the less care for the welfare of the
same, and that the best townes-men, and such as were most careful for the
State, were banished from thence: they sought by all good means and
entreaties, to have the banished men restored to their houses, Adolph Earl of
Moeurs, etc. Governor of Gelderland, Vtrecht and Oueryssell, to keep within
Vtrecht, and to put in practice their secret desseignes, seeking all
opportunity to effect the same. To which end on the seventh of October this
year 1588. when as the ancient custom of the Town was to be observed, and
their Magistrates changed, they of the Town had sent their deputies into
England to be recommended from thence for the continuance of their places, but
(the Earl of Leicester being dead, and they finding but small assistance
there, it seems for that the Queen had been otherwise informed by the Earl
of Moeurs, who had likewise sent into England about the same business,) they
were deceived of their expectation: so as the fifth of secretly practiced how to
effect their pretended enterprise, and to fortify themselves, 1588.
Prouinck (otherwise called Deuenter) unto the (...) house, who being come
thither, he first took order that the chief leaders The Earl of M^urs
reconciles Vtrecht with Holland
over them of the town: and as Captain Julian Claerhagen (who lay with his
company in the said town, (hearing of this tumult) was going unto the
Towne-house, he was suddenly thrust into the body, yet he dyed not of the
wound, his company and the company of Mounsieur Villiers stood still, and so
did the English horsemen, Prouincke was brought from the Towne-house, and
committed prisoner to the Earls lodging; and after that the Scout Trillo and
one of the Captains of the watch: the next day the Earl took order for the
government of the town, according to their ancient privileges, and not long
after the banished men returned home again: First taking an oath not to seek
any revenge in regard of their banishment, but to live lovingly and quietly
together. Many witnesses were produced against the said Bourguemaister, who was
examined upon diverse interrogatories, and after forty two weeks imprisonment
set at liberty, and the rest likewise, so as the town and territories of
Vtrecht were once

Now I must return to the siegeof Berghen: the Duke of Parma seeing the
repulse The action at the ^use of Berghen.
which the Marquis of Renty had received at the Island of Ter-Tolen, and that
he could not impeache the succors which might be sent unto the besieged by
sea out of Holland and Zeeland, and finding that the siege would be long and
tedious, he entertained a practice for the delivering up of the great North
Sconse, which stands at the head of the haven: the discourse whereof I have
thought good to set down plainly as I had it from the chief actor himself,
both in regard of himself,

The Duke of Parma having marched from Dunkerke through Brabant with his army,
being betwixt twenty and thirty thousand strong, he sent certain officers
before to view the commodiousnesse of the ground before Berghen, (which he
meant to besiege) as well for the planting of his ordinance, as for the
quartering of his men. One of these officers who was a commissarie of the
ordinance called Pedro de Luco, and an other named Thomas Swegoe, (who
professed himself to be an Italian) were taken prisoners by certain soldiars
of the garrison of Berghen, who were at that time sent out as Scoutes, which
prisoners being thus surprised, were committed to the safe keeping of master
Read-head, who was then appointed by the Lord Willoughby to be deputy Provost
of the town of Berghen. These prisoners had not 1588.
William Grimeston (having had some conference with Swegoe,) found cause to
suspect him to be an Englishman borne, and there-vpon devised with Read-head
how to discover him; who having good opportunity to discourse with them, for
that they were in his custody; he told Swegoe that he was much discontented,
with his entertainment and usage on that side, wishing that he were with the
Kings forces, under the command of Sir William Stanley, under whom he had
served in Ireland. Whereupon Swegoe wished Read-head to be merry and of good
comfort, saying that he was an English man, and borne in Seething lane in
London, that his Mother was one of the Queens women, and that he had a sister
which attended on the Lady Lomley; protesting that it was a happy time for
Read-head Read-head did willingly yield to perform any thing that he would
direct him in.

Then did Swegoe acquaint the foresaid comissarie of the ordinance with all
this conference which had past betwixt him and Read-head: whereupon the
comissary told him, that if he could deliver any port of the town, or any of
the sconses, or any piece of ground of advantage, he would assure him he should
be so bountifully entertained by the King, as he should never want whilst
he lived; to whom Read-head made answer, that he had no command neither
within the town nor sconses, but he had Read-head did confer with William
Grimeston, (who had then the command of Captain Thomas Baskeruile his company
lying in the North Sconse) and told him that he had discovered the foresaid
Swegoe to be an English man, and that if he would secretly join with him, he
doubted not but they should give the enemy a great overthrow, do good service
to the country, and purchase great credit and advancement to themselves:
whereunto Grimeston did very willingly assent, who presently went and
advertised the Lord Willoughby their general, of all that had past; who seemed
to be very glad thereof, willing the said Grimeston to proceed in this
practice, and to Grimestons dealing in this action, the Lord Willoughby gave
him a warrant under his own hand.

Then did Read-head bring Grimeston to the Comissarie of the ordinance, and to
Swegoe, who told them in what manner Read-head had broken with him, and that
he was willing to do the King service, but he would have some assurance how
he should be entertained, for that he was not able to live in his own
country, and had many friends of worth; all which he must forgo, and therefore
he would be assured of some certainty: whereupon the Comissarie of the
Ordinance and Swegoe, did assure Grimeston of the Duke of Parmas honorable
dealing with him, if he did perform that service, Swegoe did write three
letters, one to the Duke of Parma, an other to sir William Stanley, and the
third to Owen, of all their practice and proceedings, which letters they could
not devise to send without discovery, whereupon Read-head told them, that
rather then the service should be any way hindered or protacted, he himself
would adventure to carry the letters, whereof having given copies to the Lord
Willoughby, he past with them accordingly in the night time through Grimestons
sconse, to the enemies camp, where at his coming the Sentinel gave an
alarm, and some five or six shot were discharged at the said Read-head, but
in the end he was received by a Sargeant, and some two shot, carrying him
presently William Stanley, who examined the said Read-head of diverse matters,
as well of the strength of the garrison within the town, as how they were
furnished with munition and victuals, with sundry other 1588


Then the Duke of Parma desired to know when he should have the sconce
delivered unto him, whereunto Readhead made answer, that he could not tell,
for that it was in Master Grimeston to perform, who had the command thereof:
And if it pleased his highness to send some one with him whom he might
trust, he would bring him to confer with Master Grimeston, by whom he
should understand his full and certain resolution, wherewith the Prince was
well pleased, and said that he would send one with him to talk with Master
Grimeston, protesting to deal honorably Readhead made answer, that for his
own particular he did vereliebeleeue it, because he heard him speak it, but
to satisfy Master Grimeston and to encourage him the better to effect the
service, he desired him to have it under his hand, whereunto he did willingly
consent: And at that instant Readhead brought away certain Articles signed by
the Duke, the which he delivered to Grimeston, and with him the Duke of Parma
sent one Alford a Yorkshire man and a guide to speak with Grimeston, and the
chiefest reason was to know when he should have the sconce delivered:
Whereupon Grimeston willed Alford to tell the Duke, that he could not appoint
any certain time, for that he was suspected for his Religion, and had

On the sixth of October being Sunday, Grimeston and Readhead went to the Dukes
Camp, about eleauen of the clock at night, where they were quietly received
without any great alarm in the camp. Being entered, Grimeston was presently
mounted and sent away, and Readhead stayed the Dukes coming (who was vewing of
certain ordinance which he had caused to be planted, to hinder a passage by
water) whereof the Duke being advertised, he came presently away, commanding
a horse Readhead, with whom he discoursed all the way to his Tent, being
three miles: Grimeston attended him at the entry of his Tent, whom he took
very kindly by the hand, bidding him welcome: And after many questions made
by the Duke to Grimeston, concerning the Estate of the town besieged, wherein
the said Grimeston dealt directly and plainly, knowing it to be his safest
course, the Duke having so good intelligence out of the town, in the end the
Duke desired to know when he could be sit to perform the service which he
had undertaken? who presently answered that he should have it delivered unto
him on the Wedensday-night following, which was Grimestons guard night;
whereupon he took his hand, and commanded Sir William Stanley, Hugh Owen and
diverse other captains to be merry Grimeston and Readhead, who conducted them
to an other Tent where there was a banquet prepared, being in the midest of it,
there were two gold chains sent from the Duke, one to Grimeston, the other to
Readhead. The banquet being done, they were re-conuaied to the Duke, who after
some more questions with Grimeston concerning the intented business, he gave
them leave to depart, commanding they should be mounted upon two of his own
horses, and Sir William Stanley with Owen Salisbury to guard them to the water
side, which they did accordingly, and so taking leave one of the other,
Grimeston returned to the Lord Willoughby acquainting him with all their
proceedings, who said that it could not be performed as Grimeston had concluded
it with the Duke, for that he was altogether unprovided,

Whereupon Grimeston moved the Lord Willoughby to call Read-head, and to
encourage 1588.
Read-head say the sconce could not be delivered that night, he fell
presently into a great rage, laying his hand on his rapier, and swearing that
he did think it was but a stratageme to cut his throat, whereof if he were
assured, he would kill Read-head with his own hands: but Read-head gave him so
great reasons for this delay, as he rested satisfied, promising that Grimeston
should deliver it unto him, or loose his life; whereupon the Duke took his
hand, commanding him a cup of Sack, and so dismissed him for that time. Sir
William Stanley came back with Read-head to the water side, who upon the way
entreated Read-head, if it were a stratagem, to tell him, and he would never
reveal it: but he made him answer that there was nothing but truth; Then he
gave Read-head a watchword, that when they should enter the sconse, they might
send in some hundred or two hundred men before, that himself and the rest
might enter with safety; all which Read-head promised should be done. Having
taken leave of sir William Stanley, he returned to the Lord Willoughby, and
acquainted him with what had past, and what sir William Stanley had resolved to
do by his watchword, all which his Lordship willed him to keep secret, and
to acquaint no man therewith; and in the mean time he made all things ready
to receive them.

Upon the night prefixed, betwixt eleven and twelve a clock, being as dark as
pitch, Grimeston according to appointment, went forth to conduct them into the
sconse, who coming to the Dukes quarter, where his troops were ready, they
demanded for Read-head, and said that they thought it was a plot to cut their
throats; but Grimeston answered that Read-head had slain one of the Governors
men in the market place, and that except the expedition of that service did
save his life, he would be hanged for the fact: yet for all that they would
not trust him, but sir William Stanley caused his hands to be bound with a
match, and appointed a Sargent to lead him with his dagger drawn to stabbe
him, if he discovered any treason, and so they came unto the sconse, where
there entered not above forty, whereof some twelve were slain, and the rest
taken prisoners. The alarm being given, Grimeston did strike up the Sargeants

This is a brief and true relation of all that action performed by Grimeston
and Read-head, which some malicious papists, or ill affected to the State, have
given out to have been undertaken by the receiving of the Sacrament, wherein
they protest and will Grimeston a hundred pound in money, and an anuitie of
fifty pounds a year during his life, causing him to be sworn an Esquire for
her body; to Read-head she gave a hundred pounds and forty pounds a year
during his life, commanding him to be sworn an ordinary Sewer of her chamber,
which place he still enjoys under his royal Majesty.

The Duke of Parma having received this disgrace, and seeing his bad success
against the Isle of Ter-Tole, without the which he could not fully besiege
Berghen, the The Duke of Parma raises his si^ge from Berghen.
which might be relieved at every tide by the ships of Holland and Zeeland,
through Maurice went to his town of Campuere, where he took possession of
the Marquisate of Vere, being his inheritance, with the accustomed ceremonies,
in the which he caused 1589.
Prince Maurice installed Marquis of la Vere.
la Vere, tied together with a double knot, with this circumscription; Nodus
indissolubilis: on the other side was an arm armed holding a sword, and the
devise; Ie maintiendray Nassau. There was an other kind of coin with two
hands joined as if they plighted their faith, out of the which came Mercuries
Caduceus, the writing about it was; Auxilia humilia firma consensus facit, that
is; Unity and consent make small forces firm and strong. He had received the
like honor at Flushing, but by reason of some jealousy betwixt the English and
the Estates, it was deferred until August the year following.

Whilst the Duke of Parma was at the siege of Berghen, Charles Earl of
Wachtendonk besieged and taken.
Mansfield lay before Wachtendonck, a small Town in the upper quarter of
Gelderland, The subjects of the Netherlands arrested out of the country for the
States debts.
money from the same, for the which they had the Estates bills formerly made,
whereby they bound their subjects to the payment thereof, understanding that
for want of payment it should be lawful for the said creditors to arrest their
subjects and their goods which dwelt out of the Netherlands, as it has been
often used in Germany and the East-countries; so as for the like debts, and
for the arrerages of rents for diverse towns, many Netherland Merchants of
Antwerpe and other places, were arrested, and their goods stayed, and actions
entered against many Netherland Merchants inhabiting in London, upon such bills
of debt, the which bred great troubles.

The united Provinces at that time were much troubled about the like cause with
the King of Scotland, who this year, about the two and twenty of August, sent
his James King of Scotland sends to the united Provinces for pay due to
Colonel Stuart.
Herald unto the united Provinces, to will them within forty days after his
message done, to take order for the satisfaction of their martial debt for
service done unto them, by certain of his subjects, as to Collonell Stuart,
and to other Captains and soldiers which had served under him in the
Netherlands, which amounted to above five hundred thousand gilders, else he
should be constrained to give the said Collonell and his associates leave to
execute his letters of Mart, granted unto them already by the advice of his
council, and so pay themselves: to prevent this danger, and all other
controversy which might grow betwixt the King of Scotland and the Leonard de
Voocht one of their council of The Estates send Monsieur de Voocht to the King
of Scotland.
Estate unto the King, with Commission to inform his Majesty, that the united
Provinces, and especially they of Holland and Zeeland (who were most threatened,
and in greatest danger of the said letters of Mart) were not to pay any thing
unto the said Collonell Stuart and his associates, of his pretended debt, which
(they said) grew, when as they served the Estates of Brabant, Flanders, Arthois
and Henault, under the government of Mathias Archduke of Austria, and after him
under the duke of Aniou, by whose Commission the said Collonell Stuart with his
regiment, served in the said Provinces, whereas they of Holland and Zeeland had
not any thing to do touching the payment of soldiers which served in those
Provinces, but ever since seek to get old debts for service done long since in
wars by letter of reprisall, so long 1589.
Charles and the Kings of France, England, and Denmark, yea and the King of
Spain himself, were indebted many milions, unto such as had served them in
fore-passed wars, the which was not yet paid.

The Estates gave commission unto their Ambassador to return by England, to
inform the Queen of his proceeding in this business, and to entreat her
Majesty that The Queen writes unto the King of Scotland in favor of the united
Provinces.
she would be pleased to compound this controversy betwixt the King of
Scotland and them: whereupon on the tenth of November she wrote very
effectually unto the King in favor of the united Provinces: and not long after
the Estates sent the said Voocht and John vander Wercke an other Councellor of
Estate into Scotland by sea, who satisfied the King so well in all points, as
the aforesaid letters of reprisall ganted by the King unto Colonel Stuart,
were called in. The Estates finding themselves somewhat eased of the fear
they had of the Spanish fleet, and of the mutiny of their soldiers, having
thereby re-established their authorities, they resolved to settle a better The
policy of the united Provinces touching martial affairs.
course for the government, finding the great unwillingness that was generally
among the soldiars, as then serving in the Netherlands, by reason of their bad
pay, during the Earl of Leicesters Government, whereupon they determined to
establish a new order in martial policy. First, they compared their charges
of the war, with the

Thirdly the Estates took order that the monthly paiments which from thence
forth the soldiers should receive, should be accounted at 48. days to the
month, causing the 48. days to the month for the paiement of their soldiers.
Colonels, Captains and common soldiers to swear that they should rest
satisfied with such pay, but the entertainment of superior officers, was
appointed to be paid at 32. days to the month. And to the end that good order
might be observed concerning the payment of the soldiars which serve in the
said Provinces, the Estates appointed the said soldiers to be kept in garrisons
in the said Provinces, according to the order made concerning the contributions
wherewith every Province was charged, according to Their care to pay the
soldiars where they serve.
their abilities, whereof ensued many notable effects, especially that the
contributions of the respective Provinces, were not divided, but truly
employed for the furnishing

And finding that the charges of war grew so great, as the ordinary
contributions were not sufficient to defray the same, the said Provinces were
content to be rated extraordinarily, over and above the old contribution,
which every of the said Provinces used to pay, whereof the Council of Estate
had the disposition, and employed it for the extraordinary charge. And it was
agreed that at the end of the year the said Provinces should assemble and
account together, to see if every of them

The means whereby the said Provinces raise their particular monthly
contributions, are not alike in every Province, for they of Holland and Zeeland
(being the richest and mightiest Provinces) do raise their contribution by
excises and imposte rated upon 1588


Some Provinces have other means to raise their contributions, as the
situation and condition of the Provinces may afford, of the best means they
can devise for the preservation of the said Provinces towns and villages,
which prescribed contribution is not to be diminished, but must be paid out
of such means as they shall find least prejudicial to their subjects. With
these and such like means, the united Provinces of Holland, Zeeland, Vtrecht
and Friseland, have not only valiantly defended themselves against the power
of so mighty a King, but also (as it shall appear) with the aid of
Gelderland and Oueryssel, have oftentimes made offensive wars against the
said The united Provinces have done great exploits with small numbers of men.
King, and have taken whole Provinces, with many strong towns and fortes from
him,

The war by sea is maintained by the Estates in as good order as that by
land, appointing in their sea Provinces an office of the Admiralty, which
consists of diverse persons of good judgment in pollitick affairs, or else in
traficke by sea, and are divided into five several places, where they have
their ordinary residence, as at Amsterdam, Rotterdam, Maurice (as Admiral
General of the sea) is the head. In whose name all commissions and orders for
the war appointed Prince Maurice is ^dmirall and chief of a^ the rest.
by the said Officers of the Admiralty, are sent forth: the Officers under him
are sworn and receive their commission from the general Estates. The
Admiralll has three or four Vice-admiralls, which keep in Holland and
Zeeland, in places that are most convenient upon the seacoast, as in Holland
John van Deuenvoord Lord of Warmont, and under him Peter vander Doos and John
Gerbrantson. In Zeeland Justin Nassau and under him Ioos de Moor.

The Officers of the Admiraltie direct all the wars by sea, by advise from
the general Conuoy money employed for the wars by sea.
serve by sea, and are at the charge of the generality, as also for the
building and repayring of ships of war, and for the rigging and furnishing
them with all things necessary, the which is a very great charge in respect of
the great number of ships of war which they are forced to entertain
continually.

The war by sea is ordered by the Admiraltie in this sort; first they appoint
diverse ships of war to watch the haven towns, which are under the enemies
command, as before Dunkerke, Nieuport, Ostend etc. Secondly there are certain
ships of war sent out to keep the seas. Thirdly they use yearly to send out
some ships of war to defend the fishermen, which take herings and cod upon
the coasts of England, 1588.
Courses made by the States garrisons into the enemies Countries.
in Brabant went forth with eight hundred men, horse and foot (the horsemen
taking up the foote-men behind them) and went to Tilborch by Boisleduke whereas
some of the Duke of Parmas troops lay, whom they charged and defeated,
whereof diverse being slain the rest fled into the church, but they durst not
stay to force them fearing that upon the alarume, the garrisons there about
would issue forth and charge them, and so they returned back with good prize.
The like did they of Berghen up Zoom, being less then a hundred soldiers
(whereof five or six were horsemen of Baxe his company) and led by a Sargent,
they went to do an exployt upon Botchloon, whereof they failed, yet they past
valiantly through a company of soldiars and came to Thienen, where there lay
five or six companies of Spaniards, into the which they got by reason that the
town is great, and drove out the Spaniards, putting three companies of them to
the sword, and then spoiled the town: the enemy attended them at their
coming forth being about four hundred strong, but they making head valiantly,
not only forced through them, but came safe to their garrison withal their
booty which is a thing almost incredible.

The Zeelanders being about seauenty strong, past over the water into Flanders,
and there cut of a conuoie going to Cortrick, where besides the foot there
were above Martin Schenck in like sort was not Idle but made road as far as
Momedi, and in December he had secret intelligence with some of Nymeghen,
meaning to undermine the wall, whereas the ditch was not very deep, and so to
blow it up, but by reason of some store of rain which fell about that time and
stood in the diches, he could not effect his desseigne. There were many subtle
enterprises attempted about this time of either side both in Brabant,
Gelderland and Freezland, sometimes with profit, sometimes with loss, for
that there were many good soldiars Martin Schenck to recover some of his losses
in the beginning of November made a sconse at Herwerden upon the Rine without
the consent of the Estates, which was some impayring of their public
authority, but by the persuasion of Prince Maurice and the Lord Willoughby he
had a great charge given unto him that he should throw it down again.

The English garrison in the Brill began to mutine for their pay, being
somewhat long ere it came: that garrison lying in such sort, as the soldiars
had good means to help themselves by incursions upon the enemy, but for
that their pay (according to the contract) was to be brought out of England,
the Estates of Holland disbursed Mutiny under the enemy for pay.
his wars, part of those wants were supplied by the King of Spaines name and
authority, and yet not so well, but diverse of their soldiers put themselves
under the

In the beginning of this year the garrison of Geertruyden bergh began to
mutine again, it is a town belonging to Prince Maurice, lying right against
Dort, upon 1589. The second mutiny at Gheertruydenberg.
the Mecwe or Vlack, which is a water made by the Rhine and the Mase: this
garrison suspecting that something might be attempted against them, they
presently disarmed the Bourgers, and stayed all the ships and boats that
past by, taking contributions, burning villages and committing all insolences
as enemies to the Estates. Upon the six and twenty of November past, the
souldiars being persuaded to union, they made answer by writing the which
(they said) was signed by Sir John Wingfield Governor Maurice or the Estates;
who considering of this their resolution, and finding that they entertained all
fugitive soldiers, and sought to incite other garrisons to the like rebellion,
having received intelligence that from the second day of February this year,
they had been in treaty with the Duke of Parma: Prince Maurice (with the advice of the Estates) resolved (seeing that the Lord Willoughby, Sir John
Norris nor Master Bodley could not prevail with them, and that the Lord
Willoughby was as then to go for England) to besiege Prince Maurice besieges
Geertruydenbergh the 25. of March 1589.
towns lying about it: and so coming before it the five and twenty day of
March, he sent a kind letter to them of the town by a drum, giving them to
understand that the Governor Sir John Wingfield and other captains had
threatened to deliver the town into the enemies hands, and what a dishonor and
danger they should thereby purchase unto themselves, offering them all
contentment, whereunto they made answer, that they would rather seek aid
from the enemy, then yield to Prince Maurice or the States, threatening to hang
up his messenger.

The town of Dort did likewise write unto them but they tare their letters.
And when as the Lord Willoughby wrote his letters on the eighteenth of March, to
Sir John Wingfiled his brother in law, desiring him to find means to come
away rather then his presence should give any cause of offense: Sir John
Wingfield refused it, saying that he had sworn to live and die with the
soldiers, as long as they would hold that town for her Majesty and the good
of the Netherlands, who protested to deliver it rather to the enemy then to
Prince Maurice or the Estates, with other words to the like effect. In the
mean time Prince Maurice did what he could to win the town, and began to
batter it furiously, they within defended themselves, yet there was a
reasonable breach made, and being ready to give an assault, they within
cunningly offered a composition by a minister and a deputy, whom they had sent
forth to treat with the Prince and the States, to whom the Articles were
delivered, with the which they returned, Lansavechio, which they within the
town had received, hearing also that the Duke of Parma was within few miles of
the town; Prince Maurice resolved to with-drawe the siege, that they might
have no just occasion to pretend they had been forced to yield the town unto
the enemy, hoping by that means to move the best minded soldiers to consider
thereof, and to be dealings might be unto her. And upon the fourth of April
he wrote unto them by master 1589.
Leuinus the minister, saying, that he sought not the life neither of officer
nor soldier, Offers made by Prince Maurice to the garrison of Gheertruydenberg.
but assured them that as many as would continue in pay should be still
entertained, and such as would not, might depart whether they pleased withal
they had: so as they would assure the town unto him. To whom they made answer
the same day, that their full resolution was to stay there in garrison, and to
do the like service they had done before, and that they would make choice of
their own Governor.

On the fifth of April Prince Maurice did again offer them all security, and
to perform whatsoever they would else demand by contract, desiring them to
send their deputies unto him, but all was in vain, for that upon the ninth of
April they received the Duke of Parmaes deputies into the town, with whom
they compounded to yield the town for fifteen months pay, and not any of
them would yield unto Prince Maurice Gheertruydenberg sold to the Duke of Parma
by the garrison.
John Wingfield and Charles Honings should depart when they would with all
their households, goods and mouables, and that they should have pasports given
them to that end. This was concluded at Breda upon the tenth of April 1589.

The garrison being in this sort paid, rewarded and gone out, the same day
Charles Earl of Mansfieldt entered the town. The Estates of the united
Provinces proclayming The garrison of Gheertruydenberg condemned for traitors.
both the Governor, Captains, Officers and all the Souldiars, Traitors and
Rebels, condemning them to be hanged where-soeuer they should be found, with
promise of five pounds in reward for every private soldier, and ten pounds
for every Officer, to them that could bring any of them to the Estates, and
their goods John Wingfield with Captain Honnings retired themselves into
England: He is much taxed in this action by the Estate, but it seems he had
but the bare title of a Governor, and no commanding power over the garrison,
who compelled him to do what they pleased, the which seems to be true, for
that they set a guard over him during all the time of the seege, as I have heard
himself affirm, neither was it in his power to yield the town unto Prince
Maurice.

During the seek of this town there were slain of the States side these
captains, Wolffart van Brederod, vander Aa, Landas captain of Prince Maurice
his foot guard, and Cornellis Adrianz Schaeps; and above fifty more, there
were hurt Peter vander Does viceadmirall of Holland and captain Sydenborch,
the marshall of Villiers was also 1589


This loss of Gheertruydenberg did much prejudice the united Provinces,
wherefore they presently stopped up the river with ships of war both to
hinder their fishing and passage out of the town by water. The thirteen of
April Cont Charles of Mansfeldt went with a small army from Gheertruydenberg
into the quarter of Boisleduke by the Duke of Parmas commandment, where he
took the Castle of Lobben the which he Many castles yielded to the Spaniard.
was forced to leave three days after. On the seauenteene of May he also
took the Castle of Daetoren near unto Heusden: on the twenty one day passing
out of Boisleduc, his men took three ships of war of Holland, lying at anchor
in the river of Meuse Schenck had held so long as his own patrimoney, being
situated in the upper quarter of Gelderland) was also yielded unto him the
twenty five of June after that it had been a while beseeged: and the sixteenth
of July the castles of Puydroyen and Brakel, the which was afterward
abandoned, and burnt with the whole village. But going to camp before Heusden
the same month he was forced to rise with shame and loss. The same month
three companies of the Estates horse were surprised nere unto Boisleduc by the
new garrison of Gheertruydenbergh, The Cornets of the estates horse defeated
and defeated, the one was of Prince Maurice his guard whereof Rysoyer was
Captain, the second the Seignior of Kynschys and the third the deceased
Marshall Rysoyer and Kynschy with diverse horsemen were taken, the rest were
put to rout. Whilst that the Earl of Mansfeldt with the duke of Pastrana and
the prince of Ascholy with many ships and boats, beseeged the house or castle
of Hele in the I Will of Bomel: Prince Maurice, the Earl of Hohenlo and the Earl
of Solms, drew the garrisons about Heusden together in the month of August,
and by force victualed the town in the face of the enemy, who lay not far
from it. The Castle of Hele had bin sore battered with nine hundred shot at the
least, whereupon Sidenborch the governor The Castle of Hele taken by the Duke of
Parma.
yielded the twenty four of August, by means of a dissension fallen among the
soldiers, who were most slain, whereof afterward he excused him self. From
thence the Dukes army marched to Louesteyn, lying at the end of the I Will of
Bomel, and they

In September the Duke of Parma supposed by the enclosing in of Heusden, and
the taking of Hemert, Hele and other sconses there abouts, that the country was
sufficiently guarded on the one side Hemert to pass over the Meuse into
Tielsche-Weert, and so to go to Buren or Vtrecht, but the Spaniards (who had
the fore-ward under Collonell Lieua) having some quarrel with the Italiens,
and being set on by the Duke of Pastrana and the Prince of Ascoly, (who were no
great friends to the duke of Parma) would not pass over the river, but cried
out viue el Re, fuora il mal gouerno, and when the Earl of A mutyne among the
Spaniards.
Mansfeldt would have forced them to pass, they shot at him, and drove him
away time his uncle, the great Cardinal Farnese dyed in Rome the three and
twentieth 1589.
The Duke of Parma goes to the ^paw.
and very melancholy: So as in May he went to the Spawe in Sweborn, and
lodged at Mentfort or thereabouts, drinking daily of those waters for the
recovery of his health.

Before his departure he called together the Estates of Brabant, Flanders,
Arthois, and Henault, to aid the League of France both with money and men, and
An assembly of the Estates under the Duke of Parma.
to take it out of the rents wherewith the revenues were charged. They were
content to yield to his desire in many things, although they were much
impouerished by reason of the great taxations which were imposed upon them, the
which were raised with harder conditions then upon them in the united
Provinces, who had free and

About the same time he had sent certain Mules laden with rich Tapistries and
cloth of Arras with other costly things, out of the Netherlands to be
transpo^ed The Duke of Parmas goods taken in Lorraine.
and taken away, the which afterward was openly reported, and did manifestly
appear, that it was done by advise from Spain, whether it were by the Kings
own command, or his Councels, or by the practices of such as loved him not, I
know not, but it was a great hindrance unto him, and bred a great dislike in
him against Spain.

Moreover there fell a controversy with great reproaches, betwixt the Lord of
Champigny and the President Richardot (the Duke of Parmas favorite) and
afterward with the Duke himself, concerning the treaty of peace at
Bourbrough, betwixt the Deputies of the Queen of England and those of the King
of Spain, of which number Dislike between the Duke of Parma and Champigni.
Champigni and Richardot were, but both of diverse opinions: Champigni sought to
Richardot had contrary instructions from the Duke of Parma to break of the
treaty, holding the conquest of England easy, according to the advice and
project which Don John had left in writing at his death: for the which Mounsier
Champigni was much offended in regard that he had past his word to the Queen
of England that there was no other intent but to deal sincerely and uprightly,
so he was thereby disgraced and proved a liar: whereupon after the bad
success of the said army, Champigni complained thereof Champigni^ forced to
leave the Netherlands.
he obtained leave to send Champigni out of the Netherlands, the which he put
in practice with no small rigor, commanding him to dislodge out of the
Netherlands, and to retire into Burgongne within a very short time: Champigni
asking him the reasons why, the duke answered, to teach your tongue to keep
silence, and your pen to write better: The Duke seeing himself maligned and
slandered by them that were and ought to be 1590.
Richardot (...) by the duk of Parma ^to Spain.
affected unto him then unto any other Spaniard, that might aspier unto the
government) he sent the said Richardot president of Arthois into Spain unto the
king, to answer in his name to al obections and slanders, wherewith they had
filled the Kings ears, and to bring back a continuation of the dukes
commission in his government of the Netherlands in despite of his enemies.
Whilst that Richardot was in Spain the duke went the eight of May toward the
Spawe (as we have said) for his indisposition, his servants and other Italiens
complaining openly at the Spawe, that the Spaniards had dressed their master in
that manner, having his belly and legs sowlne.

The Duke of Parma being much distasted both of Spain and Spaniards, he wanted
no remembrance^s to put him in mind of the Kings displeasure, being charged to
have Machauells council) rather make himself Lord of Ba^ Council given to
the ^ke of Parma.
the country, whereunto he had good reason to aspire, in regard of the
Spaniards hatred toward him, and the wrong which was done to his son
Raynutius, touching the crown of Portugal, whereunto he had better title (as
they said) then the king himself. And that if he would attempt any thing in the
Netherlands, whether it were with the title of Sovereign, or as Protector or
Lieutennant thereof, he should want no friends within the contry, nor
wel-willers without it, as France, England and the united Provinces Don John of
Austria. Others thought he would defer the execution of his desseigns, till
after the death of the King of Spain, being very old, and that the house of
Farnese was wont to be subtle and covetous enough yet always wary and very
circomspect: But the King granting his desire, and at the last sending for the
Duke of Pastrana into Spain he was well satisfied: And for that the King was
fully resolved to aid the Leaguers in France Richardots return out of Spain,
he recommended that business unto him, as the fittest man for that action, and
he for his part resolved to undergo the charge, being a fit means to purchase
more honor, and for that cause he made all the have he could sending both men
and money to the frontire towns and gathering an army together in Arthois,
wherein La mot had the cheifest charge, who not long before in April thought
Pr^paration to aid the league ^n France.
to have surprised Ostend, by the secret intelligence with some of the
soldiars, but he failed of his purpose, whereupon the garrison of Berghen up
Zoome with that of Ostend and others, spoiled Gramont, or Geecsbergh.

On the twenty of September the duke of Parma went from Spawe to Aken or Aix la
Chapelle three leagues of, having three companies of horse with him: there he
Joseph's breeches, the virgin Mary's smock, the sheet wherein John Baptist
was buried, Charlemagnes chair, and some other petty ones, and from thence he
went to Bins to be nearer unto the frontiers of France. This summer Berke was
beseeged by the Duke of Parmas forces, Colonel Schencke came in the end of
July with many ships to relieve it with victuals, mounting up the river
Schenck rele^ues Bercke.
within a league of the town, from whence he carried such store of victuals
and munition as they had need of by land, and entered safely therewith into
the town.

Cont William Lewis of Nassau Governor of Freezland for the Estates, was daily
at wars with Verdugo Governor of Groaning for the King of Spain, to whose
aid the to enter into East Friseland and then into the country of Groaning.
Colonel Schenck 1589
Schenck defeats some of the (...) of Parmas troops.
taking from them all the money which they had brought to pay the garrison of
Groaning and other near places, which the King held in those parts of
Friseland. Schenck victualled Berck and defeated these troops in less then
eight days, about the beginning of August.

The third day after his victory being fortefied with all the forces he could
get Schencks unfortunate enterpise upon Nymeghen.
(carrying a spleen to them of Nymeghen) he went from his sconcse called the
Bril or Vossenhole, lying by Tolhuys, and sailed along the river of Wahal, that
he Schenck not staying for the rest, resolved to give an attempt before it was
day, and landed by the Maie-gate, then presently taking two Rams which he had
brought, he went to Saint Anthonies gate, the which (although it were very
strong) he brake open, and so got through certain iron grates and windoes
into a house, which they took, from whence they thought to ceaze upon the
market place, being not far from thence; in the Schencks soldiars out
again, the rest being not yet come: In the mean time the horsemen with some
footmen were busy to get open the Hessenche gate, but they began to late,
for before they had beaten of the locks and bolts, it was day light, so as
they within the town casting stones and other things upon them, forced them to
leave it.

This succeeding so unfortunately on every side for that they came too late,
and were Schenck with his men were forced to retire back again unto their
ships, which retreat was with such confusion, disorder and fear, as every man
sought to save himself as speedely as he could; whereupon there leapt so many
into four or five great boats that were nearest, as three of them sonke with
the weight thereof, so as such as could not swim were drowned, whereof Sir
Martin Schenck himself was one: who was oppressed with the weight of his Armor
and could not help himself: The ships that were laden did drive down half
Schenck drowned.
a mile beyond the town, by a village called Ostenholt, where they cast
Anchor, missing their Commander: One of their great Puntes or boats full of
men, did Corn. llis Zeghers and Jacob Ween being Bourguemasters of Nymeghen.

The townsmen of Nymeghen being somewhat eased of their fear by this
victory, took certain scutes and boats, and went to see if they could with
their nets and hooks get any men or booty out of the water; where amongst
the rest they found a man with a fair armor and well appareled, which being
brought to land, they knew it to be Sir Martin Schenck, by the marks he had
about him, 1589.
(...) bo^ (...) by them of Nymeghen
their rage upon his dead ca^case, the which they quartered and hung up
ignominiously at the four corners of the town, and his head was set over
Saint Anthonies gate, but not long after they were taken down again by
commandment from the Marquis of Varembon, Governor of Gelderland for the King
of Spain, for that many poor Townes-men of Nymeghen were slain and murdered
for it in many places; and so the head and quarters were laid in a coffin and
kept in a Tower, till that the town was taken three years after by Prince
Maurice, His bo^y ho^bly ^ed.
and order of a soldier, and laid in the great Church before the high Altar
in the Dukes of Gelders tomb, Prince Maurice and all his train accompanying
the body.

Thus did Sir Martin Schenck of Nydeck (one that had tried his fortunes on both
sides to his great honor and reputation) end his life, being one of the most
resolute, valiant and polliticke captains in his time, which his worthy
enterprises and exploites do well witness, as his many victories, his
releeuing of the castle of Blyenbe^ke, The life and com^ndation of Sch^k.
where he beseeged the beseegers, and forced them to leave the seege. His
stratagems were likewise notable, as the winning of Nymeghen and Breda from the

In his youth he was first page to captain Enchuisen, and after that to the
Earl of I^elsteyn whom he with other captains beseeged in a sconse before
Goore, and there he took his master prisoner. He did win Werle in
Westphalia, and behaved himself poll^tickely and valiantly in the taking of
Bonna, with many other memorable enterprises, which deserve an honorable
remembrance: he was made knight by the Earl of Lecester: when he died he
was but young; he was very strong and hardy, and always brought up in the
wars; a great enterpriser, and active beyond all measure, and soden in his
actions, for when as the enemy Villiers died not long before, it was thought
in time he should have been advanced and preserred to that same place.

After the death of Colonel Schenck, the Fort which he had built (called then
A muti^y in the ^ort of Grauenw^erd.
they call it Schenkes-sconse) which during his lifetime had been kept in
very good order and discipline, mutined for their pay, the which they said
resolutlie the would have, or else they would find them that should pay them.
And it was given out that they had already begune to treat with the Duke of
Cleues to yield it unto him. But the Earl of Meurs coming thither the
fifteenth day of August, pacified al, promising them upon the word o^ an Earl,
they should be paid and satisfied, making it his own debt.

In the beginning of Summer William Earl of Nassau Governor of Friseland for
Wars in Friseland.
he fortefied and made a very strong sconst Island: and then he took some other
small 1589.
money to Verdugo governor of Groaning, but Colonel Schenke defeated them upon
the plains of Lip, as we have said. The twenty of October William Earl of
Nassau took an other sconse called Saltcamp, lying in the mouth of the
Reedeep, and entering it by force in the sight of Verdugo, (who could not
prevent it) he slew eighty men therein, and took many prisoners, this sconce
lies in a marish, stopping the passage upon Reedeepe unto Groaning.

The twenty eight of August, the Earl of Meurs with the garrisons of Lochem
and other near places, entered into Westphalia: And for that the great Borrough
of Grave two leagues from Munster the chief Town of Westphalia, did Grave in
Westphalia spoiled
Jacob Antonissen, vice Admiral of Harlem was captain, but not then aboard
for that he was sick) lying with other ships in guard before Dunkerke, while
the rest of his company had the enemy in chase he being alone, certain
fisher-boates well manned and other ships of Dunkerk cunningly A resolute act
of one of the estates captains at sea.
set upon him, grapled with him and borded him, where after they had fought
along time and valiantly defended themselves, finding themselves in the end
too weak they set fire on their powder, and blue both themselves up, and a
great number of them

The Dunkerkers being now very strong at sea by reason of the great prizes
which they took daily from them of Holland and Zeeland, where with they did so
enrich their soldiars, as they tempted many sailors and soldiars of the united
Provinces, to run thither and to serve them, and so they kept in the north
seas, and took diverse English men, Netherlanders and fishermen, and put them
to ransom, for assurance whereof they took out the masters, pylots and
merchants and whatsoever was good within the ships and then let them go. The
Englishmen for their parts made no means to prevent these spoils, but the
united Provinces first somoning all their

The town of Bercke lying upon the Rhine, and belonging to the jurisdiction of
Villiers, or Colonel Schencke.

This year in January they made a bridge over the Rhine, and thereby used to
victual 1584.
The ^paniards chased out of the Island of Bomel.
had burnt the castle of Puydroyen and some other places, they returned into
the Mairie of Boiseleduc in Brabant.

At that time Mounsire Balaigny Governor of Cambray was wavering, keeping both
the Kings of France, Spain and the league in breath, and drawing comoditie
from Charles Earl of Mansfeldt, and la Motte Pardieu thither, who came with
their troops near unto Cambray the fifteeneth day of September, attending the
effect which they expected of their intelligences; which was that making a
general procession Balaignyes wife (who was very cunning) having vented this
mine, being advertised by some one of the enterprise, (whom she had won)
they were disapointed, for the which the Deane of the Cathedral Church with
some Chanoin^ and Burgers were committed to prison, who at Balaignyes return
(being then absent) were executed.

The Earl of Meurs to victual the town of Bercke, sent the Earl of
Ouerstein, the Barron of Poetly^ and Sir Francis Vere thither with a thousand
horse and two thousand foot, knowing well that the Marquis of Varambon was
there attending Francis Vere with four Companies of English, and by
Christopher Wolfs Cornet of The Marquis of Varambon defeated by the ^states.
Reyetrs being on the wing of the reereward: so as this charge turned into a
Battle, whereas Varambon lost above 600. men upon the place, with ten
Enseignes and three Cornets, besides the prisoners, and above 200. horse,
whereof the English had six Caraffa, who was wounded, and one Lieutenant.
There were not above foure^eene Knights, Captains and Officers slain, whereof
one was the Marquis of Cico, Nephew to Spinelli, Master of the Camp; John
Antonio Caraffa and Alonzo Palagano both captains, and seven Ancients, most
Neapolitaines. Whilst they were in fight Count Charles of Mansfeldt came
posting thither with threescore and ten companies of horse and foot, but the
Earl of Ouersteyn, the Barron of Poetlys and Sir Francis Vere having won this
victory made have to recover Berck with their conuoy and victuals. The Earl
of Mansfeldt thought to have met with them in their return, but they took an
other Boisleduc toward Grave, passing by a little wood, he was saluted with a
Volley 1589.
A dear brauado of 35. soldiers.
to be compast round about and searched, they found 35 soldiers there, whereof
30. were slain upon the place, and the other were hanged.

Whilst that the Earl of Mansfedlt made preparation to go and besiege Berke,
the Earl of Meurs to succor it (as he had done twice or thrice before)
gathered together all the men he could, being at Arnhem, the chief town of
Gelderland, in The vnfor^nate death of the Earl of Meurs.
the Dukes Palace, where meaning to make a trial of some fire works, the
powlder was unfortunately set on fire, wherewith a part of the Chamber was
blown away, and he burnt, and drawn from under the ruins of the house,
whereof he died within few days after, full of pain, whereby the succoring of
Berke was broken of and

The Earl of Mansfeldt had resolved to besiege Berke after an other manner,
having prepared all things necessary, he came out of Bommels-Weert, where
(...) had battered the sconse of Vorne ten days together in vain, and in
November he ^oke the Sconse of Reez aforesaid, the which by reason of the dry
wether and the lowness of the water, they did yield by composition, whereby
the besieged could not be now well relieved, who having great want of
victuals, and finding that their succors failed them; the Estates considering
also that this town being so far from them would be over chargeable to
victual so often, they did consent that the besieged should make the best
composition they could with the Spaniard: so as in the end of January Charles
Earl of Mansfeldt for the King of Berke yielded to the Earl of Mansfeldt.
Spain, the Captains, Officers, and all the soldiers going forth with their
full arms, and baggage, the Drum sounding, Coullors flying, matches light,
and bullets in their mouths, and to carry them away they should have fifty
ships and Scutes with convenient Conuoy, and a Captain called David Soper a
prisoner should be discharged without ransom. The Burgers likewise had good
conditions, and so Berke (other-wise called Rhynebercke) was given over: It is
thought that there were certain secret promises made, which caused the
garrison to yield more willingly, as that the Countess of Meurs (then a
widow) should quietly enjoy her lands by circumscription, as being a member
of the Empire and Neutrall. Thus the Duke of Parma Ernestus Bishop of
Cologne, but he kept the chief places with good garrisons, as Rhynebercke,
Bonna, Nuys, Keysersweert, and after the taking of Bercke, he had some
disseignes upon the Towns of Cleues, Goch, Reez, and Emric, belonging to the
Duke of Cleues, but all was in vain, his enterprise being discovered.

There was not much more done this year neither by the Duke of Parma nor yet
by the united Provinces, the Duke (being busy to send men and money into
France) stayed at Bins in Henault, where the Duke of Maine and other commanders
of the League came to speak with him: on the other side the united Provinces
Iustine of Nassau Admiral of Zealand, and the Seignior of Pree Agent there for
the Estates. And the Queen of England sent him first twenty thousand pounds
starling, by Sir Edward Stafford then her Majesty's Ambassador with some
poulder, munition for war, and ships to serve him: and within 15. days after
being besieged in Deep by the League, the Queen sent the Lord Willoughby over
with 4000. men to his succor. The general Estates had long before reduced all
the enemies Frontier Countries to certain ceasments and contributions of
money, payable monthly, as well upon the lands as upon the Country houses,
Villages and laborers and other good people, who might freely do their work
and follow their 1589.


This was against all right in the wars of fore-passed ages, who would not
yield any thing unto their enemies (as the Duke of Alua caused a poor peasant
to be hangged, for that he had been forced to carry a bottle of hay to the
Prince of Oranges Camp before Maestricht) and it was also dangerous. But the
profit which did rise thereby, did counteruayle the pain to provide for the
dangers which they feared. The which the Spaniard might in like manner do for
his part, who might reap far greater commodities thereby then the Estates.
But no man smarted so much as the Lord of the soil and proprietary, who by
reason of these contributions, did not receive half Mondragon Governor and
Castellan of Antwerp, notwithstanding the profit which the King of Spain reapt
thereby, did forbid Mondragon forbids con^tions.
the Inhabitants of the Champian country to pay any more contributions to the
Estates: The which they did not bring in as they had been accustomed: Which
made the Estates seek to force them (that occupied such houses and land)
thereunto by the way of arms. Whereupon Captain Marcelius Bax brother to
Paul Governor of Berghen up Zoome, with his company of horse and part of his
brothers, went often to field to make these executions, so as one day among the
rest the Village of Vlrich was burnt, for an example and terror to the rest,
they having done some displeasure unto the garrison of Berghen, and this was
the last of November.

In December Marcellus Bax with other Captains went forth of Berghen with 160.
horse and 70. foot to attend for a Conuoy of victuals which was to go from
Antwerp to Steenberghen, conducted by three companies of high Duchess: being in
ambush A Conu^e defeated by the Estates men.
they charged them upon a heath, where they defeated them quite, took Colonel
Maldits prisoner, with the three Captains and many others, as well soldiers,
Merchants, victuallers, as peasants, with all their wagons, victuals, munition
and baggage, among other booty his men found new cassocks for Don Fernando of
Gonzagues company of horse, with great store of good and rich merchandise, but
they paid dearly for it, for many of their horses were slain or wounded by
the Germans shot, who in the beginning had intrencht themselves with their
wagons, and could not have been forced, Bax lost three of his best horses, two
in the fight, and the third being shot in diverse places brought him home to
Berghen. The three companies of Germans were 400. pikes and 200 musketeers
and small shot: they sent two Enseignes to Prince Maurice, and the pieces of the
third with all the booty they kept for themselves.

Cont William of Nassau having taken from the Spaniards in the country of
Groaning, the Forts of Immentes, Soltcamp and others, he did fortify them to
keep all that quarter of Friseland under the Estates contribution, with the
help of the Forts of Otterdome and Rheid lying above Groaning: There fell out
also a great jealousy and coffeehouse betwixt the inhabitants of Groaning
and their Governor Verdugo, they of the They of Groaning discontented with their
Governor.
of Gaspar of Robles Lord of Billy, as also during the time they held for the
Estates, they had always defended themselves well without any garrison.
Where-vppon Verdugo seeing that the Earl of Nassau did still prosper, and that
he had small assurance of them of the town: He writ unto the Duke of Parma,
entreating him to send him supplies of men: who presently dispacht away Cont
Herman Vanden Berghe, with twenty two companies, as well Spaniards as others, to
receive the which at the passage of the Rhyne, Verdugo went with certain
troops; but hearing that the Estates were entered into the country of Groaning,
he turned head. These companies sent by the Duke of Parma, having past the
Rhyne, marched toward Oldenzeel, and by the Tuente in the quarter of Ems, to
enter that way into the country of Groaning: Cont William of Nassau was also
fortified against them that either party aimed: and above all that Verdugo had
sent for those 1589
The description of Aix la Chapel^.
years become very populous and of great traffic, by reason that it is a
free neutrall Town, many of the reformed religion fled thither with their
whole families, so as they grew to so great a number, as it seemed the
magistrates by common consent The King of Spaines at t^pts against Aix and
other towns.
it not fit to suffer the Netherlanders (whom they termed rebels) to settle
themselves there, wherefore they thought good to begin first with them of Aix,
thinking themselves in a manner assured of the countries of Iulliers and
Cleues, by reason of the old Dukes infirmity, whom they had long governed by
a Spanish affected council, and as for the young Duke, who was but simple, and
married to a daughter of the house of Baden an ernest Catholic Princess, they
feared him not. In the territories adjacent thereunto as Cologne, Leege and
Munster, they had placed Ernestus of Bauaria to be Bishop, being there
creature, whereby the King of Spain did hope that in the end he should have
the dominion of those places, when as the inhabitants Hendricke Bishop of
Bey^rne: they were in hope also by some means to get the town of Cologne and
Emden, omitting no practice nor stratageme: for the effecting of this their
desseigne, they had often dealt with them of Aix by the Emperor and the Duke of
Cleaues, and now at last the Duke of Parma by authority from the King, as Duke
of Brabant and Limbourch, and upon pretext of being Protector of the town of
Aix, he sought by Proclamation to cut of all the preuiledges which that town
of Aix claymed in the Netherlands, and declared openly that he did not accoumpt
it a neutrall town, whether the fugitive Netherlanders should fly for refuge,
and enjoy The King of Spaines proclamation against them of Aix.


And in the beginning of the year it was signified unto them of Aix; The Mayor
and Sheriffs (which were fled) seeking by this means to overthrow the
authority of the great Council of the town, had been first suitors for it to
the Emperor and the Duke of Iuliers as one of the Protectors of the aforesaid
town: whose Council (and among the rest one Shynckern Amptman of the town
and Castle of Iuil^ers) 1589.
Albert of Austria, who undertook it.

This proclamation did spoil many of the chief of the strangers, for that
they began to ceaze upon their lands and goods in the Netherlands, which dwelt
in Aix, wherefore

By reason of the wars in France in Anno 1589. the Estate of the Netherlands
was then much altered, for that the Provinces of Arthois, Henault, Luxembourg,
Namur, 1590.
and others, bordering upon France, were then to defend themselves, from the
invasions The United Provinces have some by rea^ o^ the wa^e; of ^rance.
a care thereof, for the which in the beginning of this year 1590. he
assembled an army upon the Frontiers of Arthois, which he sent into France
under the command of the Earl of Egmont: by which means the united Provinces
had some time and respight to breath, after their long miseries and intestine
wars, which they had endured against so mighty an enemy. And for that the
government of many is most tedious and dilatory, but wise and provident in
resolution, so in the two years last past, they had spent their time to
advance their affaiers first appeasing all factions betwixt the Estates and the
English, and the mutinies of their garrisons, great wisdom, policy, money and
discipline being thereto requisite and necessary, the Queen of England being
well

Concerning religion (whereof the government of the country much consists)
they had always an especial care to follow the necessary resolutions of the
general Estates, in the time of the late Prince of Orange, making a religious
peace, and having a dislike that men should i^gine their consciences should be
forced otherwise then by good instruction, good living and by prayer. And
finding them of the reformed religion (the most zealous to defend the liberties
and welfare of the Netherlands, in regard they had been many times persecuted
for religion by the Spaniards) to be well united together, they therefore
grounded their foundation upon the greatest number: and for that the The
policy of the united ^states concer^ng r^gion.


Those of the confession of Ausbourg (which seek to divide themselves from the
reformed 1590


And to show that their only care was for unity, religion and liberty, this
year they Deo iuuante. On the other side was a strong pillar, standing upon a
great square book called religion, and upon the pillar was a hat, which
signified liberty. This pillar was fast bound by six strong arms noting the
six Provinces of Gelders, Holland, Zeeland, Friseland, Oueryssel and Vtrecht,
with this inscription under the foundation called religion, Hac nitimur: and
over the hat of liberty, Hanc tuemur, as if they would say, By the force of
truth and unity, grounded upon religion, with the help of God, we enjoy and
maintain our liberty.

For the general government of the Provinces, they had a counsel of Estate,
consisting The united Provinces ruled by a council of Estate.
Thomas Bodley (now a Knight) and Master Gilpin Secretary of the said
counsel; this council had the ordring of all causes in every Province, the
general Estates being not always assembled, who commanded over this council
of Estate: and besides this every particular Province had their private
council.

After the death of the Prince of Orange they did choose Prince Maurice, Earl
of Prince Maurice made Lieutenant general.
Nassau, Governor of Holland and Zeeland, Admiral of the sea, and Lieutenant
general of their forces, and Philip Earl of Hohenlo; an old soldier and of
great experience his Lieutenant. Vtrecht, Oueryssel and Gelderland, did
likewise at that time Maurice for their governor. William Lodowike Earl of
Nassau, eldest son to John Earl of Nassau was governor in Friseland, a
soldier of good experience and polliticke. Prince Maurice was from his youth
trained up by his father in the wars, and in affairs of Estate, and was his
second son (his eldest brother Philip William, who is now Prince of Orange
and Earl of Buren, being yet kept prisoner in Spain) and for that cause
being very fit to supply the place he was chosen chief General and
Commander over all their forces both by sea and land. In matters concerning the
land, he was to be ruled by the advice of the council of Estate, and
touching the sea by the admiralitie: and certain Comities were appointed under
him, when any thing was to be done concerning the country, and the limmits of
their liberties, by whose advice all causes touching the state were John van
Ouden Barnevelt, Lord of Crimpel, Advocate of Holland, in regard of his great
wisdom and experience.

The Netherlanders have as great means to bring in money for the mayntenance
The means how the Estates leauy money for their wars.
of their wars, as ever was heard or seen in any Country, the which is done
willingly, with a general consent, and with little hurt and prejudice to that
there subjects by making, working and carrying it thither may get any thing,
arysing 1590.


Besides this they could so well husband their money and employ it to the best
profit, as all Potentates, commonweals, and commanders in the wars might
take example The Est^es good husbandry for the employment of their money.


They did not usually entertain any great forces, but they had old, valiant
and well disciplined soldiars with the which they did many great exploits. At
that time they What number of m^n the v^ted Provinces entertained.
had about twenty thousand foot and two thousand horse, besides the Bourgers,
whom in time of necessity, they employed and paid as soldiars. They
entertained about a hunderd ships of war at sea and within their rivers,
being all well appointed; and whenever they came from any service, their men
were presently to be paid. Besides this ordinary charge of ships, sailors and
soldiars, they took order by a general consent for a certain provision of
money to be made, for the entertayning of an army in the field, for certain
months in the year, with ordinance, pioners and a supply of soldiars, to
make an offensive war, to enlarge their fronters, and also to aid the French

The Queen of England also paid to her souldiars in the garrisons of the
Brill, of Flushing, and to those that aided the Estates within the country
twelve thousand five What the Queen of England paid every monthe to relieve
the Estates. The united Provinces rich by their wars.
hundred twenty six pounds starling every month, accounting 56. days to the
month according to the contract, besides extraordinary charges for
transportation of souldiars, and the apparel both for horse and foot, which
was yearly to be provided.

By this provident care and wise government of the Estates and their
assistants, the united Provinces were exceeding rich and mighty, yea in the
midest of their greatest wars, which commonly makes any country poor and
miserable, and yet they robbed no man at sea, but were rather robbed, and at
land they used but the ordinary course

In the beginning of this year, a regiment of Spaniards complaining for their
pay The Spaniards murine and surprise Cortrey.
began to mutine, seeking what towns of Flanders they might surprise for
their pay, some Bourgers slain, making themselves masters of the town and
living at discretion. 1590


All these mutynies were thought to be by the provocation of the Duke of
Pastrana and the Prince of Ascoly who hated the Duke of Parma, and sought by
that means to do him an affront, but he surmounted all, having received a
continuation of his commission, and commandment from the King of Spain, to
go and succor the league in France. Being at Bins in Henault, the Duke of
Maine chief of the The duke of Maine comes to the ^uke of Parma.
league, carrying himself as Lieutenant of the Estate and crown of France
coming to confer with him, with some other Noble men of the league as we
have said. The Spaniards that were mutined in Courtray durst not refuse to make
this voyage with him into France, being the Kings pleasure, for the effecting
whereof, they made have to ransom the poor Bourgers, threatening to burn
their town, so as they forced them to

The fourth day of March Breda was surprised for Prince Maurice, being his
inheritance, after this manner. The signior of Herauguiere a gentleman of
Cambray, captain of a company of foot under the united Provinces, being in
garrison with his company and some other souldiars in the island of Voorn
near unto Bommel, under the command and authority of Count Phillip of Nassau
governor of the towns of Gorrichom, Vaudrichom or Vorcum and Louestein, and
Colonel of a Regiment of foot. This Earl after the retreat of Prince
Maurice out of those quarters, did impart unto the said Heraugiere (whom he
knew to be a hardy and valiant captain) Herauguiere made answer: that
first of all he did most humbly thank the Prince and the Earl for the honor
which they had done him therein. That he for a long time had dedicated his
life and fortune to the Princes services, as all his actions might well
witness during the Maurice at the Hage in Holland, being newly returned from
the army, to determine fully of this business.

Herauguiere being come thither, and having conferred with the Prince of the
manner Breda surprised for Prince Mauric^.
of the execution, and of the number of choice and resolute souldiars that
should be needful to be employed in the action; they found at that time no
better expedient* then to attempt it by a boat laden with wood. But as this
enterprise was protracted by reason of the great and long frosts in winter; in
the end of February the Prince sent 1590
Herauguiere, letting him understand in the presence of captain Edmont (now
Colonel of the Scots) that a fit time was offered to put it in execution, and
that he held the best means to be by a boat of turfes, the master whereof
was called Adrien van Berghen. Herauguiere who wished nothing more then to be
at work, desired the boatman might be sent for. To whom (having been well
examined upon all circumstances) instructions were given what he had to do;
and commandment given him not to treat with any other from that time but with
Herauguiere: who then went toward the Fort of Noortdam where his company was
in garrison, and the man with his boat to a village called Leur two leagues
from Breda, where he was to take in his turfes. Who having laden and being
ready according to the order, he advertised Herauguiere for the putting it in
execution on the Twesday following, as it had been Lambert Charles (who for
this service was afterward made Sargeant Mayor of Breda) that it was necessary
to anticipate the day, and to begin on the Monday, for that the Receiuor of the
castle did press him to deliver his turfes: The said Lambert made such speed,
as having spoken with the Prince at the Hage, he returned presently with
answer to Herauguiere, that the Prince would be ready at the place appointed,
with a number fit for the exploite.

In the mean time Herauguiere according to the charge he had from the Prince,
sent to diverse garrisons for many Officers, with the most choice and resolute
souldiars. Out Philip of Nassau sixteen, led by captain John Logier: from the
garrison of Heusden (whereof Mounsire de Famas was Governor,) sixteen led by
captain John Fernel: from the garrison of Clundert of the Signor of Lieres men
being governor of the Island, twelve, commanded by captain Matthis Helt his
Lieutenant, and of Herauguieres own company Gerard des Pres a Squier with
four and twenty soldiers. On Sunday the five and twentieth of February, about
ten of the clock at night, after that he had acquainted the chief Officers
with his disseigne, knowing that the boat attended them, the which lay at
Swerttenbarchsweer, they marched that way as covertly as they could for the
space of some six hours, yet they could neither find boat nor men, the
which did much

Night being come, the mariner failed not to come unto them, assuring them
that it was time to march. Before they departed Herauguiere sent word unto the
Prince (who was come with good troops unto Clundert) of all that had past.
Then they went on with such speed, as with in two hours they entered all into
the boat, and were not descouered; where they endured great discommodities for
that the wind was contrary, so as they continued there from Mondaie at night
until Thursday in the morning, with great cold, hunger and other extreamities.

But seeing the impossibilities to pass on by reason of so many difficulties,
they resolved to advertise the Prince, for that they would not do any thing
without his leave, unto whom they sent one of the mariners with letters,
whereunto the they staid until eleven of the clock at night and then their
boates-man returned saying, 1590
Herauguiere was forced to hear and endure from some private soldiars many
complaynts and reproaches, telling him, that he had brought them to the Butchery
and to an assured death. But he answered them courageously, that they were in
noe sort better, nor equal to himself: and that being their commander under
so generous a Prince, it would be a perpetual infamy to abandon so honorable
an enterprise, basely and for want of courrage. That they which spoke thus
should remember, that oftentimes to watch the

Whilst they expected the return of the tide to enter into the Castle by the
great Sluice, the boat was fast upon a bank of sand, unknown to the boate-men,
the which did trouble them very much, fearing that by the water which entered
into her

There boat being thus drawn into the midest of the Castle, the Sargeant
Mayor commanded the boatman to furnish turfe for every Corpse de guard, so as
there were Herauguiere and his soldiars continued betwixt hope and fear until
eleven of the clock at boat was old, wherewith they were satisfied, and in
this sort he continued pumping 1590
Herauguiere seeing then that it was time to work, having admonished every
soldier of his duty, and to show themselves men of courage and resolution,
he willed the Marryner to make all the noise he could at the pumpe, to take
away the noise of their going forth Those that were first appointed to land
went forth as covertly as they could, to whom they gave their arms as they
went forth. Being all landed without descouerie (an admirable thing being so
near the Court of guard where there was a sentinel) Herauguiere divided his
troop in two, he appointed two captains Lambert and Fernel to lead one of
the troops toward the Court of guard on the side of the town haven, on the
South-east: and he with the rest marched along the munitio^ house, under a false
port toward an other Court of guard Herauguiere marching in the head of his
troop, met upon the way an Italien soldier, who being demanded who goes
there, he answering in his own Langage, Am^go, was seized on, and commanded
upon his life to hold his peace; being demanded of the number of the souldiars
that were in the said Court of guard, and in the whole castle, he said they
were three hundred and fifty men, comprehending those that came out of the
town in the evening, to fortefie the guard, which hearing, it made him keep
him a while, and when the work should begin, to kill him. Herauguiere seeing
that the souldiars did demand curiously of the number of men, which the
prisoner said were within the castle; he answered them that he was well
informed they were but fifty, (to hide the enemies force) and that it was no
time

Then marching instantly toward the Court of guard the sentinel cried out,
Who goes there? Herauguiere made no other answer, but thrust him through the
body with his pike: then was the alarm given of all sides, and the fight grew
furious: for they of the Court of guard and the round, seeing themselves
surprised, defended themselves valiantly, so as they endured the first charge a
long time, keeping themselves strong in the said Court of guard, out of one of
the which there went an Ancient, who incountred Herauguiere bravely, and hurt
him in the arm with his sword but he overthrew him, and there he was
slain. But seeing they could not draw them out of the Court of guard, he
commanded his men to shoot through the doors and windoes, Herauguiere seeing
that neither the time nor the occasion would suffer him to use mildness, but
that he must withal speed make himself master of the place, they were all
in a manner presently slain. Before that all this was ended captain Paulo,
Antonio Lancauechia, the Governors Son, and commanding in his absence,
being retired into the dongeon, made a brave sallie with about some thirty
men, and charged the other troop (whereas Lambart and Fernel were,) furiously,
who withstood him as resolutely: so as Lanca-vechia with such as escaped of his
troop, were forced to retire unto the Dongeon, himself being hurt, and so
was Fernel with a shot.

In the mean time the alarm grew hot in the town: some advancing to set fire
on the castle gate, notwithstanding the shooting of Herauguieres men, who were
there, and had defeated that Court of guard, whereof being well assured, he
run speedely with some of his men to charge an other Court of guard, near
unto the great platform, where there were fifteen or sixteen souldiars, who
were soon defeated. About two hours after, Prince Maurice having heard the
charge, the Earl of Hohenlo his Lieutenant arrived, with the foreward, and for
that (by reason of the ice) they could not open the castle gate toward the
fields, they entered by a palissadoe of the river nere unto the Sluse whereas
the boat came in. The Earl being arrived, Lanca-vechia (who before had begun
to parle) compounded with him, that he and his troop should depart with their
lives only.

Soon after followed the Prince bringing the rest of his troops, being
accompanied by the Earl Philip of Nassau and Solms his coussins, the Lord of
Famas general Prince Man^ t^
of the Ordynance, the Admiral Justin Nassau, the Admiral Verdoes, Sir Francis
Vere and others: who being busy to give order for the entering the town at two
ports which 1590
Vander Noot, captain of his gards, with his company, to seize upon the
towne-house, and some others into diverse other places, to assure himself of
the town.

We must note that in the beginning of the alarm given in the castle, the
Marquis of Guasts company of horse and five other companies of Italian soote,
being dismayed and fainting, notwithstanding that many Burgers fearing the
spoil (as in deed it was to The Italien garrison Hyes out of Breda
open one of the town gates; they fled away shamefully. The Duke of Parma,
hearing of this, and not able to endure this loss and disgrace, yea the
Spaniards and other of the King of Spaines servants laying all the blame upon
the Italiens, and rejoicing therear, he committed the chief Commanders to
prison, and cut off some of their heads in Brustelles, as of Caefar Guerra,
Iulio Gratiano of Tarlantino Lieutenant to the Marquis of Guast, and the
Corporalls who sercht the boat. The Duke of Parma cut of the captains heads
that Red


This town and castle of Breda was miraculously won, without any great
bloodshed, and yet they had diverse skyrmishes, only one of them that first
entered fell into the water in the dark and was drowned, and not any hurt but
Heraugiere and ^rnel, Philips company, called Nicholas Genietz, who being made
Ancient, died soon after of that wound, and of the garrison of the castle
there were about forty slain.

For this victory all the united Provinces did generally give God thanks and
made fires of joy, and in memory thereof, they caused certain pieces of gold,
silver and copper to be minted, whereon was graven. Breda a seruitute hispanica
vindicata, ductu Principis Mauritii a Nassau. 4. Martii 1590. that is, Breda
upon the fourth of March in the year 1590. by the means of Prince Maurice of
Nassau, was freed from the Spanish slavery: On the other side stood the castle
dicth with a turfe boat, and the soldiars coming forth, with this
inscription; Parati vincere aut mori, and Inuicti animi premium Maurice with
the consent of the Estates, gave the government of the town, Castle and
territory of Herauguiere made gouerner of Breda.
Breda to Heraugiere; captain Lambert Charles was made Sargeant mayor, and the
other captains and private soldiars each had one of the said pieces of gold with
a sum of money given him, and promise of preferment when time and occasion
served, each one in his degree. The scippers were also rewarded, with pensions
during their lives, and other preferments. The town was presently provided for
out of Holland (according to the order before taken by Mounsire Barneueldt) of
all things necessary for a year and a half, and that was done within less
then ten days, placing therein four Heraugiere a cup of silver and guilt made
like a boat, with the which he did this exployt, with other rich presents.

The tenth of March Charles Earl of Mansfeldt went out of Antwerp with good
troops of horse and foot to lie about Breda to stop their incursions, and
to keep the peasants from spoiling, who presently put garrisons into
Osterhout, Ternigh Coat Charles of M^dt takes Seuenberghen.
and other convenient places, and took Seuenberghen where they used great
cruelty: At Heyden a village between Seuenberghen and Breda he built a great
Sconse with a bridge over a water called Mercke, whereby to stop the passage
Mathyas He^t was governor, he was in the turfe boat at the taking of Breda:
upon the thirteen and fourteenth of May he battred it with seven pieces of
Ordinance, having spent at the least twelve hundred shot, he gave a very
1590.
Horatio Fontana of Modena, and John Francisco Pagano a Neapolitaine, with
diverse others, and some Netherlanders of very good account, he lost at this
assault at the least six or seven hundred men, the loss was the greater by
reason that fire fell into the ship, and burnt both it and all the men within
it, whereupon he was forced to leave the Sconse, and to retire with many
wounded men, so as Captain Mathias Helt wone great honor, and the Estates
soon recovered Sevenberghe

In the mean time the united Provinces had gathered together a small army,
under the command of Prince Maurice and the Earl of Hohenlo, who marched into
the Betuwe, and encamped over against Nymeghen, where-vppon the point of the
River of Wahall they began to build a great Sconse, to keep the town from
provision on that side: The Earl of Mansfeldt (finding himself to weak to
fight with them) came to Nymeghen, and finding that the Prince intended to make
a Sconse there, he planted certain Ordinance within Nymeghen, which drove
them from their work and battered it down: Then he went and lodged in the
land of Cuyck, along the River of Meuse, and Prince Maurice stayed all that
Summer thereabouts Knodsenborgh sconse built by the states.
of Nymeghen called when they grew contentious, and brought the Knodsen into
the streets: It was victualled and furnished of all things for six months,
wherein there were four or five hundred men placed, under Gerrard of Yough,
after that he lay in the Betuwe and made the River of Wahall his defense,
meaning in time by continual shooting to tyer them of Nymeghen, and to that
end from Bomell to the Tole-house or Shencks Sconse he placed soldiers, and by

The Estates caused a new Channel to be cut cross the Betuwe, to draw the
water of the Rhyne into the VVahal beneath Nymeghen, and defended it on either
side with good banks, that they might ascend and descend the River of Rhyne by
the VVahal, without any danger of Nymeghen. By this channel and the banks the
lower Betuwe unto Dordrecht is greatly defended from Inundations: they spent
most

The Estates made also an other strong Fort in the Island of Voren by Herwerden,
above Bomel, the which was done by the Earl of Solms, whereby they of
Gelderland (as much as was before united with the other Provinces) received
Prince Maurice for their Governor, the rest by the King of Spaines command was
governed by the Marquis of Varrenbon a Bourguignon.

In Friseland certain inhabitants of the town of Groaning, made a motion unto
the Queen of England to receive them into their protection, which she refused
to do and yet she caused her Secretary to command Sir Francis Veer (who lay
then about William Earl Groaning craves protection from the Queen of England.
of Nassau and the council of Estate, and although they had assembled about
three thousand foot, yet they of Groaning would receive no garrison into their
town, but without it they offered to deliver certain places if they thought
well thereof, upon 1590
Verdugo their Governor had more men sent unto him from the Duke of Parma, he
complained by his letters of the fifteeneth day of March, which were
intercepted, that his souldiars mutined for money, and that in steed of money
they had sent him more men, whereas he solicited the Duke of Parma chiefly
for money, so that as then he had three score and five companies of foot, and
five Cornets of Reistres, but at the last having The fort of Immentil. in
Frizeland taken by Verdugo.
found means to pacefie his souldiars he took the s^onse of Immentil, part
of the garrison being gone forth about an enterprise: from thence he went to
Nieuwelt which made William Earl of Nassau to go to field, having some troops
sent unto him from the camp before Nymeghen, under the leading of the Earl of
Ouerstein, and Verdugo lying right over against him about a mile on the other
side of Vpslach, where they lay long to get some advantage one against the
other, but little done, there were diverse enterprises taken in hand, and some
conuoies cut off.

This Summer there was an assembly of the deputies of the Electors of the Rhine
and other Princes of the Empire at Cologne, whereas it was declared by the
deputies of Cleues, Westphalia, and Saxony, what great losses, spoils, and
ruins they were forced An assembly of the Princes of the Rhine at Cologne.
to endure, by reason of the wars in the Netherlands: making complaint
especially against the souldiars which served under Verdugo and Emanuell de
Vega, which continually ouer-ranne and held the territories of Munster and the
Earldom of Benthem Charles Earl of Mansfeldt, who committed the like outrages
in the Duchies of Cleues and Iuiliers and the Earldom of Lip: And in the
territories of Cologne by John Manriques de Lara, taking in of Abbayes, and
Noblemens houses, and building of diverse sconses to keep the country in a we
and subjection.

They showed moreover that the like insolences were committed by the souldiars
of the united Provinces, and therefore they desired their advise, and help
both of men and money, to prevent these spoils and incursions, either by
persuasions or by force: but the fruits of this assembly were small (for that
many of the deputies were affected to the Spaniard) but they only referred
all to an other meeting Gaspar van Eltii State-holder of Langstein Adam Gants
Barron of Potlitz, counselors to the Electors of Mentz and the Count Palatin.
Otto van Welmernechuysen, State-holder Ambassadors sent from the Princes into
the Netherlands.
general of the nether Circle of the Rhine: Wynant van Perordt chief
chamberlain of the Duchy of Iuilliers, John Bauman and Bernard van Puts,
deputies for the said borders.

These Ambassadors went to Brussells, but they prevailed very little there,
after which they desired a pasport from the united Provinces and so came to the
Hage, whereupon the three and twenty day of August, they had audience, and
delivered their charge in writing, giving them to understand, that the Electors
and and that without respect of the Lords and Princes of those countries, they
held many 1590


Whereunto the general Estates of the United Provinces made an answer in
writing on the 23. of ^eptember, as follows.

The general Estates having duly considered of the necessity of the present
time, first give thanks unto the Princes Electors, and other the Estates of
the aforesaid The Estates answer to (...) ^lecots (...).
Territories of Germany, for their good and friendly admonition; desiring to
intertaine peace and good neighborhood with them: And praying them to persuade
themselves, that for their parts they had not spared, neither would, their
best diligence and indeauors, to let both the Electors and the rest of the
Estates of the

But whereas they were charged (although they might freely and with good
consciences protest, that they had always dislikt, and been much discontented,
for the wrongs and injuries done unto their neighbors) to have suffered their
soldiers to commit all that neither they nor the Council of Estate, could so
restrain the insolency of soldiers, 1590.


And it appears their disseignes and intents have always tended to that end,
by the taking into their hands of all the richest Abbeys and spiritual livings
of the country: for

Touching their intent to attain unto their pretended Monarchy; Germany it
self might produce many examples which diverse yet living could witness: as it
was very apparent by their unjust taking of many towns and Provinces in the
Netherlands, belonging unto the holy Empire, and by the shedding of the
innocent blood of the chiefest Don Antonio his near kinsman. The unjust intent
and purpose (and the execution thereof put in practice) to conquer the Realms
of England and Ireland, the spoiling and forcible detention of many towns
belonging to the Empire, and lastly the daily enterprises and invasions made
upon France with whole armies. Al which does sufficiently show what they aspire
unto under this Spanish government, when as the Noble Kingdom of France does
with a woeful voice, cry, sigh, and bewail her iminent decay and ruin. It is
most certain that al they which at this time aspire unto the Crown of France,
do it not in regard they doubt of the would live freely and unbound and enjoy
that quietly which God and nature had given 1590.
submission and humility, and with the purchase of great sums of money, to
have liberty of conscience allowed them: whereas now the subjects of France,
not only enjoy the freedom thereof, but are also set on to lay violent
hands on their Kings Crown, unless he will change his religion. These be
the privileges which they usurp, to do all that (which they blame and
discommend in others) without any restraint of law, yea commanding over the law
it self: that is over the consciences, lives and goods of poor men, after
their own wills; and so by outward shows

But if this their request might not be allowed of, nor granted (whereof they
had no doubt) they then desired the said Electors, and the rest of the Princes
and Noblemen of the Empire, not to misconster their actions in those
troublesome and chargeable wars, whereby they should with more courage and
allacratie, bear this great burden (which in their necessary defense
increased daily) and proceed therein as they had begun, that the said
Netherlands by their means and ability (which doubtless are not small) might
not in the end be made Seeds Belli to the ruin and overthrow of their
neighbors, and be an instrument to raise and uphold their absolute pretended
Monarchy. That the Estates being forced by mere extremity to bear arms,
and that In terminis defensionis, to defend and preserve that which belonged
unto them, and to recover that which by force, practices, or any other unjust
means, had been wrested from them: having no desire to force or withold any
of their neighbor towns, Castles or Forts: and therefore they see no reason
why they should be entreated or commanded to forsake any places which they
held. Touching Sgrauen-Veerts Sconse, whereof question is made, the Estates are
fully informed that it lies in the Jurisdiction of Gelders and not of Cleues,
as it is pretended: it was built at the great charge of the united Provinces,
by the late Colonel Sir Martin Schenck, after whose death it was preserved
from the practices of the enemies, and has been maintained ever since by the
Estates, not to wrong or prejudice, but to stop the enemies Irruptions into
their Provinces; being allowed by the Imperial lawful means, whereof they
should have no cause to complain, meaning to have 1590.
sent their deputies thither, whom they daily expected, who do constantly
mayntaine it to be in the Duchy of Geldres, as at their coming they will
plainly show. On the other side the Spaniards had built and made forts, in the
territories of the Empire, and in the Duchy of Cleues, where there have no title
nor interest: and have taken and deteyne many good towns, not forced thereunto
by necessity for their own defense, but to oppress their neighbors and to
enlarge their absolute pretended dominion, as has appeered by their letters
which of late have been intercepted: wherefore the Princes and Estates of the
Empire ought to have an especial care, least the Bishopriks there a abouts
belonging unto the Empire, fall (some by force and some by practices,
corruption and other secret devises) into the hands of the creatures of Spain:
who hereafter

It is true that the Estates to their great charge, entertain ships of war
which lie at 1590.
Iuris publici all men being allowed to he at anchor therein without offense;
there is no cause why this action of the Estates should be ill taken, for that
they only seek to stop and hinder the enterprise, and incursions

In the mean time it seems strange unto the Estates, that any should dislike
of their proceeding therein, seeing that many Princes, and commonweals, living
in peace and free from all enemies, do (without any urgent necessity) impose
the like exactions, yet the Electors and other Princes of the Empire, may rest
well assured, that these burdens will be withdrawn, the affaiers of the country
being once reduced to their desined end, and their necessities ceasing, and if
in the mean time any disorders shall be committed by the soldiers, either by
water or by land they shall be severely punished. And to show how much they
dislike all disorders and spoils, the good orders which they had made in the
fort of Sgrauenweerd sense the death of Collonell Schencke, do sufficiently
witness, where they have discharged all Tolles and such like impositions which

They also entreated the Ambassadors, to make a favorable report of their
answer, unto the high and mighty Princes Electors and others: hoping that
almighty GOD (whose powerful arm, had hitherto wonderfully preserved these
countries) with the aid and assistance of their friends, allies and neighbors,
will send them a spedy, happy and long expected issue, in the affairs of their
common welfare. Lastly whereas the Noble contesse of Nieuwenar. etc. widow to
the Noble Earl Adolph Earl of Nieuwenar, Muaers. etc. complains that
against the constitutions, Laws and Ordynances of the empire she has
(contrary to all law and reason) been deprived and is yet of certain widoes
Estate may be no longer thus wrongfully oppressed. Given in the Hage the 1590.


Unto this answer made by the Estates upon the twenty five of September the
Ambassadors The replication of the German Ambass^ors to the Estates answer.
delivered a replication, wherein they promised to make a favorable report of
their answer, but touching the fort of Sgrauenwert, they said, that they must
(according to their commission) make answer: that it seemed very strange to
them, to hear them pretend that it stood upon the territories of the Duchy of
Geldres, whereas they were certainly informed, that the said Sconse, for the
space of a hundred years, beyond all memory of man had been a certain issue
or current of water, which ran from the town of Cleues into the Rhine, (as
the land of Alwinch) lying in the duchy of Cleues, and that the Dukes of
Cleave had from time to time received rent for the same, as being their own
inheritance, and such as had hired it of them did enjoy it Charles the fifth
and the Duke of Cleaues, in the year of our Lord 1545. the 2. of January,
which treaty was called the confirmation of lands of inheritance, having in it
an Article which makes mention of the limmits, wherein there is no mention
made of Sgrauenweert, being then in the possession of the said Duke, as also in
the treaty made before Maestricht in the year 1549. in October, where mention
is made of the said Martin Schenck in the year 1586 had begun to make up the
sconse, there had always complaint been made touching the same, so the
Estates could not deny the restitution thereof. And moreover they said that
they must of force let the general Estates understand, that they had no
jurisdiction neither upon the Confines nor yet in the rivers of the Empire,
although they pretended that they were Iuris publici common, and therefore they
had no right to keep their ships of war there, to the prejudice of
marchantes and sailers, to prevent the which, no doubt but the Empire would
take some good order, therewith desyring their resolution upon those
particularities, as also concerning the other complaints.

The French King being this year at the seege of Paris, and having reduced it
to great extreamitie, the Duke of Parma was pressed by the Duke of Maine and them
of the league, to go and relieve it: And being in July at Brusselles, he
sent for the Estates of the country, letting them understand that he was of
force to go into France, to the relief of Paris, appointing in his absence
old Peter Ernest Earl of Mansfeldt, Governor and Captain general of the
Netherlands by prouiso. It is said that a motion was then made unto the Estate,
to accept and acknowledge the Prince of Spain, the King of Spaines only
Son (though then absent) to be their succeeding Lord, the which was done
only to try the peoples

The Estates on the other side laid before him, how unfit and unnecessary
they held it to make an offensive war in France, and how prejudicial it
might be in time to the fronter Provinces of the Netherlands, but whatsoever
they could pretend or object, it was held more convenient to maintain the
wars in France, then to attend it in the Netherlands, holding it most
certain that the warlike French King would seek to reduce those Provinces
under his command, with the aid and assistance of the united Provinces of
Holland and Zeland.

The Duke of Parma having taken his leave in Brabant, he went from thence
Camillo Capres, ten Companies of Ballisons; and about three thousand Duch-men
of Barlaymonts and 1590. The Duke of Parmas forces that went to relieve Paris.
Ascoly the Prince of Chasteavetrane Who went with the duke into France.
and Don Octauio, both sons to the Duke of Terranoua, the Prince of Chymay,
the Marquess of Renty, the Earls of Arremberg and Barlaymont, and Don Sancio
de Lieua with diverse others: John Baptista Taxis was superintendent of the
Army, La-Motte general of the Ordinance, Don Alonzo Idtaguez and Don Antonio
de Sunega Colonels of the Spaniards, Pedo Galeran and Biazio Capezuca
Colonels of the Italiens: With this Army well furnished with Artillery,
Munition, great store of Wagons and all other necessaries, the Duke of Parma,
in great pomp marched through Henault into France, in the month of August, his
Halberdiers, Archers, and his Cornet Balagn^ was too vigilant for him. At Meaux
he joined with the Duke of Maine, and there took charge of the whole army.
What happened during his abode in France, I leave to the French Inuentory, where
it is related at large.

The Duke of Parma having relieved and entered into Paris, winter being come,
and therefore not fit to besiege any towns, in regard his army was full of
sick men, having great want of provision, for that nothing could come unto him
out of Henault, neither could the old soldiers which were appointed to come
with some necessaries Verdugo, pass: He in the end of November, resolved to
leave France, finding some dislike grown betwixt his soldiers and the French,
and that the towns of France would not receive any garrisons of his, besides
the united Provinces had gotten such victories in his absence, as his presence
was very necessary, so as in December he came to Brusselles. It is thought
that the third part of his men dyed of hunger, poverty, sickness, and by the
sword, and that all the Hospitals in in Arthois and Henault were filled with
those that returned home, whereof many died.

At the same time died Emanuell of Lalaine Lord of Montigni, and Marquess of
Renty by his wife, who was daughter to the last Marquess, of the house of
Croy, a wise

Whilst that the Duke of Parma was in France, Peter Ernest Earl of Mansfeldt
being his Lieutenant, wanting the King of Spaines chief forces he had no
means whereby to do any thing that was of importance. But in the mean time
Prince Maurice slept not, but came unto the field with an Army, to perform a
promise which was made by him and the Estates unto the Princes of the Empire,
for the restitution of the Forts and places held on either part in the
Territories Duchy of Cleues; and at Kenhouen in the diocese of Cologne,
causing all the forts to be 1590.


The Bourgers of Venlo in Gelderland, finding themselves tyranously oppressed by
(...) w^y their garrison.
the souldiars of their garrison, and could not be eased by any entreaties,
nor their complaints Bentinck their Governor absent; they consulted together
how they might free themselves of their garrison which consisted of Italiens
and Germans, but these were somewhat more modest then the Italiens. The
Bougers having acquainted them with their intent which was to drive out the
Italiens; the which done they should have the more profit, and therefore
entreated them to assist them in this execution, or at the least (if by reason
of their oath they might not do it) that they would stand still as Neuters, and
not put themselves in arms against the Bourgers. The which having promised,
they of the town being all in arms, commanded the Italiens to depart, if
not, they knew well how to force Bentincke (who was then busy about the
raising of a new Regiment of foot) would gladly have been revenged of this
indignity: But the Bourgers to be rid of him also, caused his wife and all
his family to depart: and so he lost his government and the King of Spaines
favor, and with all his Regiment was soon after quite dispersed, whereof a
part being suddenly surprised betwixt the towns of Aix and Mastricht, was
defeated by the Estates men.

Behold how Bentincke of a petty companion grew great, and fell again into
the same Estate. They of Venloo, did write their excuses, unto the Earl of
Mansfeldt, and to the council of Estate at Brusselles, promising to continue
constant in the Catholic religion and in the Kings obedience, and not depart
from the one nor the other, neither had they chased away their garrison to*
seek any innovation, nor to attempt any thing against the Kings service, but
to free and deliver themselves, their wives and children, from the barbarous
cruelties and execrable villainies of those Italien souldiars and others, the
which they could no longer endure: And they entreated it might not be
misconstred not taken in evil part, seeing that the King should not be thereby
prejudiced, and that they would keep the town under the Kings obedience and
service without a garrison.

The Spaniard had at that time built a Fort joining to the town of Houy in the
country of Leege to keep the river of Meuse subject from all which came from
above, in the which was captain Grobbendonc but with a hundred men. The
Estates angry that the Spaniards should play the masters in that manner, and
hinder the navigations of the river of Meuse, they sent some eight hundred men,
who being camped before The Fort of Houy yielded to the Estates.
this Fort, they pressed the captain to yield upon the first sommons, if not,
if they took it by force, they would not leave a man alive: The beseeged
knowing themselves to weak for so great a number, and that the place was not
to be held long against any great force, having small hope of succors, they
offered to yield, upon

But the Statesmen knowing that the place was filled with the goods of the
neighbor villages, brought thither for refuge, they would make no other
composition but to depart with white wands, as they were forced to do: being
gone forth the Fort was raized to the ground, the Estates men returning into
Holland laden with 1590


They of Zeeland had at that time an enterprise upon Dunkerke, which they
thought to surprise by scaladoe in the night. The desseigne had not been ill
plotted by Colonel Nicholas Meetkerke, with three thousand foot and one
hundred horse An enterprise upon Dunkerke in vain.
which were embarked: but the wind being contrary, and driving them back
upon the coast of Flanders, it made the Flemings grow into suspicion, and so
they were discovered. Yet having landed, the said Meetkerke showing unto the
Earl of Solms and to Sir Francis Vere the place where he meant to assail it,
being upon the edge of the ditche, they were all three hurt with shot. Six
days before the garrison of Ostende surprised the town of Oudenbourg near
unto Bruges in Flanders, where there were about the number of four hundred
souldiars, the which they spoiled

The nine and twenty day of October the Spaniards sought to surprise the town
of Lochem with three carts laden with haie, every one having two or three
souldiars An enterprise of the Spa^ds upon them but in vain.
by it attired like Pesants with forkes. The first being past over the draw
bridge, the porters son and an other boy (as it is their custom and right)
began to pull as much haie as they could whilst the carts were betwixt the
two bridges; And the cart making no have, one of them took a soldier that was
hidden under the haie by the foot, and presently cryied out treason, treason,
whereupon the souldiars leaping out of the carts slew them that were in the
Court of guard: But the Townsmen Francis Ballochi Sargeant Mayor, made head
against them, and boat them back beyond the bridge, the which was presently
drawn up; and so this enterprise failed for want of horsemen. The Sargeant
Mayor of Zutphen was the undertaker, who was slain within the town and buried
there.

In the end of December the Earl of Ouerstein entered with a good troop of
horse into the country of Westphalia (for that they did still maintain the
Spanish faction) The country ruined by both parties.
and spoiled many villages about Munster and the Diocese of Paterborne; The
like did the Spaniards in the country of Liege, without any mercy: Where the
Bishops council complained at Brusselles, first to the Earl of Mansfeldt,
and then to the Duke of Parma at his return from France: But they had small
succor or

The Duke of Parma had certain intelligences in the town of Breda, which he
hoped to surprise by their means who were corrupted, but they were discovered,
and such as were of the practice were laid hold on, and afterward executed. The
Spaniardes sought to do the like upon certain towns in the country of
Oueryssell and in diverse other places.

Whilst that the Spaniardes continued in their mutinies about Herentall and
other places, the Estates free-booters (which are aduenturing souldiars without
Courses of the Estates freeboters.
pay) Hollanders and Zeelanders, made a road into the countries of Brabant and
Flanders, spoiling all they incountred; and oftentimes the ships which went
from Antwerp to Dendermonde and Brusselles: yea they were so bold and hardy,
as to demand a tribute of ordinary passing boats, which went and came
daily betwixt Antwerp and Brusselles.

Sir Edward Norris Governor of Ostend in Flanders; Brother to Sir John Norris
General of the English, went with a good part of his English garrison on the
fifteen day of February in the year of our Lord 1591. to set upon the Fort
and Sir Edward Norrys takes blanckenberg
village of Blanckenbergh in the night, lying by the sea side betwixt Scluse
and the next day summoned them to yield by a drum: whereunto they would made
no 1591.
Edward Norris and and all the English, as they took it by force and slew
above a hundred, few of them being spared or saved. This Fort was raised and
the Scluces of the Sea broken and burnt, then Blanckenbergh was abandoned,
carrying away the Artillery they found in it. The same day some soldiers
having failed of an enterprise upon the Castle of Crimpen within the Diocese
of Cologne, they fell upon certain horses and passengers, whom they took
prisoners, but being incountred by the garrisons of Nuys and Meurs, they were
defeated and lost all their booty. The same month of February the Seignior of
Teligni son to Mounsier la Noue having been taken (as we have said) upon
the River of Antwerp, going to Lillo,

At that time the Earl of Ouersteyn and Sir Francis Veer, took in the name of
Prince Elector Truxes, the Castle of Colenborch near to Ordange, at their
return from an Coll^ch taken by the Estates.
enterprise which failed upon the town of S^calen in Gelderland. The Peasants
thereabouts came presently and environed this Castle, summoning it to yield,
but they within made answer that they were soldiars, and not accustomed to
yield up any place to clownes, and so they were constrained to retire But the
Castle being afterward besieged by certain soldiers, it was yielded to the
Seignior of Milendoncke, whereas Hans van Gulich (who had been the conductor of
the enterprise) was hanged at the Port.

The tenth of April they of the garrison of Breda surprised the Castle of
Tournhout, by the means of a Brewers man, who did usually carry beer thither
by Cart: Who (being come with his Cart and beer within the Port) overthrew
the Centinell into the ditch, and slew an other, at which brute those which lay
in ambush just by an old burnt house came running, who recovered the Port, and
made themselves masters of the place.

Prince Maurice and the general Estates began this Spring to gather their
forces together, and to provide all things necessary for to go to field, and to
besiege towns and Great preparation made by the Estates.
Maurice departed with a hundred ships great and small, fayning to enter into
the River of Meuze: but turning suddenly he mounted up the River of Rhyne
toward Arnhem, and from thence slipped into the River of Yssell,

The two and twentieth of May, fifteen or sixteen soldiers under the command
of Sir Francis Veer, going out of the garrison of Doesbourg in the Country of
Zutphen attyred like country people, some men, some women, came by the break
of day before A polliticke surprise of the great Fort before Zutphen
the Port of the great Fort, which is upon the Rivers side right against the
town of Zutphen, bringing eggs, butter, cheese, herbs, and other commodities
which they had in their baskets, staying there and leaning upon their staves,
as Peasants do when they rest themselves, attending the opening of the Port:
which being opened, a part lay in ambush under the conduct of Sir Francis Veer,
who made themselves masters 1591


Prince Maurice hearing of the good success of this gentle enterprise, went
thither withal speed with his Army, and invested the town of Zutphen causing
his Zutphen besieged by the Estates.
Artillery (which was at Doesbourg) to advance, and having made a bridge upon
boats, to pass five horses in Front: At his first approach (which was the
eight and twentieth of May) the Earl of Ouersteyn (having very inconsideratly
advanced near unto the town ditch) was shot and slain upon the place:
they had some difficulty to draw away the dead body, which the besieged
thought to have for his spoils. The same night they made their approaches, and
the Canon was planted Zutphen yielded to Prince Maurice.
capitulation was that they should depart with their rapiers and daggers, and
as much goods as they could carry upon their necks: Whereas the Prince
entered, and the same night he sent all his horsemen to inuest the town of
Deuenter which is but two leagues from thence, causing his Artillery to march
the next day, with the rest of the Camp. Thus was the Town of Zutphen won,
with that mighty

The Prince being before Deuenter, having quartred his Army of either side
the River, and made two bridges above and beneath the town, to go from one
Deuenter besieged by the Estates.
Camp unto an other. The Canon being planted where he meant to batter it, On
the nineth day of June being VVhitsonday, by the break of the day he began
to play on either side of the Port with eight and twenty double Canons, and
having discharged some Vollies against the Rampar, he sent to summon the town
by a trumpet. Cont Herman vanden Berghen made answer, that he recommended him
to his cousin: But as for the town he would keep it for the King his
Master, as long Floris of Brederode Lord of Claeting, all very resolute and in
good order. But as the Bridge made over the Haven (as it often times falls
out, the most the kaye, ran to the breach, where as an Ancient mounted with
his colors being 1591. The bravery of the Engli^h:
Herman hurt with a slate of the wall, which slew almost as many as the cannon,
and struck off captain Mullers head, just by Count Herman. The next day in
the morning being ready to renew the battery, they had word from the town
that they demanded a parle, whereunto Prince Maurice yielded, giving them leave
to depart with their arms and baggage.

During the seege of Deuenter there came a gallant Albanois out of the town,
to the Princes camp, chalenging any man to break a lance with him, like an
other Goliath; A combat before Deuenter.
Prince Maurice commanded his men to forbear this challenge: but Charles
Vander Cathule signior of Rihouen a Ganthois, impatient of his bragges,
entreated leave of the general to break a Lance, the which they did without
any advantage, and then they drew their swords: but the Albanois had a pistol
which Rihouen did not see, who running at the Albanois, he cut off his hand
that held the pistol, which fell to the ground, and his hand hung still by a
piece of the flesh, and so he was taken prisoner, confessing himself to be
vanquished, and putting his chain of gold about Mounsire Rihouens neck:
Prince Maurice sent him back to the governor with a letter, and

The Prince poursuing his victory advanced toward Steenwick, and passing on
he entered into the country of Groaning, where he beseeged the great Fort of
Delfziel, the which yielded easily the first of July. Then he went before
Oslach, whereas the garrison thinking to carry themselves more valiantly then
the first, attended a battery of four cannons: But seeing a breach almost
made, without attending any assault, on the seventh day of the month they
yielded, to depart without arms or baggage. The like happened to the Fort of
Immentil the leauenth of the same month, and to that of Dam, which were all
Forts about the town of Groaning.

The Duke of Parma being importuned to succor Deuenter, (not thinking they
Mauricee his camp: But being come thither, and hearing of the taking of
Deuenter, and that the Prince was marched far into the country, and had taken
Delfzyel etc. he returned with his army into Brabant, not without some
murmuring of the captains: Where he was entreated by them of Nymeghen to free
them from the Fort of Knotsenbourgh, which the Estates held right against the
town, upon the Betuwe, and did much anoy them with their cannon, so as they
could not rest quiet in their houses, and withal the navigations was quite
taken from them He to cease these murmurings and discontentes came to Nymegen
(whilst the Prince was before Kno^senborg beseeged by the Duke.
as he could recover, he entered into the Betuwe, and the third day of Iulie
planted his seege before this Fort: whereas the Earl of Mansfeldt with his
Regiment was camped on the West side, Barlaymont on the East, Bossu, Beaurains
and other Colonels were dispersed here and there in the country, the
horsemen were lodged in a village called Lent, on the North side. The Dukes
army was great, where there wanted no Artillery, the which was commanded by
La Motte; making their approches the Spaniards lost many men.

The two and twenty day of Iulie the battery began with six pieces, and
then Prince Maurice hearing that the Spaniard was come into the Betuwe, leaving
Groaning 1591
Francis Veer Collonell of the English: he sent two Cornets to view the Dukes
camp, who being descouered were charged by six companies of horse, among the
which the Duke was one, who at the first made some show of resistance, but
turning their backs suddenly they fled, the Spaniards following The Dukes
horsemen defeated.
them until they had past the Ambush: then they that fled turning head again
they were compassed in of al sides, and charged so furiously, as in a short
time they were al defeated, or put to rout: many were slain or prisoners,
among the which were Don Alphonso d' Aualos bastard brother to the Marquis of
Guast, Don Pedro Francisco Nicilli leading the Duke of Parmas company with his
Cornet: Cont Ieronimo Manfredi Lieutenant to Don Ieronimo Caraffas company with
his Cornet, captain Padilla was sore hurt, whereof he died in Arnhem; the
Seignior of Lievin brother to the Lord of Famas of the company of Biasio
Capesuca and Anthony d' Agina, a Spaniard, with many Italien Gentlemen slain
upon the place and above two hundred and fifty horse taken. The Duke of Parma
being in a high place within Nymeghen, did with his own eyes see this defeat
of his men.

The news whereof being come unto the camp the whole army was so amazed
(knowing The Dukes army being amazed leaves the seege.
the Prince Maurice was come thither in person, and hearing that the ships of
Holland Rene or Raynutius Farneze (being newly come out of Italy,) excusing
himself as well as he could, and making fair promises to them of Nymegen,
who at his departure gave him some skoffing tawnts: and having left his army
under the command of Verdugo in a village called Cranenbourg, he went to the
Spaw, abandoning Nymegen, as despayring to succor it: whereof the States made
their profit soon after.

They of Collogne (desiring to entertayne a neutrality and to live in amity and
good They of Cologne send Deputies to the Estates.
the Hage in Holland in August, whereupon an answer was made them in writing
the 19. of September. That the estates desired nothing more then to entertain
amity and good correspondency with them of Cologne, as well in general as in
particular, so as they meddled not in any sort with their wars, nor with that
which depended thereon and so doing there should be no hinderance nor wrong don
to any persons, goods nor merchandise of the inhabitants of the said town and
contry of Cologne: whereof commandment should be given to all the garrisons
of the united Provinces. The Estates also entreating them of Collogne to be
favorable to the Lady Walburge Contesse of Meurs and Nyeuwenart in her
affayers, considering the wrong which their Bishop Earnest of Bauaria did
her, in the detention of her rents and revenues lying within his diocese.

The said estates did in like manner make answer by writing on the 30. of
October to the complaints and greeuances of some deputies of the neigbour
Provinces, and the states of The Estates answer to the complaints of them of
Liege.
the country of Liege, touching some excess and disorders committed by the
Estates men of war, and for some prisoners: whereby among others the taxed
the Bishop and Prince of Liege (who is also Bishop of Cologne) to be a
partisan and fauorer of the Spaniards their enemies: whom he supported in his
country by the seazure, confiscation and descouery of their goods that served
them and held their party, against all right and duty of neutrality. That the
country of Liege was justly wasted by the Spaniards and other soldiars of the
league, whereof they maintained whole after the manner of the inquisition of
Spain, but also against their men of war, 159^


The said Estates could not yet resolve any thing touching that buisinesse, but
they would be more amply informed, and better instructed. And then if they
found that the Liegeois sought their friendship with a good meaning and
intent, and desired Liegeois promised to remain more neutrals then they had
done in former times; and that they would suffer the Estates men to pass
through their Country with their Arms and booty, to a certain number both of
horse and foot, so as they were led by their Captains and Commanders. And so
began the traffic betwixt Liege and Holland, by the way of Breda.

Prince Maurice after that he had (in a manner) chased away the Duke of Parma
from Nymeghen, and refresht his Army some few days, after their great
marches, Hulst besieged and taken by Prince Maurice.
to the land of Waes, where with all speed he planted h^s siege before the
town of Hulst; the which finding it self not sufficiently fortified, neither
with men, nor with any other things necessary to endure a long siege, the
battery and the assaults which the Prince might give them in a short time,
they agreed to yield the twentieth of September: upon condition to have two
years free exercise of the Romish religion within the said town, and that
they should have but five companies of foot and two of horse in garrison:
Whereof George Euerard Earl of Solms; was made Governor, for that he was
Collonell of the Regiment of Zealand. Mondragon Governor of the Cittadell of
Antwerp, hearing of the loss of this town, he gathered speedily together
four thousand foot and a thousand horse, with whom there joined a thousand
Spaniards of those which had continued at Courtray: With the which troops he
thought sure to recover it: But at his approach he found some dikes broken,
and the town so well foritified with men and munition, as he was of an other
opinion; and retired without attempting any thing at all.

The nine and twentieth of September dyed John Earl of East Friseland, younger
brother to Edsard Earl of Emden. He was a Nobleman full of piety, who only
sought the peace and quiet of the country, and of the town of Emden, which
some (yea of the Contesse wife to Edsard and sister to the King of Sueden)
sought to trouble,

In the same month there came Ambassadors to Cologne in the Emperors name
(but at the instance of the King of Spain) Salerin Earl of Ysenbrugh, Noble
Simon Earl of Lip, the Bishop of Wirtzbourgs brother, the Baron of Pernsteyn
and Rhede, with certain Doctors of the Law; these were sent to try if there
were any Ambassadors sent from the Emperor about a peace.
course to be taken for a peace betwixt the King of Spain and the united
Provinces: They were first to go to Brusselles to the Duke of Parma, as they
did to the Kings great charge. And from thence they were to go with pasport to
the general Estates at the Hage: demanding which pasport the Estates desired
them to spare the cost and labor, Don Guilaume of S. Clements his Ambassadors
which the Emperor did sufficiently show, that it should be but a feigned and
counterfeyt peace: besides they could not treat of any peace without 1591.


They of Bruges seeing the town of Hulst taken, and finding themselves
environed with many enemies, as Ostend, Axell and Terneuse, they were suitors to
the Duke of Parma that they might be under the Estates contribution, and
(seeing their town could not They of Bruges perplexed.
subsist without comerce) to traffic into Zealand with a pasport, paying the
ordinary customs, as they of Antwerp did by Lillo, and they of Gant by the
Sas, the which Ernest of Austria.

Sir Edward Norris Governor of Ostend, would willingly have brought the country
of Flanders, near unto his garrison under contribution, thereby to fortify
himself, Sir Edward Norris seeks to bring Flanders under contribution.
and to de^end his town the better from the violence of the sea, and to
supply all necessary reparations, the which he pretended to do of his own
private authority. But the general Estates finding it to be of great
consequence would not allow thereof. Whereupon (the said garrison being
entertained and paid by the Queen of England) he went and made his complaints
of this prohibition to her Majesty, who at the first seemed to justify his
doing.

But when as the Estates had duly informed her of the importance of this
action, and how prejudicial it would be, appertayning only to the Sovereign
Governor, and that it would be a very bad example, whereby the other Governors
and Superintendants (for at that time the title of Governors seemed odious to
the Estates, giving unto them that had the like charge but the name and
quallity of Superintendents) would in every town play the petty Kings, as
experience had taught sufficiently in France. Norris yet seeking to proceed in
the levy of these contributions, he so incensed the Queen as she commanded
him to keep his house, and would not suffer him to return to his government,
until that the Estates themselves were intercessors for him: the which they did
for the respect they bare unto general Norris his Brother, who had done them
so many

After that Prince Maurice had ordered all things well in the town of Hulst,
having caused his army to imbarke, and commanded all the horsemen he could
recover under the Estates service, to march speedily into Gelderland: he
mounted up the River of Nymighen besieged by Prince Maurice.
Wahal, and the fourteenth of October landed all before Nymeghen, besieging it
both by water and land; then he made a bridge over the River, to go from one
quarter unto an other, through the favor of the Fort of Knodsenbourg, which the
Estates had built on the other side of the River right against the town. And
although at the Princes first coming, they of the town showed themselves
very courageous, playing continually with their Canon to hinder the approaches:
yet soon after, seeing the great trenches; word or deed: so as the 22. of the
month the Seignior of Gheleyne, captain Snator 1591. Nym^gen yielded.
John van Veerden went forth with their three companies, marching toward Grave
and carrying with them their full arms, colors flying, and all their
baggage. In this manner Nymegen was reduced under the command of the Prince and
the Estates, who appointed Cont Phillip of Nassau, cousin german to the
Prince, to be governor thereof. This was the conclusion and end of their
victories and happy success that year, 1591. In the which (a remarkable
thing) they wone the towns of Zutphen, Deuenter, Hulst, Nymegen, all towns of
great importance, with so many forts (whereof we have made mention) as well in
the country of Groaning as other places: defeated the Spaniards in field, and
forced the Duke of Parma to raise his seege from before the sort of
Knotsenbourg, and all with such celerity, as it is scarce credible they could
have intrencht themselves and planted their cannon in so small a time as they

We have showed before how that Colonel Martin Schenck, having failed of his
enterprise upon the town of Nymegen, was there drowned, and through the fury
of the Bourgers his dead body cut in four quarters, the which hung long upon
the rampars, and his head on a Lances point in the top of a tower: but the
Marquis of Varenbon Governor of Gelderland coming to the town, whilst it held
for the Spaniard (knowing him to have been a brave caualier) caused them to
take down that spectacle, and that the body thus cut in pieces should be put
in a coffin the which Maurice caused him to be honorably interred, with a
goodly military pomp, where he assisted in person, being followed by all the
Commanders, Collonells, Schencke honorably buried by Princ^ Maurice.
captains, magestrats of the town (being renewed) a great number of soldiars,
and the common people, unto the great temple, where he was buried in the
monument of the Dukes of Geldres.

There was a Provost Marshall in Brabant called Danckart, who before had served
the Estates in the same office, but having been taken in the castle of Eckeren
near unto Antwerp, by the Spaniards, to free himself he promised to do the
King great The end of Provost Danckert.
service: And having obtained a new commission, he pursued the Estates
Frebooters Rooderoede, that is to say Red Rod, who was slain in fighting: his
Lieutenant being taken was burnt in a hollow tree with a fire of straw.

The French King having resolved in the end of this year to beseege Rouan, the
leegue sent presently to sue for aid of the Duke of Parma, who being retired
confusedly from Nymegen, and returned to Brussels to attend the coming of the
Emperors Ambassadors. He who would not fail them, according to the express
charge which he had often received from the King of Spain his master, which
was to lay The Duke of Parma goes into France to relieve (...)
unto valenciennes, news came unto him of the arrival of the Ambassadors to
treat of a peace; wherefore the Duke of Parma commanded his army to march by
small iornies toward Picardy, he went post again to Brusseles, to give them
audience, where 1591.
Peter Ernest Earl of Mansfeldt his Lieutennant in the government of the
Netherlands, under the obedience of the King of Spain during his absence, he
returned speedely to his army. They reason why he marched thus slouly, was to
make himself the more necessary to the league, and under the show of arms to
manage another desseigne, which was to procure the Estates of the league, to
give the crown of France to the Infanta of Spain whom they should promise to
one of the heads of that party. What he did in this his second voyage into
France, you may read at large in the French Inuentary. The French King having
resolved to beseege Rouen, the Queen of England (at the instant request of his
Ambassador) sent him over to his aid 4000. foot and 200. horse, under the
command of the earl of Essex with some ordinance. And the general states of
the united Provinces did also send him over Phillip Earl of Nassau, who
brought about 3000. foot, and among them the company of Prince Maurice his
gards being 200. pikes and musketeers, under van Noot their captain, with
eight cannons and some culerins, with all necessary munition. In the end of
this year prince Maurice had an enterprise upon the town of
Gheertruydenberge, going from the Hage with 1600. men, thinking to give it a
secret scaladoe: the ladders were let up, but being descouered they of the
garrison defended themselves so valiantly as he was forced to retire, without
doing any thing, with the loss of two of his Captains. All the winter this
year 1591. there were of either side, betwixt the Spaniards and the Estates,
many enterprises and surprises, amongst the which the Estates

The Provinces that were under the Kings subjection lay more open to the spoil
then the united Provinces, which were well defended with great rivers and
forts: the Orders for Frebuters
number of such as ran up and down the contry to spoil all passengers
increased daily, most of them putting themselves under the Estates, and were
called freebuters, being of no companies, not under any command. To prevent
these insolences and spoils, they of Brabant sent forth their Read Roeden or
provost, commanding the country people upon the sound of a bell, to aid and
assist their Officers or else of themselves to set upon those Freebuters. And
for the redress of these disorders, the Estates

The mutinous soldiars in Brabant, being come into the land of Vase, were
satisfied by the Duke of Parma, so as the forts against Hulst were the more
easily built, after best of their goods, and the soldiars taking what else they
found good, brought it into 1592.
Spanish Frebuters at sea.
took certain fishermen, which ships they manned, and took other ships
with them, but the ships of war of Holland which guarded the fishermen
pursued them and took them, and bringing them to Rotterdam, hung 39. of them.

In the begnining of January, in the year 1592 William Duke of Cleaues
Iuilliers and Monts, Earl of Marck, Lord of Rauestine etc. died being 76.
years old in his town of The death of the Duke of Cleues.
Dusseldorp: he had been a quiet and peaceable Prince in his time, after that
he was reconciled to the Emperor from the prime of his youth both he and his
wife (who was daughter to the Emperor Ferdinand) were troubled of their senses,
and in their speech. They have spoken diversely of the causes of these
accidents. At his death were present the Duke of Deuxponts his son in Law,
and the Duches of Prusse his daughther, pretending in his lifetime the
administration of all those Dukedomes and Signeures, as well for the weakness
of his senses, as of Duke John his only son: But nothing followed, by reason
of the oppositions made by the Emperor, the Popes legate and the John, being of
the house of Baden, and of a contrary relligion to the Duke of Deuxponts and
the duchess of Prusse, who all met the year before at Dusseldorp, to treat.
Those of Groaning being oppressed of all sides by the Estates forces, which cont
William of Nassau held in many forts there abouts, fearing to be beseeged in
the spring, they sent their deputies with letters to Peter Earnest Earl of
mansfeldt, lieutenant of the government of the Netherlands in the Duke of the
Parmas absence, letting The Groningeois send deputies to cont Mansfldt.
him understand into what miserable Estate they were reduced, having always
continued constant in their faith and duties to the King, and that their
condition grew daily worse. These letters being full of grief and
commiseration, fell into the estates hands. By reason whereof Verdugo Governor
of the said Town went thither in person. Cont Mansfeldt writs to them of
Groaning.
Verdugo should remain in Brabant to solicit what should be here after most
fit and necessary to be done: finally he entreated them to continue constant,
and to have a care of them-selves, and of that which did concern them, and not
to suffer the honor which they had pourchased by their fidelity, to be now
blemished and quenched: but that it may be said of them that the Groningers
have loyally persisted unto the end in the obedience and service of their
Prince and King.

Afterward they of Groaning sent unto the Emperor, to let him understand, how
that sense the year 1536. they had freely and willingly given themselves to
the house of Austria, upon condition that they should be mayntayned and
defended by them against of two or three thousand men with a little munition
but they must employ a mighty 1593
Escuriall, by the which he entreated him to succor and assure this good
imperial town which was so faithful unto him. The King did thank the
Emperor for the care he had of the said town, promising to take some order:
whereupon he commanded the Earl of Mansfeld by his letters, that all other
affayers set aside, he should go into Freezland, and free the town of Groaning
from all fear. But as it was a tedious and dangerous piece of work, and could
not be done without the winning of all Freeseland, the greatest part whereof
being under the obedience of the Estates, and the government of William Lewis
Earl of Nassau: and withal the states and Prince Maurice Verdugo with a supply
A small supply o^ small proffit sent by the Spaniard i^to Freezland.
of some 6000. men, horse and foot, part, under the conduct of the earls
Herman and Frederic vanden Bergh brethren, who did nothing worth memory, but
recovered sometimes a little fort, sometimes a trench, and sometimes a
Barricado in this country of Freeseland: finally it was not to beseege or to
take any Towns by force, but by surprise, if they could.

At the same-time in the beginning of this year, the German regiments of the
Earls of Arembergh and Barlaimont did winter in the Duchy of Luxembourg,
where

Prince Maurice by the intelligence which he had with the Baron of Pesch, made
an A frutlesse enterprise upon Maestricht.
the noise they made, they took the Alarm in the town, which terrefied them
in the boats so as they did not their duties. And so this enterprise failed,
and the Prince returned without doing any thing, being much discontented that
his men upon the river had carried themselves so fayntly: and the Baron being
discovered to have been of the enterprise, he retired with the Prince into
Holland, where afterward Berieyck taken by the Estates.


They of the garrison of Nymeghen, passing by the countries of Geldres and of
Iuilliers, entered into the quarter of Eyffel, and set upon the Abbey of
Steynfeldt, near unto the town of Sleyden, in the which there were some
peasants, who at the first made a little resistance: but they were forced, and
the said Abbey spoiled. This happened for certain indignities which the Monks
had formerly done unto them.

There was at that time some speech betwixt the particular Estates of the
country of Oueryssel and Cont Herman vander Bergh, to raze certain forts of
either side. Those of the Spanish party did ruin Goor and Twyrkloo, and the
Estates Dorthet and Verworden: whilst they were upon these terms, Captain
Gerard of Beuersfort with a very few men seized upon the Castle of Saesfeldt,
the which was ill guarded by captain Leucama. The Earl hearing of this
surprise, would proceed 1592.


The seven and twenty of April about two hundred of the Estates soldiars of
the The ^states men defeated.
garrison of Westerloo in Campeine (the which a little before they had
surprised) went to make a road into Brabant, betwixt Louvain and Brusselles,
where they were incountred by the Spaniards and quite defeated, so as few
escaped but they were afterward spoiled by the Peasants near unto Dyestheim.
There was at that time two factions in religion within the town of Vtrecht,
the one were called by some the consistorians, Two (...) in religion at Vtrecht
the other the Iacobits, these were so called by reason of a minister in Saint
James church, who gave more liberty unto his troop: And the other was so
termed by reason

At that time Prince Maurice made a voyage to Midelbourg in Zeeland, whereas
the particular Estates of the Province were assembled, he required that he
might be furnished (for their parts) of that which was necessary to raise the
body of an army the next Summer, for the beseeging of some towns. The which
being resolved, and having determined some other affairs in that quarter of
Zeeland, he returned into Holland, where having gathered together all his
troops, leaving but half garrisons, the which he filled with the Bourgers of
the neighbor towns, in those places that were upon the fronters, having
commanded his cousin Count William to do the like in Friseland and Oueryssel,
he resolved to go and set upon the town of Steenwyck, the which he had let
alone the year before, and yet after the taking of Zutphen and Deuenter,

Before the seege of Steenwick, the Spaniards had an enterprise upon Enchuysen,
An enterprise upon Enchuysen.
which they thought to have surprised, by the means of a Sayler who dwelt in
that town, who not long before had come out of Spain, where he had spoken
with the King himself about this exploit, and had received money both for
himself, and to Maurice, from whom he had such directions as he persuaded
the Spaniards, that the enterprise might be easeliest effected by the haven,
for the which they should send some thousand men from Steenwyc (which lay not
far from thence) in an evening, in certain ships, the which might come
thither without any suspicion by means of the said Bourger, for that some of
the captains and chief Bourgers were already engaged in the enterprise, who
did assure them of their credits that all was well prepared for the effecting
of their design; and the better to confirm them of Steenwyc in this conceit,
he that laid the plot, offered to deliver himself for hostage Maurice sent
his army presently to beseege Steenwyc.

He came before the town the eight and twenty day of May the which he did
inuest on that side which goes from Ommen to Gyethorn, and of the side of the
forest: 1592.
Anthony Coquille a Wallon commanded within the town with sixteen companies
of foot, among the which there were many of those traitors which had sold
Gheertruydenberg to the Duke of Parma, and of those which at the taking of
Deuenter had sworn not to serve the king of Spain against the Estates for one
year: whom Coquielle called unto him, and they all swear to defend and keep
the town unto the last drop of their bloods.

The rowne being beseeged on all sides, and the camp sufficiently intrencht;
on the eight of June he planted twenty four cannons, the which did batter
continually with such fury, as the earth did shake above a League of, and there
were reckoned that day above seven thousand shot: the Seignior of Famas
general of the artillery sparing neither bullets nor poulder, so as toward
night he was forced to cease the battery, for William of Nassaus quarter, and
slew some soldiars. The battery ceasing, the beseeged made a skoffe at it,
sweeping their rampar, as if it had done them no more harm then the sweeping
of a beesome, with many opprobrious words, from the which it is hard to
restrain indiscreet and ill conditioned solldiars. The thirteen of the month
the battery began again more furious then before, from four of the clock in
the morning until six at night; and although the breach were not sufficient,
yet the Prince caused five squadrons to approach as if he went to give an
assault; but they past no farther at that time. The beseeged did often make
very furious sallies upon the Estates camp, Olthouen, which they defeated, and
there the captain and his lieutenant were slain: Captain Cornput of the
Estates regiment of Freezland invented a certain engine of wood in form of a
tower with three stages, the which was let up and down by vises, so heigh as
they might descouer any thing that was done in the town. In either of those
stages there were certain musketeers, which scoured the streets, so as they
durst not show themselves, and much less upon the rampars, Lymstanghe, that
is to say a lyme-twig to ketch birds withal, meaning that it served for no
other use at all but to loosemen without any profit.

The twelth of June Frederic Prince Elector Palatin of Rhine, duke of high and
Low Bauaria married the Lady Louyse of Nassau, eldest daughter to the deceased
Prince of Orange, by his third wife, the Lady Charlotte of Bourbon, daughter to
the Duke of The Prince Elector (...) Louyse of Nassau.
Montpensier, a Prince of the royal blood of France. This young Princess was
conducted from the Hage in Holland by the young Earl John of Nassau his Cousin
german, and by the Lady of Nassau countess of Schwartsenbourg her Aunt, and
the Seignior of Saint Aldegond, representing Prince Maurice her Brother: She
was conducted to Cont John of Nassau her Uncle, to the Castle of Dillenbourg,
in the country of Nassau, whether the said Prince Palatin came and married with
her; She was honorably and richly endowed by the general Estates of the
united Provinces,

About the end of June Verdugo knowing that the besieged within Steenwick had
want of poulder, he sent two hunderd and fifty soldiers every one with a bag of
ten or twelve 1592.
Maurice his Camp, and well examined, he descouered the succors that were to
come, the which failed not at the hour which the governor had set down, who
being watched for upon the passages of those two hunderd and fifty men two
hundred of them were slain the rest escaped as well as they could. The
beseeged understanding and finding their men to decrease more and more, having
lost cont Lodovic vanden Bergh, the captains Blundel of Hessel, the
Lieutennants of Steenbach and Camega with many others, seeing also that there
was no hope to be deliuerd, and that as well their victuals as munition began
Maurice demanding all those merchants of Gheertruydenbergh at his discretion,
there was nothing concluded at that time: alleging that from the beginning of
the seege, they had all sworn to live and die equally together: by reason
whereof the condition of the one ought not to be worsethen the other, desiring
rather to die fighting then being prisoners after the town was yielded to be
hanged, as their sentence did import: whereupon the Prince caused his battery
to be doubled with sixty pieces of Ordinance, which did thunder into the town:
besides three mines which played the fourth of July, and made such a murder of
soldiars which were on the top and at the foot of the rampar, as the could
see nothing but men flying in the air, and it made such a breach as Maurice
desiringe to vewe the operation Prince Mourice shot.
of those mines, approchinge somewhat near, he was shot into the cheek from
the town but without danger, whereof he was soon cured. The beseeged being
amazed at this thundering, despayring of all means to hold out long, fearing to
be taken by assault, having such great and large breaches, they consented all
with one accord to parle and to make a composition, the which Prince Maurice
yealded unto, and the next Steenwyc yielded by composition and other towns
besieged by the Estates.
day being the fifth of July it was concluded: the beseeged departing without
arms, and swering not to carry arms against the Estates beyond the Rhine in
half a year. In this sort was Steenwic yielded to Prince Maurice by
composition, under the obedience of the general Estates after it had endured
29000. Cannon shot, the Prince having lost Francis Vere General of the
English and Sir Horatio his brother, William van Dorp Colonel of the Regiment
of West Friseland, whereof he died and many others. The town being yielded,
Captain Beresteyn was put into it with four companies, the Estates army
remaining thereabouts, until the rampars were repaired, the ditches made
clean and raised and the trenches made even. The Merchants of Gheertruydenberg
(not comprehended in the accord) as many as could be taken of them were
hanged; Captain Coquielle, who had commanded in the town during the siege,
and all his men, with those that were hurt and sick, with all their baggage,
were conuoyed unto the Conty of Benthem in the frontiers of Westphalia.

About the midst of July Collonell Mondragon Governor of the Cittadell of
Antwerp, was sent with three thousand men and five pieces of Ordinance, into
the country of Cempeine to besiege the Castle of Westerlloo, the which yielded
the eighteenth of the month by composition. Passing on he went before
Tournhout, which yielded also the twentieth: and that of Berghey the one and
twenty, by which three places the Estates did always afflict Brabant and the
country about. Prince Maurice pursuing his victory of Steenwick, marched with
his army before the town and strong Castle of Couoerden, in the country of
Tuente; and drawing forth of his camp some twelve hundred men and five pieces
of Artillery, he went toward the town of Otmarsen in the said country;
whereas at that time Alphonso Mendo a Spaniard commanded: who Verdugo, as he
should bring them succors. The Prince being camped before the town, he
commanded the Seignior of Famas as general 1592.
Famas General o^ the ordinance (...) the (...) slain.
wars and sitter then any other man to govern the ordinance. The beseeged
hearing of his death would attend no more greater extremity, but some cannon
shot; knowing well that if they continued obstinate the Prince would revenge on
them the death of that gentleman, whom he had so much loved, and therefore
they yielded: They being gone forth, and a garrison put into it for the free
Estates, the Prince came with his small army to his camp before Couoerden.

The Drossart of Couoerden hearing of the coming of the Princes camp burnt
the town, and beat down all the gardins and hedges about it, for that he
would leave noe coue^t for the ennemy, yet the Prince intrencht himself by
little even to the brinke of the castle dich, the which is strong by
situation, by nature and by art, and held impregnable. There was a raueling
near unto the port which defended the bridge, the which was presently battred
down: yet the beseeged made furious sallies; and one among the rest at noone
days, in the which they cut in pieces a whole company both Captain,
Liuetenant and Ancient, of the which there were only eleven soldiars saved. To
hinder these sallies, it was thought good to plant certain ordinance to break
the bridge, the which was done. This summer was in the beginning very dry, so
as they

Whilst these things pass in this sort, the Duke of Parma knowing of what
importance this place of Covoerden is as being the kay of all the country of
Freezland, Drenthen and Groaning, he sent about four thousand foot and six
hundred horse under the leading of Verdugo Governor of the country of Groaning,
to pass through the Estats camp, or to force Prince Maurice to retire. Being
come thither and finding the Prince well intrencht he went and campt at
Enlichom, to cut of the victuals, which came unto the Estates camp from
toward Zwol. But after he had stayed their some days, Verdugo seeing that
there came abundance from other places, he resolved to try his fortune, and to
set upon the trenches: The which was very successful in the beginning;
Verdugo coming to relieve Couoerden is repu^st.
same instant entertained in such sort by the Earl of Hohenlo, who came
running thither with all speed, that as many as were entered, remained upon the
place: And then began the cannon of the Camp to play through the thickest of
their squadrons, so as they were sorced to make a retreat always skyrmishing
yet marching away like soldiars, as if they had resolved to come a second time.
The beseeged seeing their succors retired being without all hope, finding their
rampars to be so sapt, as there remained nothing but to set fire on them, their
defenses and parapets quite beaten down, so as there was not any man that
durst show himself if he were not weary of his life, they Verdugo being thus
retired with his troops, and Couoerden fallen under the obedience of the
Estates; Prince Maurice who Couoerden yielded by composition.
during the seege would not go out of his camp to fight with the Spaniards
(fearing to loose so good an occasion as was offered to make himself Master
of that place) after that he had put a garrison into it, and given order for
the reparation of the rampars and ruins thereof, and for the making plain of
his trenches, he parted withal his 1592.
Verdugo finding his men so much discouraged as they slipped away in small
numoers, passing along the town of VVezel (the Prince pursuing him still,
meaning to do him an affront) he went and campt under the favor of a little
town in Westphalia called Bucholt: whereas the Prince would willingly have
charged him, if the Spaniard had not so well observed his retreat: whereas
there was but one narrow passage to come unto him, and a great bogge or moorish
plain betwixt both. For which consideration the Prince not able to approach
near unto him, being loath to pursue him any further, (for that Autumn was
well advanced, and the moist wether and the bad time of winter approached) he
left him there; and went back

After the Duke of Parmas retreat out of France from the relief of Rouen, the
leagguers held an assembly of Estates at Paris, and the partisans of Spain
were in hope that the Duke of Parma would return the third time with a mighty
army, to perform some great work, and assure the Crown of France to the King
of Spain, or to the Infanta his daughter, but death cut of his life and all
his enterprises, for marching toward Picardy with an army of seven or eight
thousand men horse and foot, his foreward being near unto the tree of Guise,
he staid in Arras to call an assembly of the Netherlands, that were under the
King of Spaines obedience, He had been always sickly and ill since his last
retreat: Being in the town his sickness increased in the beginng Vast. Prince
of Parma dies.
His body was conducted through Lorraine into Italy with eight scorehorse all
in mourning. They say that he ordained in his testament to be buried in a
Capuchins weed. He was much lamented by them of Arthois and by many others, who
are of a mylder disposition then the Spaniards or the Jesuits, by whom he was
not much moned, He was held the honestest man and (although an Italien) a less
dessembler then any of the former governors which the King of Spain had sent
into the Netherlands: Jealous of his honor, and holding his word above all
things. He died being about forty eight His commendations.
years old. Being dead and opened, they found his vital parts much perished:
so as he could not haueliued long. He lies interred in his town of Parma. At
his funeral

With this inscription. 1592.


QVOD. ALEXANDER. FARNESIVS. PARMAE. PLACENTIAE. DVX. TERTIVS. MAGNO. IN.
IMPERIO. PRO. REPVB. CHRISTIANA. GESSERIT. MORTEMQVE. OBIERIT. ROMANIQVE.
NOMINIS. GLORAM. AVXERIT.

S. P. Q. R.

HONORIS. ERGO. MAIORVM. MVLTIS. SECVLIS. INTER. FVSIS. REVOCANDVM. CENSVIT.
STATVITQVE. CIVI. OPTIMO. EIVS. VIRTVTIS. SVAEQVE. IN. ILLVM. VOLVNTATIS.
TESTIMONIVM.

EX. S. C. P.

CLEMENTIS. 8. P. M. ANNO. 11. GABRIELE. CETARINO. I. V. C. IACOBO. ROBERO.
PAPIRIO. ALBERO.

CELSO. CELSO. CAPO. REG. PRIORE.

Besides the Dukes Image there stood a fair table wherein was written as
follows.

ALEXANDER. FARNESIVS. OCTAVII. F. PARMAE. ET. PLACENTIAE. DVX. 3. PROVINCIAM.
NACTVS. BELGICAM. PHILIPPI. HISPANIARVM. REGIS. IMPERIA. DETRECTANTEM.

MAstrichum vrbem munitissimum expugnauit: Birronium Gallum diuersarum partium
Ducem, collatis signis praelio vicit, Dunchercham, Gandauvm, Brugas, Hypras,
Denremundam, Bruxellas, Exclusam, aliaque plurima Belgiae Oppid^, aut vi cepit,
aut ad deditionem compulit, Antwerpiam humanis viribus inexpugnabilem, ingenti
ad scaldin fluuium operum magnitudine circummunitam, in deditionem accepit:
Nusium acceptum, Coloniensi archiepiscopo reddidit. Belgas omnes qui
continente^ incolunt, in Philippi regis potestatem, and ad Roman ecclesiae
obedientiam reduxit. Hasce ob res, alisque fortiter gestas S. P. Q. R. summus
imperator elogio, prope maiorum triumphus, quorum gloriam aut vicit, aut certe
aequauit, ornatus est.

ALexander Farnesius son to Octauius the 3. Duke of Parma and Plaisentia,
being Governor of the Netherlands which disobeied the King of Spain, wanne the
strong town of Mastricht, defeated the Marshall of Biron general of the
French army, he took Dunkerke, Gand, Bruges, Ypre, Denremonde, Brusselles,
Sluys, and many other towns in the Netherlands. Antwerp invincible to be won
by man's force lying upon the river of Sheld, he forced to yield. He took Nuys
and restored it to the Archbishop of Cologne, All the Belgic Provinces upon
the maine land he subdued to the King, and brought under the obedience of the
Romish Church, for which and other his worthy deeds, he has been honored with
the title of Emperor by the city of Rome, deserving a triumph, such as were
made to the ancient Romans, whose glory if he did not surpass, yet did he
equal it. This stands in Rome, for his honor and perpetual memory.

The Argument of the 1592.

COnt Phillip of Nassau runs over the country of Luxembourg, with some of the
Estates, troops: Prince Maurice beseegeth Gheertrudenberg, and takes it in view
of a royal army led by Peter Ernest Earl of Mansfeldt, who beseegeth Crevec^ur
in vain: war made in Freezeland by Cont William of Nassau for the Estates.
The Earl of Solms makes war in Flanders. Otmarson in Oueryssel and many
other forts in Freezelond recovered Ernest comes to be Governor of the
Netherlands for the King of Spain Michell Reuichors a Priest undertakes to
kill Prince Maurice, for the which he is executed: whereof the Archduke Ernest
being taxed, he seeks to excuse himself by his letters to the Estates,
whereunto they make answer: The said Archduke makes war against the King of
France, Prince Maurice delivers Cowarden, beseegeth Groaning and takes it: Peter
de Four pretends to kill Prince Maurice, for the which he is executed: Cont
Phillip of Nassau ioynes with the Duke of Bouillions troops. The marriages of
the Earl of Hohenlo and the Duke of Bouillon: Huyville and the Castle
surprised by the Estates in the country of Liege, and soon recovered by the
Spaniard. The death of the Archduke Ernest: Colonel Mondragon a Spaniard comes
near unto the Estates camp, he is pursued by Prince Maurice. The Earls
Phillip of Nassau and Ernest of Solms are hurt, taken prisoners and die; Cont
Frederic of Nassau remaining prisoner. The Earl of Fuentes makes sharp war
against the French King: The Spaniards offer a peace in the Netherlands: Liege
in Brabant surprised for the states, but recovered the same day. Albert made
governor for the King of Spain, he takes Callis from the French King, who
recouers La-fere from the Spaniard. The Cardinal beseegeth Hulst in Flanders,
the which in the end yields. The king of Spain dispenses with himself for
the payment of his debts. The English and Estates ships takes Cadiz in
Spain. The Mareshall of Biron makes war in Arthois, he takes the Marquis of
Var^nbon governor of the country. A league betwixt the French King, the Queen
of England and the Estates against the Spaniard: Prince Maurice defeats the
Earl of Varax by Tournhout who is slain there. Amiens surprised, by the
Spaniard, beseeged and taken by the King, the which Cardinal Albert offers to
succor in vain: Prince Maurice beseegeth and takes the Towns of Alpen, Meurs,
Rhinberg, Grol, Brefort, Enscheyde, Old^nzeel, Otmarsom, Goor and Lingen, all
in three months. The King of Denmarkes Ambassador to the Estates, and to wh^t
end. The King of Spain makes a peace with the French King: The Admiral of
Arragon sent Ambassador to the Emperor, and to what end: Peter Pan under
takes to kill Prince Maurice, and is executed. The Albert.

AFter the Death of Alexander Farnez^ Duke of Parma Peter Ernest Earl of
Mansfeldt his Lieutenant during his absence in France, was by provision
appointed to the government by the King of Spain of all that which remained
under his obedience in the Netherlands, attending the coming of Ernest
Archduke of Austria, the Emperor Rodolphus Brother, being chosen for Governor,
Stephano Ybarra, Superintendent of the Kings treasure, a Spaniard also: without
the advice of which two he could not do any thing, neither yet treat nor
dispose of a denier.

About the end of this year 1592. as Cont Charles of Mansfeldt, was sent unto
the fronters of Picardy, to provide work for the roialists, to the advancement
of the league, and to beseege Noyon, the which he did and took it, the King
being otherways employed: Cont Phillip of Nassau goes into Luxembourg.
Phillip Earl of Nassau with some 4000. horse and foot into Luxemburg, to
make some enterprise as well upon the town of Saint Vyt (belonging to Prince
Maurice by inheritance) as else where; and also to force them to their
contributions. The Earl of Mansfeldt, father to Count Charles, to make head
against him, sent the 1593.
Philip seeing his men laden with booty, which they had gotten as well in
Luxembourg as in Cempeine, he retired quietly, without any loss. The
government of the Kings country, being (as we have said) put into the hands
of the Earl of Mansfeldt the father (an old and pollitike captain) with the
assistance of the said Earl of Fuentes, Stephano d'Ybarra and other Spaniards,
and of the Spanish faction: they were of opinion to break quarter, and (as
they were wont to say) to make foul wars, not suffering any souldiars of what
quality so ever, captains or other Officers, to be ransomed, nor exchanged
for other prisoners, thinking thereby to make their men more resolute to fight,
and to vanquish, or die: for if they escaped The Spaniards break quarter with
the Estates men.
and were no^ slain in the fight, being prisoners there were no ransom,
exchange nor The Estates proclamation to di^anul that of the Spani ards
touching breaking of quarter.
all the Netherlands and the inhabitants thereof: And therefore they signified
unto them of the Champian country that were of the adverse party, that if they
did not advise otherwise for there saf^ties after the 10. of April next
ensuing, that there would be no quarter for any person, place, Bourrough or
village (as now many did reside there

Prince Maurice doubting not but the Earl of Mansfeldt Lieutenant for the King
of Spain, was fully resolved to hinder him this year 1593. from some good
design, meaning to prevent him, before he should have means to advance: he
made have togather his army together in the beginning of the spring, and the
28. of March he came with all Gheertruydenberg beseeged by Prince Maurice.
his forces both by sea and land, before the town of Saint Gheertruydenberg,
to beseege it, and by a long or a short seege to carry it. And whereas there
was a Fort within musket shot of the town, called Steelhof (which is as much
to say as a gardin of thieves) the which hindered him from making of his
approches on that side, and kept the passage for victuals toward Osterhout,
he must first of all win this Fort, the which they of the town did every
night relieve with new gards; for the preventing whereof Ditch, where as the
soldiars (as if they had burroes in the grownd) lodged themselves 1593.
Hohenlo his Lieutenant to quarter with the regements of Cloetinghen and Locren
on the East side beyond the water in the village of Ramsdonch, about half an
hours passing from the town, where being intrencht, a brigde was made to
pass the water from one quarter to an other, for relief if need were. The
Prince with the Regiment of Cont Henry Frederic the younger brother of the
Earl of Solms, the Seignor of Graeneuelt, and of Balfor a Scotishman, camped
on the West side. And for the intrenching of his camp, he had the hearts of
his soldiars both in general and in particular, so at his devotion, as with an
incredible celerity, and for a small reward, preforming the duties of pioners
(a rare thing) they finished all the trenches of the camp, the which a good
soote-man The form of the trenches in the camp before Gheertruydenberg.
the place, before which trenches there was a dich about thirty foot broad:
And asthough there were many marish places and full of boggs, the which were
not easy to pass; yet in steed of a counterscarp to the said ditches, there
were great pyles driven in, which remained four foot high above the ground,
to the top of every one of the which, there was a long pike of iron fastened
before, that any man striking thereon suddenly in the night, he should not be
able to pull it out of his breast (being one chained unto an other) without
making of a great noise so as a man might hold himself better assured John
Petit.
lodged in the camp for refuge, not only with their wives and children, but
also with their horses, kine, sheep, and other cattle, yea even with their
hens to save them from the Spanish army, which they knew to be upon the way
selling unto the soldiars (as in an open town market) their butter, eggs,
milk, cheese, and other commodities, yea the proprietaries or farmers who had
errable land within the circuit of the Camp, had liberty to till it, the which
will seem incredible to such as have been inlicentious and ill governed
armies: if an infinite number of the inhabitants of neighbor towns, yea
Charles his son, had discharged his duty well on Picardie for the service of
the league, having taken Noyon, he sent for him to come with all The Spaniards
mutine against Cont Charles.
his troops, and to join with his army near unto Gheertruydenberge. As
Charles was upon his return at Aussyle chasteau (belonging to the Earl of
Egmont, half in France, and half in Arthois, divided by the river of Authie)
meaning to do justice upon a Spanish Captain who had ravished a young maid of
Hesdin: presently all the Spaniards took arms against him and against all his
Wallon soldiars, whom they put to flight and spoiled all their goods, making a
head among them whom they call Electo: and being thus mutined, they seized
upon the town of Saint Paul, the which they fortefied, and from whence they
held in subjection and did ransom all the quarter of Arthois, which they call
the heigh country betwixt Hesdin, Bapaulmes, Arras, Bethune, Air, and Saint
Omer, whom they did force to bring unto them every week both money and
victuals, which mutiny continued a whole year before it could be appeazed.
After whose example, the Italiens and wallons (which were in the country The
Italiens and Wallons mutine in Henault.
of Hennault) did mutine soon after, and did fortefie themselves at Pont upon
Sa^bre: from whence they did force the Country there abouts to pay them nine
hundred florins a day, the which they of Mons were to furnish every week.

The garrison of the town of Berke upon the Rhine did no less, and as the
country thereabouts belongs to the diocese of Collogne, or to the Duchy of
Iuilliers, having no means to ransom it, besides the ordinary customs, they
charged all ships and merchandise which must of necessity pass that way
with great impositions, dividing 1593


Prince Maurice and the Estates Camp, being thus entrenched, defended and
disciplined before Gheertruydenbergh, toward the land, the town was in like
manner shut up by Sea, with about a hundred ships great and small, to keep
all things from Gheertruydenberg shut up by water.
entering. Besides there were a great number of ships full of victuals and
munition, by the Princes quarters: so as there was abundance of all things,
and good cheap. The like there was on Cont Hohenloos quarter, so as nothing
wanted on any side. As for the horsemen the Prince knowing they would be to
more use in the town of Berghen up Zoome, Breda and Heusden to cut of the
enemies victuals, who began to make head at Tournhout, he retired a small
number which were camped at large, betwixt the

The Earl of Mansfeldt being resolved to try all means to raise this siege;
approached with his army (being about twelve thousand men) to Osterhout, about
half a league from the Estates Camp: where he kept himself intrencht two
days. But as upon that side (which was toward the Princes quarter) there was
no access, as well for the marrishes, as for the mighty trenches, and
fortifications of the Camp: Changing his place he went and camped on the East
side, in the Villages of VVaesbeke and Capelle, near unto Cont Hohenloos
quarter: to whom Sir Francis Veer was sent with six hundred Mansfeldt being
camped there, without Cont Mansfeldt dares not force the Princes Camp.
any show that he would force the Estates Camp, still attended some good
aportunitie: for he foudd there was small means to go to it by force: and
that the Princes Camp (although at the most there were not above seven
thousand men in it) was as sufficient in the weakest part, as a good strong
place, and could not be attempted without battery, and the hazard of men, and
with small hope of any honor to be gotten: like an old, wise, and advised
Captain (who would not rashly adventure any thing) he continued about three
weeks in that place, seeing with his own eyes all that was done before the
town, and not able to help it, nor prevent it, but with his good wishes. At
that time, besides the battery which did tear down the Rampar of the town;
the

The four and twentieth of June being Saint John Baptists day, on the which the
Earl of Mansfelds soldiers had bragged that they would come (it is an ancient
superstition in the Romish Church) and make Saint John's fire in the town, a
soldier of the Estates Camp, of the company of Captain Haene a Tourneisien,
adventured to pass the townditch of Gheertruydenberg about one of the clock
in the afternoon, mounting up easily by the ruin of the breach, which was
made at the rauelyn of the Port of Breda: being Boeuine, casting themselves
into the ditch, got up to this rauelyn, and won it, they slew some, and
chased away the rest that were in guard, whom they pursued even into the town:
where there was one taken, who was brought unto the Prince.

Upon this Alarm the Seignior of Gissant (Governor of the town) being in
arms to come unto the Rampar (as the canon from the Camp ceased not) was
slain with a The Seignior of Gisant Governor of the ^ne slain.
stone shot out of a mortar, and many about him hurt, and among others the
Sargeant Mayor: The besieged seeing this rauelyn won; their Governor dead
(who was the and among others the said Sargent Mayor, wounded as he was in the
head, to the Prince 1593. Gheertruydenberg yielded by composition.


All the garrison being gone forth, most of them being heigh Bourguignons and
Germains, coming to the last bridge, whereas the Prince (accompanied with the
Earls Sixteen ensigns de^red to the Prince.
of Hohenlo, Solms, and others) did see them pass. Every ancient, delivered
his colors into the Princes hands being sixteen, the which he sent to the
Hage. The same day the town was yielded, the earl of Mansfeldt sent some
troops of foot to descouer Cont Hohenlos quarter, against whom was sent the
Earls company of horse, led by captain Cloct, with Sir Francis Veer, and his
Cornet and some others, who defeated these footmen, and brought two captains
Wallones prisoners, who being brought into the camp, were much amazed to see
the town yielded, for Mansfeldt knew nothing of it until that day in the
evening he espied bonefiers within the town, and in the Estates camp, with
shooting of the ordinance and their small shot. Thus this town (which the
Spaniards held impregnable) was taken in the sight of the King of Spaines army,
commanded by a brave old Captain, who (to say the truth) was twice as strong
as the Estats. But we must also confess that the Prince (by reason of his
forts and intrenchments) had a great advantage: had the Spaniards been twice
as strong the approach unto the Estates camp, was so hard and dangerous, which
grew by Prince Maurice his Dise) Going toward the town, that by the means of
this fort he might command the river, so as nothing should go down to the
towns, of Heusden, Gorrichom and Dordrect, nor mount upwards. Prince Maurice
hearing that he had turned head that way, he presently sent Floris of
Brederode Lord of Cloetinge^ brother to the Lord of Brederode, with his
regiment by the same river to the fort of Creuecaeur, causing his ships of
war, with boats and artillery to follow, the which sailed so happily with a
westerly wind, as (without any let) they came and cast anchor just before the
Fort. The Prince being assured Cont Mansfeld forced to leave the fort of
Creuecaeur.
going to camp in a village called Heel, right against the said fort, the
which he supplied with artillery, which the besieged did so employ, as
Mansfeldt (having his quarter drowned with the waters which did rise) was
forced to retire his army, and to camp half a League of. In the mean time
the said channel was stopped, that nothing could go in nor out. In the end after
that Mansfeldt had stayed there some time, made a great spoil, especially of
the Hoppe grounds (whereof that country is very full) his men leaving not a
pole unburned, so as the hoppes were spoiled; he left this place of Creuaecuer

Behold what little honor this old soldiar got before these two places of
Gheertruydenberg and Creuecaeur. This fort had been first built by the
Spaniards, who gave it Why Creuecaeur was to called.
that name, for that it held the river of Meuze in subjection, to the great
grief of the Hollanders, and especially of them of Dordrecht, by reason of the
merchandise which 1593.


Whilst that they made war in this sort in Brabant: William Lewis Earl of
Nassau, governor for the Estates in the country of Friseland, going the 4. day
of April from Oosthorne, came the 13. to camp at Bellingwolderziel, the which
he fortified, to cut off the passage to Borentanghe. Colonel Verdugo governor
of Groaning for the King War in Frisland.
Maurice. Verdugo fortefied himself with 3000. foot and eight cornets of
horse, thinking to do the Earl an affront, who then lay quiet within the Fort
of Newoort two leagues from Groaning, expecting the return of his troops, which
he had sent unto the Prince, the which were sent back unto him after the
taking of Gheertruydenberg: So as he was re-nforced with twenty companies of
foot and twelve cornets of horse, with the which he went to field and beseeged
Gramberge, with six pieces of artillery, the which Gramberghe yielded to Cont
William.
succors came which the Earl of Mansfeldt should send unto Verdugo, being
two thousand foot, eight hundred horse, eight pieces of ordynance, and two
hundred wagons, besides three hundred horse more led by Verdugoes Lieutenant,
the which past at Linghen the fifth of September, expecting greater troops from
about Namur. This fort of Boerentanghe was then wholly finished, which cut off
the passages to the town William appointed captain Frederic of Iongh to
command in the place.

MAVRICE OF NASSAV BORNE 1593.
Prince of Orange; Marquis of La Vere and of Flushing; Earl of Nassau, Meurs,
Catsenellebogen, Dyets, Vianden, etc. Baron of Breda etc. governor of Gelder,
of Holland, Zeeland, Vtrecht and Ouerysell. Great Captain and Admiral
general of the united Provinces of the Low Countries.
MAVRITIVS D. G. NATVS AVR PRINC: NASSOV MARC VERAE ET VLIS ET BELG PROVIN GVB.


The Spaniard filled with rage and deep disdain,
To have his faith-breach quit, and be expeld
For his Injurious and Imperious reign
In Holland, Zeeland, and the rest he held;
Bard from revenge, unable to refrain
His wrath against that good united State 1593.

Practiced a murder, at a costly rate;
And cut my Fathers vital thread in twain,
Half cut before: An act vnparalelld
For foulness: but thanks Heaven (behold what gain
He got by this) my fathers awful fate
Virtue and valor ever curbing Spain
Surviue in me: the Spaniards scourge and awe
Am I that ever will uphold NASSAV.
SVRCVLVS FACTVS ARBOR.
The Branch is made a Tree.
I Must advertise you, that this picture of Prince Maurice should have been
placed in the year of our Lord 1589. presently after the Earl of Leceister
had left the Government of the united Provinces, but not as Governor of those
Provinces, but only as General of the Estates army in those Provinces, as
he has continued unto this day, the which being through negligence omitted
in his due place, I am enforced to insert it here (though somewhat improperly)
rather then to leave it out altogether, he having done such worthy and
memorable services to the united Estates.

Whilst that the Spaniards and their adherents impoyled all their wits to
continue the miseries of France, hoping by the means of a parliament held by
the league, so to trouble the Estate and to breed such a confusion, as in the
mean time they should have good means to advance their designs upon the
Netherlands, England and upon France it self. Henry the fourth was solicited
by some counselors nere unto his person, and from diverse other parts, to leave
the open profession of the re^ormed religion, and to adhere unto the ceremonies
of the Romish church. Their The French King councelled to become Catholic.
reasons were, that to chase away the Spaniard, and to get Paris and other
towns of the

Upon a declaration made by the Kings attorney general, and the matter being
debated in Court, all the chambers being assembled, having never had any other
intention but 1593. A decr^ made by the court of parliament against the league
and Spaniards*
le Maistre (being assisted by a good number of the court) unto Mounsire de
Main Lieutenant general of the Estate and crown of France, in presence of
the Princes and Officers of the crown, being now in this city, that no
treaty be made to transfer the crown to any foreign Prince or Princess.
That the fondamentall laws of this realm shall be kept, and the decrees made by
the court for the declaration of a catholic and French king shall be executed.
And that he employ the authority which is committed unto him, to the end that
under the pretext of religion, the crown be not transferd to any, against the

The Duke was much discontented with this decree; seeing all his designs
crossed, whereupon he grew into some high terms with the President, who
answered him and other leaguers, very resolutly. In the end after many
meetings, letters and answers betwixt the deputies of the Kings part and them
of the league, according unto the conference which had been appointed, in
despite of the duke of Mayene and the heads The King changes his religion.
of the Romish religion, whereof he did advertise his Parliaments by his
letters the same day, which did much amaze them of the religion, yet did they
not forsake their profession. The duke of Mayen and his chief assistants
seeing a part of their designs crossed, by that which had happened, and that on
the other side the Spaniards sought to entertain the fire of divisions by the
election of a new King, whom they would marry with the Charles of Bougongne
with his daughter Mary entertained all the Neighbor Princes) served for a
Leure for the King of Spain, to draw unto him all the petty Kings of the
league.

To the end they might give some color to their affairs, and frustrat all the
practices of Spain, they began in July to negotiat a general truce, so as
after some journeys to and fro it was concluded, in 22. articles at Vilette
betwixt Paris and S. Denis, and proclaimed the first of August both in Paris
and S. Denis. Notwithstanding this general truce, the heads of the league and
Estates at Paris did not forbear to pursue their designs. And as they had
before opposed themselves at Rome, by the means and favor of the King of The
league crosses the King at Rome.
Spaines Ambassador, against the negotiations of the Cardinal of Gondi and the
Marquis of Pisaui, deputies unto the Pope, in the behalf of the catholic
Princes and Noblemen

As for the Sorbonists and other seditious preachers of the league as well in
public as in private, both before and after the truce, their discourses were
nothing else, but that the mass which was song before the King, deserved the
name of a ballet or stageplay: that it wasmpossible the King should be
converted; that the Pope could not make him a catholic again, with other such
inciuill and strange propositions. In regard of 1593.
Peter Barriere called la Bar, borne at Orleans, who being descouered, The
league pract^th to have the King murth^red.
That Henry of Bourbon was declared incapable, and fallen from all right and
pretension to the crown of France, although he did reconcile himself and
adhere to the Romish relligion. The Agents of Spain both in France and at
Rome, did further and advance all these rebellious practices, crossing the Duke
of Neuers all they could in his negotiation. On the other side, the people and
many great personages continued in their old song of the incompatibility of the
exercise of two religions within the realm, and many were of opinion that the
King should not be admitted nor received, unless he would first promise to
banish all them of the reformed religion, or at the least cause the public
exercise of the religion to cease.

There was yet an other sort of people, well affected to the league, and yet
seemed to be friends to the public quiet and tranquillity of the land, who
secretly and under hand The league commends the King of Spain.
sought to terrify such Frenchmen as were faint-hearted and not well assured,
with his name. Finally they had for the most part been so seduced, by the
practices of the heads of the league, as they admired nothing but the
greatness and Majesty of the King of

Whilst this truce continued, the King resolved to call an assembly at Mante
of some of the greatest personages of his realm, to consult and consider of
diverse affairs: among others the deputies of the reformed religion came
thither in November, whom the Complaints made by them of the religion.
King commanded to come before him on the 12. of the said month, having given
them audience and heard their complaints, upon many breaches of his Edicts, and
strange wrongs and iniustices done unto them throughout all the Provinces. He
said unto them in the presence of many Noblemen, and of the Chancellor. The
Kings s^erch to them of the religion.


My masters, I have sent for you hither for three reasons: the first, to let
you understand from mine own mouth, that my conversion has caused no change of
my affection be anything treated in the conference of peace against them of the
reformed religion. 1593.


Afterward the Kings affairs remaining long in suspense and the heads of the
league continuing in their peruers courses to trouble the estate of France,
they of the relligion remained in their accustomed condition, until that the
league was dispersed and vanished. I have made a long digression concerning this
act of the French Kings conversion to the Romish Relligion, the which I have
presumed to insert here for the rarenes of the example, although it does not
properly belong to this subject, but now

The 24, of July George Euerard Earl of Solms, past into Flanders by
commandment The Earl of Solms makes war for the Estates in Flanders.
from the Estates and from Prince Maurice his cousin, with 800. horse and 2500.
foot he entered into the land of Waes, where he sent his horsemen to inuest
the fort of Saint Ians Steyn and the footmen to the village of Steeken, where
there was a fort held by the Spaniards, the which they abandoned before any
seege, flying to the fort of Waert upon the river of Escault, right against
Antwerp, whereof there were some thirty horses taken, having at their retreat
burnt the village. The Earls horsemen met with eighty Spanish horse near unto
Saint Nicholas Bourg, all which were slain or taken prisoners. This done the
Earl went with his artillery before Saint Jacques fort, Ians Steyn. The which
having soon performed, he spoiled the whole contry of Waes, for that they
refused to pay their contrybutions. Such executions were done by the way of
arms, when as the Inhabitants of the country living under the Estates
sauegard, refused to pay the said contributions, or were forbidden by the
ennemy to do it, wherefore it is a great indiscretion and wickedness in
governors, which forbid upon pain of burning the peasants houses, to pay any
contributions, being well known unto them that refuzing so to do, they shall be
forced by their adversaries, sometimes, to their total ruin: seeing that
neither party can reap any profit by fire and burning, were it not better to
suffer these poor laborers to keep their houses hole in their poverty, and
that (seeing it cannot be prevented) either party reap some profit, and not
through wilfulness (under coullor that

The Earl of Solms hearing that Mondragon was parted out of Antwerp, to come
and meet with him with 2000. foot and six cornetts of horse, which should be
folrowed The Earl of Solms return without any encounter.
by ten Cornets more, after that he had razed all the forts which he had taken,
leduced the country of Waes under the estates contribution and done what he
would before the enemy was on horseback, he made an easy retreat (without
any encounter), to the place from whence he came, carrying with him 4000. head
of cattle of all sorts-On Otmarsum won by the Spaniard.
Herman and Verdugo played their parts in Freezland: and beseeged the town of
Otmarsum in the country of Tuent, which the Prince the year be, fore had taken
in less then two days: the which being no town of Importance after it had
been battered from morning till noone, it yielded by composition, which 1593.
Many Forts in Friseland wone by the Spaniard.
in Friseland against the King of Spain for six months: the Captains,
Lieutenants, Ancients, and Officers, remained prisoners until they had paid
their ransomes. From thence they went before the strong Castle of Wedde, which
they took by assault: Then they took the Fortes of Auwerzyel, Schyloteren,
Grysemyncken and Gransberghe where they slew all. This done they approached to
Couoerden, a very strong place (as you have heard, when as Prince Maurice took
it) and well furnished with victuals and munition; so as finding no means to
force it, as the Prince had done the year before, they blockt it up, and made
Fortes upon all the approaches, to force it to yield in the end through want.

Cont William of Nassau knowing that Cont Herman his cousine, and Verdugo, were
strong in field, being at the siege of the mighty Fort of Borentange, he kept
himself close in a sure place, expecting succors from Prince Maurice his
cousine, the which Sir Francis Veer General of the English brought unto him.
Verdugo meaning to charge him (seeing he could do no good upon the Fort of
Borentange) he raised his siege secretly, thinking to fall upon the Earl of
Nassaus trenches on the sudden when he Verdugo attempts the Earl of Nassaus
trenches in vain.
was not looked for, the which fell out in the month of October, but a soldier
going out of a little Fort hard by it, having discovered the Spaniard in good
time, gave the alarm very happily, which presently put all the Earls camp
into arms: so as he sent forth some few (being loath to hazard more) to
skirmish with them, and to keep them Verdugo still thought to draw him to the
field, but the Earl knowing it was not fit, would not do it: this skirmish
continued seven whole hours: Verdugo seeing there was nothing to be gotten
but blows, retired, with great loss toward Groaning; Balfour Colonel of the
Scots under the Estates service was shot in the foot there; a Captain and some
others slain besides those that were hurt.

Verdugo having thus blockt up Couoerden retired toward Oldenzeeel, and from
that time his army began to waste, so as in the Forts which he had built about
Couoerden, his soldiers died of hungar, cold and poverty, whereof a great
number ran a way, yea whole companies, with their coullors in their pockets:
Cont William seeing himself freed of this army, he put his troops also into
garrison, as at Visch-Vliet, Soltcamp, and other places toward Borentange. The
King being advertised of the Ernest Archduke of Austria, his Nephew, brother
in law and cousine, being at that time Lieutenant to the Emperor his brother,
in his Kingdom of Hongary, Croatia, Stiria, Carinthia and other Provinces.
Whereupon the Estates of Brabant, Flanders, Arthois, Henault etc. for that
they would not be long without a Governor, sent the Earl of Sorres with other
Noblemen into Germany, unto the said Archduke, coming first to Prague in
Bohemia, where they found Don William of Saint Clement the King of Spaines
Ambassador at the Emperors Court: whom they besought to deal with his
Imperial Majesty for Herman Vanden Bergh and Verdugo: whereupon the
Archduke being sent for, he came to Court, took his leave of the Emperor his
brother, and passing by Nuremberg and Wirtsberg, going down the Rhyne, he came
to Collogne, whereas Ernest of Bauaria his cousin the Archbishop Elector,
having feasted him, he accompanied him into Luxembourg, where he arrived the
17. of January. 1594. and from thence to Brusselles.

ERNESTVS ARCHDVKE OF AUSTRIA, 1594.
Lieutenant Governor and Captain General for the King of Spain in the
Netherlands.
ERNESTVS D G ARCHIDYX AVSTRIAE DVX. BVRGVND COMES TIROLIS BELGI PROVIN GVBERN


My step-brother and Cousine, Spaynes great King
Seeing the sick Low Countries brought so low,
So near a full and fatal overthrow,
And by the wrack of wars all ruining
Forced from his bloods dominion; having past 1594.

His promise, to allot their government
To some of his own stock; For me he sent
Into Croatia, where my state was placed
Near the Hungarian frontiers: I assent
(Perforce) and found a country all defaced,
Yet ruled: And ere I did was forced to bear
A guilty slander, but God knows me clear.
THe last of January 1594. Ernest Archduke of Austria being accompanied by the
Archbishop and Prince Elector of Cologne, the Marquis Sores, Fuentes and many
other Noblemen, as well Germans, Italiens and Spaniards, made his entry into
Brusselles, the which was so rich and stately, as if the natural Prince of the
country had been come, with an exceeding great charge, in all sorts of
splendour, by lively representations, try umphant Arches, Pyramids, tables,
pictures, with other excessive sumptuousnes; the which continued three days,
most part of the town neglecting their work. At the end whereof he called the
Estates of those Provinces which he was to command, to Court, to acquaint them
with his commission, and the authority

The second of February they of the garrison of Groaning through the favor of
the Ice, made a brave enterprise upon the great Fort of Delfziel, they came
along a causey A brave enterprise of the Groningers upon Delfziel.
where there was no ditch at the rampar, but what was on that side shut up
only with a pallisado, the which they had pulled down, before that they of
the Fort could discover

The Estates about that time to augment their army, made a levy of a regiment
and some German horse, under the command of the young Earl John of Nassau.
And The Estates increase their army with new troops.
in like manner the Queen of England did suffer them to raise a new regiment
of English, under the command of Sir Francis Veer General of all the English
in the States service. The same month of February the Prince had an enterprise
upon the town of Boisleduc in Brabant, which was too much discovered. Yet he
was in those parts with good troops, as if he had more disseignes in hand in
that quarter, to keep the Spaniards by that means from passing into Friseland
to succor Verdugo, but he suddenly fell upon the town of Maistricht, as we
will presently show.

In March whilst that the Nobility and all the Archdukes Court at
Brusselles, dreampt of nothing but sportes, Iusts and Tourneys, news came that
Prince Maurice and the confederate Estates, prepared to go before Boisleduc.
Whereupon the Archduke The Archduke Ernest makes two armies.
having assembled his Council, to resolve what was to be done all that Summer
following: it was concluded to raise two armies, one to hinder the Princes
entry into Brabant, and the other to make war in France by Landercy, whereof
the Earl of 1594.
published an Edict, prohibiting all Libelles, pa^ils and scandalous writings,
as well against Religion as against the State, inioyning al Printers not to
print any thing, before it were visited by them that had authority, and to
keep their original coppies to confer An Edict made by the Estates
concerning printing.
them with their impressions, and to see if sense the visitation there had
been any thing added that was worthy of censure, and withal to put to the
names of the authors: And that by the tenth of April following they should
appear and swear to observe the orders contained in the said Edict: with a
prohibition to all persons residing under the Jurisdiction of the said Estates,
not to make any assemblies where Mass should be said, or any exercise of the
Romish Religion celebrated, upon the penalities, set down in the edict; nor to
carry any other then a secular habit, upon pain of confiscation Michael
Renichon an Apostat priest being come to Breda, was descouered first upon
suspicion, and committed to prison. Being examined, be confessed Michel Renichon
comes to murder Prince Maurice.
that he was come thither to murder Prince Maurice or his young Brother, upon
which confession he was sent by the Seignor of Heraughiere (Governor of Breda)
unto the general Estates at the Hage in Holland, where being convicted he was
condemned Michel Renichon borne at Templours and Curat of Boissiere in the
country of Namur, prisoner at this present has confessed, being delivered from
the torture and has sufficiently appeered, that being disguized in the habit
of a soldiar, he parted from Brussells The sentence of Michel Renichon.
the fourth of March, with letters from Cont Floris of Barlaimont, and from
thence he went to Lovuain, Dyest, Herentall and Tournhout, where through
favor of the said letters he had a conuoy to bring him to Breda; where being
arrived the twelth of the said month, he delivered unto the Governor of the
said place, certain letters of the Earl of Barlaimonts, directed unto
Captain Langon, who had sometimes commanded in the Castle of Tournhout,
containing that the bearer was come thither by the express Ernestus of
Austria: The said prisoner declaring also, that he had been charged to
descouer unto the governor, some enterprise upon the town of Breda, the which
he did color with certain unlikely reasons, wherein he did persist, saying
that he had been some years secretary to the Abbot of Marolles, and that a
little before he had been advanced to be Secretery to the said Earl of
Barlaimont: the which he afterward confessed to be but an invention of his, yet
would he not declare the causes why he was come thither, till that on the first
of April being brought to the Hage he had attempted to hang himself with his
arming points tied to a bar in the prison, where he was found half dead,
having the bloody marks of a halter about his neck, and his speech much
impaired. And that the said prisoner service, the Earl sent for him again in
the end of February last by his Chaplain, 1594.
Cumulate, et largo foenore satisfaciam: then the Earl coming into the
withdrawing chamber, said unto the prisoner that he had talked with the
Archduke of their affairs, and that the Archduke would appoint him two
hundred Philips Dallors. At night after supper, the Earl being alone with the
prisoner in a chamber, said unto him, that he had charge from the Archduke to
root out or cause to be rooted out by a third person the Earl Maurice of
Nassau, Barlaimont said unto him that Cont Maurice was a young Noble man,
familiar and of easy access, and therefore he should find good opportunity,
if Maurice through the body, or that he should murder him by any other
means he could devise, as he might confer thereof more particularly with
the rest being arrived there: and how soever he that did best effect it, should
be best recompensed: that there were other men also which must be made away, as
Barnuiel or Barneuelt, Longolius and Aldegonde. And in case the said prisoner
could murder any of them he should be highly recompensed. Commanding the
prisoner from that time to conceal his own name, and to take an other, and
that he should attire himself like a soldier. Then after diverse speeches the
Earl of Barlaimont sent for an other man whom the prisoner could not name,
the which he said was one of the six, to whom having discovered what the
prisoner had undertaken, the same man called him his Camerado or
chamber-fellow, saying that he would soon follow him into Holland, with other
speeches. Declaring moreover that since the Duke of Parmas time the said six
men (being all murderers) had been entertained in the Court as Gentlemen, at
the King of Spaines charge, to employ them in matters of consequence, against
his greatest enemies, Barlaimont had received by his Secretary, from the hands
of Stephano D'ybarra, the sum of two hundred Phillips Dallors, the which
Secretary did tell them unto the prisoner in diverse coins, which he did write
down in a certain book that was found about him, mounting to the sum of
500. florins. That the said prisoner being ready to go from Brusselles to
Antwerp, the 1594.
Barlaimonts commandment attired him self in a soldiers habit, calling
himself Michael of Triuieres, and went from Antwerp to Tournhout with the
Earl of Barlaimonts letters to Larigon: But fearing much that he was gone,
he returned again to Brusselles, from whence he went with others belonging
unto the Earl toward Lovuain, Dyest, Herental and Tournhout.

Wherefore the Counsels appointed by the general Estates of the united
Provinces, for the examination and Judgment of this present fact, finding it a
matter of very bad consequence, the which cannot be in any sort tolerate in a
country of Justice without danger, prejudice or ruin of the good and public
quiet, but ought to be rigorously punished, having taken council and advise
therein, after grave and mature deliberation, doing right in the name and
behalf of the said general Estates of the united Provinces: Have condemned
and do condemn the said prisoner to be led to the place of exemplarie
Justice of this Court, there to be executed by the sword until he be dead,
then his body to be cut in four quarters, and hung up at four ways coming
to the Hage, and his head set upon a stake for all men to behold: declaring The
Archduke sends to purge himself to the general Estates.


In the beginning of May the Archduke Ernest, to purge himself of the
accusations wherewith Michaell Renichon the Apostat priest had charged him in
his confession, under coullor of writing concerning a peace to the general
Estates, he sent Otto Hartius and Jerome Coeman-Lawiers unto them, with letters
as follows.

MY masters; the love and natural inclination which we have had from our
birth, to the good and public quiet of these Netherlands, and the great
displeasure we have always had, for the troubles, dissentions and calamities
thereof, have been the chief and greatest occasion to persuade and move us to
undertake the government of some men: and that it is not as pleasing unto you
(the which we desire withal our 1594.
Otto Hartius and Jerome Coemans Lawiers, the bearers hereof, to whom we refer
our selves, with offers of our love to you. Praying God to send you a good and
happy life. From Brussels the 6. of May. 1594. These two Lawiers being come to
the Hage in Holland and the cause of their coming known, they had audience in
the Assembly of the general Hartius spoke after this manner.

My Lords whereas of late we have had pasport from the Council of Estate, to
come into these parts to treat of some private business, for the which we most
humbly thank Doctor Hartius speech to the Estates.
them, and al those that have therein employed themselves, with serviceable
offers of acknowledgement in our quarters, to those that shall have any need of
us. This being come to the knowledge of my Lord the Archduke Ernest, it
pleased him to charge us to salute your Lordships on his behalf, with offer of
his love: and to let you understand that the chief cause which moved him to
come into these parts; was the singular love and natural inclination which he
has always had to the good and quiet of these countries, hoping that God
would give him the grace to see them by his means united again and do that
love the public good) that your Lordships would resolve, in laying before 1594.
times of Ielousies and distrust, so likewise there come times of confidence,
when as they should trust one an other, and provide as well for their own
safety, as for their posterities. Secondly that there was never in any part of
the world any such dessertion or controversy, but at length it was ended and
reconciled, more by treaties and good accords, then by force of arms: for that
war produces fruits so prejudicial to the good of the people, as commonly
one dislike or quarrel breeds an other. Thirdly that it was never profitable
for any Princes Estate or common weal, to have refuzed or rejected honorable
and assured treaties of peace. Whereof we had rather pass over the examples
which we have in our memory, with silence, then by the rehersall

And whereas your Lordships may at this present be restrained by some
distrust, (speaking under correction and with reverence) it is against reason,
for that the treaty which is now offered, is in an other time and season upon
diverse occasions and dispositions, yea it is left to the discretion and
arbitrament of your Lordships with other persons: that is with his Highness
issued out of the house of Austria, whose sincerity, judgment and virtues,
are proper and befitting a Prince well bred: whereby we have seen seven or
eight Princes of the house successively attain unto the Imperial Diadem, not
by right of inheritance, which does admit as well bad Princes as good, but by
the free and voluntary election of the Princes Electors, and the Maximilian the
second, his highness father, having been so mild and temperate, as he is to
be held a rare and singular instrument to reconcile all controversies in his
time, concerning religion and the common weal, holding them in such equal
balance, and ending them in such sort, as his like has been seldom seen
Whose examples and steps his Heighnesse desiring to imitate, thought it good
to send you his letters by us: Which we doubt not but your Lordshippes have
received with as good an affection, as we are assured they are written with
truth and sincerity. Wherefore we do most heartily and humbly beseech you,
that it would please granting sufficient pasport respectively to that end. Or
else that your Lordship will appoint 1594.


This was Doctor Hartius oration, but he was required to deliver it in writing,
the which he did, and being signed by himself and Coemans, it was answered
by the Estates as follows.

The general Estates of the united Provinces in their assembly, having opened
and Ernestus Archduke of Austria, Duke of Bourgongne, etc. being closed up and
sealed with his heighnes seal of arms, in Brussells the sixth of this present
month of May, and received the twelth of the same by the hands of Otto Hartius
and Jerome Coemans lawiers, and upon the insinuation made by them the next day
being the thirteeneth: and having heard them propound on the fifteeneth what
they had in charge (by virtue of a clause of credit inserted in the said
letters) the which they have exhibited by writing. To make their good and
sincere intention known unto his heighnes, they have declared and do by these
presents declare, that sense the time they have been forced by extreme
necessity to take arms in hand, for the preservation of the liberty of the
netherlands, together with their ancient Marquis of Berghen and the Baron of
Montigni, who were entreated contrary to the 1594.
the end that the said countries, the members and towns, with all the good
inhabitants thereof, might be maintained in their goodly liberties, privileges
and ancient rights, and that the oppression of their consciences, persons and
goods, (which the Spanish nation and their adherents do exercise) might be
rooted out, which has been the cause to bring them to those extremities. By
reason whereof it shall please his Highness to understand and take in good
part, that the said Estates in this business of so great weight, and so
important for the good of those countries, and the maintenance of their
subjects, proceed in that form and manner which every man sees at this day.
And that they can hardly believe, and much less be assured, of that which
Fuera Veillacos: and of the side of Holland, Zealand, and their associates, the
two hard sieges of the good town of Leyden: the which by the grace of God, and
fidelity of their confederates and their own valor, was preserved from the
attempts of their enemies, yea with so extraordinary an amazement of the
Spaniards; as (God making them presently to faint) they fled confuzedly out of
Holland: soon after they failed to surprise Vtrecht, as they had done the same
year before of that famous City of Antwerp. This first deceitful treaty
being past, a second was prepared the year following 1575. in the town of
Breda, at the intercession of that mighty Emperor Maximilian the second his
highness father: wherein appeared plainly by their acts, how Escouedo, the
breach of Don John's oath, the manifest declaration of the Council of Spain,
brought by the Baron of Selles, and delivered at Macklyn, together with the
negotiation treated at Lovuain, in the presence of the Ambassadors of many
Princes and Potentates, might give 1594
Sedem belli of them, or rather an assured Rendez-vous for all Christendom. So
as they had rather quit some part of Christendom to the Turk, then abstain
from making war against the Netherlands, or to withdraw any part of their
soldiers which are appointed against them. Finally how they do handle the
Emperor, the Princes Electors, the Potentates of Germany, yea all the Estates
of Don William of Saint Clement and Sephano D'ybarra, all three of them
Spaniards, are appointed to be his chief councellers in matters of the
Netherlands, with charge that the said strangers should instruct his Highness
in which of the Noblemen Stephano d'Ybarra, Doctor Lopes Physician to the
Queen of England, upon promise which they 1594.
having accused Emanuel, Louis Tynoca, and Stephano Ferreira Digama, as
adherents to this execrable murder, were all executed. As also the said
Fuentes and Ybarra had plotted by the hands of Emanuel Andrada (who had
undertaken it) to poison the French King, with a nosegay of flowers or roses
without any poulder, and yet with so subtle a poison, as the smelling thereof
should cause his death without remedy. Speaking nothing of that which shall be
found in the difinitiue process of Michel Renichon, who calls himself
Triuteres a Priest of Namur, who two months sense disguized in a soldiars
habit, had been sent from Brussells into these united Provinces, together with
other murderers corrupted to that end, to murder my Lord Prince Maurice of
Nassau borne Prince of Orange, yea and his excellencies youngest brother being
but ten

This answer was given to Doctor Hartius and Coemans with an Autenticall copy
1594.
Don William of Saint Clement his ambassador in Germany. By the first of the
14. among other clauses, and whereof the Estates answer makes mention, there
was that which follows.

Touching the pacification of the Estates rebelled, seeing you are so fully
informed of that matter, you can tell how to manage it, in case there be any
means or likelehood to An extract of the king of Spaines letters.
conclude it. And you shall let all the world know that he seeks the public
good, and to requite me for the good esteem I have of him, that he may effect
this business, as the d' Ybarra, who will also dicipher the Estate unto you, and
the humors of men which are in government, upon whose discipline, as also upon
the distribution of their pay, it shall be needful there be a great change: for
which there are in those parts particular dispatches of ours etc.

And by that of the seventh day of December he says, speaking of the Emperor,
the Archduke Ernestus, the Turk and the Princes of Italy.

As also you shall represent unto them, that for that which concerns the Turk,
it shall be no prejudice, as heretofore you have let them know more particularly,
and you shall Vesperin and Palotte: and to complain that they take no order to
prevent a greater loss: It were expedient (if it might be) to accommodate
matters by an ordinary course of truce, and of a greater present: and that you
seek to win the good wills of the Bashaws by gifts, for it is the ordinary
and only remedy for difficulty concerning them. I think you have already
condoled with the Emperor in my name as touching his troublesome travel: and
that you know how to govern your self therein, that I be no further engaged,
but he rest satisfied with my good will. You shall do well to pursue that
which you have already propounded: which is, that to attain unto the
pacification of Holland and Zeeland, the point is, there may be forces ready,
Mandrucio in matter of leagues. And in the mean time that we shall be besied to
give you answer, that you seek to practice with him, but yet in general
terms, letting him understand that to make this design easy, it shall be
requisite above all things, to make the Princes of Italy resolute, in taking
away all difficulties, seeing they have so great

IF the general Estates had been scrupulous before, and distrustful to treat
with the 1594.
Hartuis and Coemans returned as they came with this answer from the Estates.
The Archduke was loath to employ any greater personages, knowing they should not
prevail any thing: but the reason why he sent the said deputies under color
to propound a treaty of peace, was to no other end, but to iustefie himself,
of the fact which Michell Renichon had undertaken, wherewith he had so charged
him: the news thereof being at that time come to Ratisbonne, to an Imperial
Diet, where there had been some speech, for the choosing of the Archduke King
of Romans.

The Archduke Ernest for the first fruits of his government, sent Charles Earl
of Mansfeldt with an army to make war against the French king* on the
frontiers, in the country Capelle taken by Mansfeldt.
Coevorden being as we have said straightly blockt up by Verdugo and Cont
Herman vanden Berghe, Prince Maurice having some great design, would first
free this place* wherefore he went to field with the best part of the Estates
forces, to set upon the ^orts which Prince Maurice frees Coverden.
the Spaniards had there abouts, or to give them battle if it were offered:
But Verdugo and the Earl hearing of his approach, made a retreat, and
abandoned all these forts, Coevoerden at liberty, the which was presently
refresht with men and victuals.

Passing on from thence which his troops, and causing his army to advance, he
resolved to besiege Groaning, the which he was about the last year* But before
we enter into The Estates go to besiege Groaning.
the siege, we will speak a little of the Estate of the town. Groaning is a
strong ancient town, which some think to be that which Pliny calls Phyleum,
fair, well fortefied and the best peopled of that part of Friseland, on this
side the river of Ems and Dollard, seated in a country which is very pleasant
and fertile, the which makes also one of the seauenteen Provinces of the
Netherlands. This commonweal was heretofore annexed to A brief description
of Gronning.
Frederic son to a Marquis of Baden, then bishop of Vtrecht, in whose time
the factions of Schyeringers and Vet-coopers reigned in Friseland (whereof we
have in the beginning of the history made ample mention:) in the time of the
Emperor Maximilian the first of that name, who by reason of the miseries which
these two factions were cause of throughout all Friseland, took occasion to
give this signeury of Groaning, with all Friseland in fee to Albert duke of
Saxony, to enjoy them as Governor hereditarie under the Emperor, of whom they
were held. But as the Frisons refuzed to receive him, in the end he persuaded
the Nobility to acknowledge him for their hereditary Lord: with whose aid he
made sharp wars against the Vet-coopers, with whom the Groningers joined
them Foox the dukes Lieutenant, did so tire them, as they were glad to
reconcile themselves unto the Duke, upon condition (amongst others that they
should leave the possession which they had had in Oostergoe, Weestergoe, and
the seven Forests, and should pay two and thirty thousand florins in gold.
The other towns in Friseland, (amongst the which Lewaerden is the chief)
submitted themselves under the Dukes protection. But soon after the Lewardiens
having slain their Lieutenant, did rebel by the instigation of them of
Groaning. The duke of Saxony returning with an army reduced them unto reason.
They of Groaning fearing to be forced (by the mediation of Frederic (bishippe
of Vtrecht) obtained a truce for six months. The Duke being returned into
his country of Misnia, Henry his son for Governor in Friseland, the Frisons
sought the third time to free themselves from his subjection, and besieged Duke
Henry in the town of Franiker.

The father hearing these news and the danger wherein his son was, posted
thither 1594.
rebels of Groaning, as the motives of this revolt. The bishop of Vtrecht sued
again for them, and obtained them a new truce, during the which Albert died,
and by his death Groaning was freed from his siege. But not able to live easily
and at peace, they went to beseege Dam which Edsard Earl of East-Friseland
held in Duke Alberts name: to draw them from thence, Huge Earl of Leysnich
besieged Groaning very straightly: then had they recourse again to the Bishippe
of Vtrecht, who procured them a peace for four years. The which being
expired, Cont Edsard (whom Duke Henry being then in Misnia had left for his
Lieutenant) and captain Vito of Draecksdorp, did block them up with two great
forts and beseeged them round about, The Bourgers having Draecksdorpe had
caused the noses and ears of two Bourgers to be cut off, and so sent them
back into the town, for that they would not put themselves to ransom: The
Groningers moved with this cruelty, left the Saxons, and accorded with Cont
Edsard yielding him the town, upon condition that he should never suffer it
to return under the government of the Dukes of Saxony. The Earl accepting of
these conditions, entered in May after in the year of Lord 1506. and received
the oath of fidelity of the Bourgers, which done he built a cittadell there
without any contradiction, and George duke Saxony did challenge it, but it was
in vain: by reason whereof Cont Edsard was cited to the Imperial chamber, and
there commanded to deliver up the town to the Duke of Saxony, which he did
not, whereupon he was banished the Empire.

In the end Duke George came with nine thousand men horse and foot, being
assisted by the Duke of Brunswicke, where he not only besieged Groaning, but
spoiled all East-Friseland Cont Edsards inheritance, taking many castles and
forts: so as the Earl was forced to leave Groaning to go and succor his
natural subjects, and having soon after lost Dam, finding his forces to
weak, to make head against so great Princes, he quite abandoned them of
Groaning: who seeing themselves forsaken and the Edsard had built. The which
Duke George refuzing, the deputies returned, after they had told him that never
he nor any of his should be Lord thereof. Hereupon the Citizens took a new
advise to choose an other Prince that might defend them against the Saxons. So
with a general consent they made choice of Charles Duke of Geldres, who
greatly affected this Estate: sending William van Oyen General of his horse
thither, who being entered into the town, the cittadell was razed in his
presence. George of Saxony, and Charles of Geldres, betwixt the which the
battles were often variable: but in the end the Saxon discontented with this
inconstant government of Friseland, yielded up all his interest unto Charles
Prince of Spain, afterward Emperor, for two hundred thousand crowns, and so
leaving Friseland he returned into his country of Misnia. Hereupon grew a
great and a long war betwixt the Bourguignon and the Gueldrois: the duke
having made the Earl of Emden his Lieutenant there.

In the end the Groningers refuzing to pay a certain tribute, of ten thousand
florines Marguerite, the Emperors Aunt, Douager of Sauoy, and Gouernesse of the
Netherlands, promising him the same tribute which 1594.
George Schenck of Tautenburg, governor of Friseland thither, who entered into
Groaning the eight of June, and received the peoples oath in the Emperors name,
recovering all which the Geldrois had held in a short time, but there was an
accord made afterward betwixt the Emperor and the duke, as you may read in the
fifth book. From the year 1536. that town has remained under the obedience
of the Emperor and the King of Spain his son, unto the year 1576. that by
the mutynie of the garrison against their Colonel and governor Gaspar of
Robles Lord of Billy, it submitted it self under the generality of the united
Provinces, and afterward in the year of our Lord 1580. it was again yielded
to the George of Lalain Earl of Rheneberg, under whom it has suffered much
unto this year of our Lord and Savior 1594. that it was reduced, under the
general union of the confederate Provinces of the Netherlands, as you shall
here.

After that Prince Maurice had relieved Coevoerden, he came with all his army
being a hundred and five and twenty companies of foot and six and twenty
cornets of horse, with artillery and all other things necessary conducted as
well by land as by the rivers which are within the country, and camped the 21.
of May before the town of Groaning, about the which (after that he had with
great speed entrenched his whole camp) he caused six great forts to be made
upon all the approches, well furnished with men Maurice cause his ordinance to
be planted on that side: which was against the tower of Dehtelaer five pieces,
against the Rauelin of Oosterport ten, against Heereport twelve, against the
Asses hoof six, and two or three against the platform.

The Prince had his own quarter retrencht apart within the great trench, upon
the way William Lewis of Nassau his cousin, Governor of Friseland, in the
midest of the camp, with the Frisons, English, Germains and Zeelanders. They
of the town had made all necessary provision to defend themselves, and to
endure a long siege, so as they neither wanted victuals nor munition of war:
true it is they had no garrison within the town, but it was before their port
on the side of Drentelaer, as you go to Dam and Delfziel, and to the fort of
Schuytendyep, which is one of the suburbs of the town serving for a small
haven for that which comes from Emden through the country: which garrison they
might receive into the town whenever they pleased. And withal they had the
fort of Auwerderzyel which did defend that side, in the which there were some
100. and thirty men: which William before all others went to besiege, he
battered it, and the nine and twenty day of May took it by assault. The
besieged seeing themselves forced, laid down their arms, and entreated to
have their lives saved, but for the proud answer which they had made unto the
dromme which did sommon them, they were all cut in pieces, with the Lieutenant
of Lankama Governor of the town, excepting some few which saved themselves at
the first by swymming, when they see their rampar forced.

Prince Maurice having won this fort made his approches nearer, and having
sommoned the town to submit under the union of the Estates: they answered that
the Prince should stay a year before he made that demand, and then they might
consider which were shot into the town, did much amaze the besieged. The
English and Scottish 1594.
A brave sally of the Groningers.
being fallen upon the English quarter, they slew a good number having
surprised them suddenly: but of the besieged there was the son of a
Bourguemaster slain, and some other Bourgers. This they did often, until
their passage out of their ports was cut off, so as they could sallie forth no
more. And besides the battery, the Prince began then to mine. Heerport was
most ruined, for on that side was the chief battery. They of the town failed
not to shoot into the camp, amongst others (as it was reported) one of their
bullets fell just into the mouth of one of the Princes cannons being charged
and ready for to shoot, the Gonner giving fire, sent back that bullet with
the other which he had charged into the town, the which was a strange

The foureteenth day of June, whilst that the Prince was busy before Groaning,
the Archduke spent his time in all sorts of triumphs and sports, at his proud
and stately entry into the town of Antwerp. Where in the end it was
propounded how they should succor Groaning, the charge whereof was given to the
Earl of Fuentes, but there wanted money, and having no means to leauy forces,
the town could not be relieved. In the mean time Prince Maurice hastened his
mines, two were finished, that by Heerpoort was advanced above twenty paces
under the rauelin, which was wont to be the Cittadell, (which the Spaniards
since the first troubles had built, and was after ruined by the Burgers). The
besieged seeing no show of succors, and Prince Maurice did Deputies sent to
treat.
the Prince, to treat of an accord. But they of the King of Spaines party,
(among the which were the chief of the town, the Prelates and other clergy
men) stronger in number and authority: to avoid al murmoring, and contain the
people in their obedience, caused (although it were not without some popular
tumult) captain Lankama Lieutenant to Colonel Verdugo to enter into the
town, with five companies which Lankama enters the town with five companies.


On the fifteenth of July the mine of the Rauelin of Oosterpoort being ready
to be blown up, the battery began again very furiously against the said
Rauelin, to batter all that down which the besieged had rampared up, (on the
which were eight pieces of ordynance the which were made vnseruisable) with
some show of a breach. The Prince commanded his men should be put in order of
battle, by squadrons, as if he would assail the Rauelin: the besieged
seeing them in this order, fortified the place with men, which presented
themselves to defend the breach, in the mean time fire was given to A mine
which wrought great effect.
the mine, the which was blown up so fitly, as a great number of them that
were with in flue up into the air, whereof many falling into the ditches, were
drowned, and some were cast even into the camp. The mine having wrought his
opperation, the Prince A Rauelin won by assault.
the town, being covered by this Rauelin.

This being won the assailants entrenched themselves against the town, after
they had found four pieces of brass Ordinance and two of iron, buried in the
earth which 1594.


The beseeged having lost this Rauelyn and some hundred footmen in it, began
to faint, having no more hope of succors. The next day they resolved by a
general consent, as well Bourgers as soldiers to send one of the Bourgmaisters
called John den Boer, with a drum unto the Prince to offer him the town,
upon condition notwithstanding that he should summon it once more the next
day to yield. Being come unto the Prince and being heard, after that he had
asked the opinions of The Groningers offer to yield.
his Council at war, he answered that he had summoned it sufficiently and
that he would summon it no more, holding it already in his power. But if the
Bourgers thought it good to send their Deputies to treat of the conditions of
an accord, they John Balen Captain and Bourgmaister, Frederic Musey
Bourgmaister also, Albert Eli, Vlgert Vlgerson Sheriffs, John Gryt Official,
John Assera Commander of Wirsum, Deputies from Groaning.
Rudolph Certs, John Malder, Poppo Euerard Secretary, Henry Honincke
Interpreter, and John Lubects, Sanders of Groot-velt Lieutenant to Cont
Frederic vanden berghe, to treat with the Prince and his Council of their
Accord. Who sent for them in hostage to the Town, the Seigniors of Sousfeldt,
Swartsenbourg and Grise vander Noot Captain of his Gards and other. The
conditions of the compositions were a while debated, in the end the beseeged
seeing there was no remedy, agreed to yield the town, and to deliver it into
the Princes power, upon the conditions which follow.

1 First, that all offenses, injuries and acts, done from the beginning of the
troubles, and last alterations, as also whatsoever has past during this
present seege, as well general as particular, both within and without are
pardoned and forgiven, as Articles of the treaty of Groaning.
if they had never happened at all, whereof there shall never be any mention,
molestation, nor search made at all, upon pain for all them that shall* go
against it, to be reputed and punished as mutines, and troublers of the
public

2 Second: Those of the Magistrates and the inhabitants of Groaning, promise by
these presents, to remitte themselves into the general union of the united
Provinces, and to adhere unto the general Estates of the said Provinces, and
to be faithful and loyal unto them. According unto the which the town and
country of Groaning as one of the members of the said provinces, shall assist
the other confederates, faithfully, firmly, and inuiolablie without
dissimulation: Entertayning good amity and correspondence: and that at all
times and upon all occasions, they shall do their best endeavors to repulse
and chase out of the Netherlands, all Spaniards and their adherents, which have
and do seek (against equity right and reason) to oppress and ruin the
Inhabitants thereof, to bring them to perpetual bondage, and to

3 Item they of Groaning shall hold and enjoy al their privileges, libertles,
rights and freedoms.

4 Item the town and the Ommelands coming to appear and to give their voice
unto the generality, with all that may depend thereon, they shall govern
themselves according unto the which (after hearing of the cause) shall be set
down and decreed by the general Estates.

5 That the most Noble William Lewis Earl of Nassau shall be received and held
for Governor of the town and country of Groaning, according to the commission
which

6 That in the town and country of Groaning there shall be no other exercise
1595.
and that no man shall be disquieted nor molested for his conscience. And that
all Monasteries and Clergy men shall remain in the estate they are in at this
present, until that the Estates have sufficiently redrest the Estate of the
town and country of Groaning: And then order shall be given for the inioying
of the goods and entertayning of Clergy men, provided always that the
Commanderies of Wyrsum, Wyt^ert and Osterwyrum shall be held and entreated as
other Commanderies lying in the united Provinces.

7 That for assurance of the generality, and of the town, and to prevent all
inconveniences betwixt the Burgers and Inhabitants, they of Groaning shall
receive 5. or 6. William and the town and country together.

8 Touching the razing of Forts it shall be done as need shall require and
with the knowledge of the said general Estates.

9 That the town and country of Groaning shall for the leuying of means and
contributions for the good of the common cause, be bound to conform themselves
hereafter with other Provinces that are contributary.

10 All taxations and contributions which unto this day have been contributed

11 That all such as are fled or banished out of Groaning or the Ommelands, or
their heirs, shall be restored to all their goods that are not alienated,
wherein modesty shall be used.

12 And in regard of moveable goods which have been alienated, be it for debt
or for morgage, as also those which have been confisked: the interessed may
take their goods again unto them, redeeming them for their own uses within
four years,

13 It shall be lawful for all Burgers and Inhabitants of the ^wne of Groaning,
Clergy or Secular, to remain freely within the town, or to retire into any
other neutrall towns and places where they shall think good, and there reside
inioying their own proper goods, but not go to the enemies party.

14 In this treaty shall be comprehended al strangers of what quality or
nation soever, remaining at this present in the said tow^ and there to continue
their

15 All letters of rent, morgages, pensions, debts and charges, of all Abbots,
Prelates and ecclesiastical persons, as well strangers as natural, being
during the troubles retired into the town of Groaning: appointment for their
nourishment and intertainement, shall remain at the decision of the Estates,
or the Magistrate of the Province or town, under which those Monasteries or
Colleges are situated, from whence they grow, to do as they shall think fit
according unto right and equity.

16 The Deputies of this Town of Groaning being at Brusselles in commission,
with their servants and goods shall be also held for reconciled and
comprehended in

17 The Burgers that were taken prisoners during the seege shall be set at
liberty paying their ransomes.

18 The government of the Town shall belong unto the Magistrate: Provided
notwithstanding that the said magestrate and the Iurates of the commons, shall
for this 1594.
William, with the advice of the council of Estates. And from that time
forward the election of them of the Law shall be made according to the ancient
custom.

19. They may not by conformity of union transport nor resign the town of
Groaning to any Kings, Princes, Lords, towns or commonweals, without his good
liking and common consent, nor yet build any cittadells.

20. Those of the Magistrate, Burgers and Inhabitants of Gronning, shall take
the oath of fidelity required to the generality, as other towns have done.

21. All provisions, be it of money or munition of wars, victuals, artillery
or other things sent into Groaning, or belonging unto the King of Spain, or
that have been otherwise brought in during this war, shall be delivered
unto the generality, or to

The accord for the men of war, the which was made with captain Lankama
lieutenant to Colonel Verdugo, captains, and officers as well for
themselves, as for their soldiars, having been in garrison in the town of
Groaning and at Schuyten-dyep was after this manner.

First that the said Lieutenant Colonel, all the capaines officers and
soldiars (except such as had served under the Estates) their wives, followers
and baggage may freely Ac^ord (...) the (...) within Groaning.
depart, with their full arms without any molestation or stay to their persons
or goods, only they shall be bound to deliver their Enseigns into his
Excellencies hands, which Verdugo, wheresoever he shall be found to have
planted his camp, and from thence beyond the river of Rhine, with promise for
3 months they shall not serve on this side that river.

His Excelency for the more easy transporting of their baggage, wives,
children, sick and hurt men, the which may endure to be carried in wagons,
shall cause them to be furnished with eighty wagons to serve them, and to be
led by a comissary and a safe conuoy, such as it shall please his Excelency to
appoint, the which shall conuoy them unto Otmarsum, or at the farthest to
Oldenziel: And the said Lankama shall be bound to leave some of his Captains
in pawn for assurance of the said wagons until their return.

All Captains, Officers, and soldiers, who by reason of their wounds and
infirmities cannot endure the travel, shall remain still in the town until
they be reasonably well cured; and they shall have passeports given them to
return to their companies, be it by water or by land.

That Captain Wyngarden having paid his charges shall depart without ransom,
as in like manner all soldiers, victuallers and wagenors of the Camp being
prisoners within the town.

That all the goods of the Governor Verdugo being within the town shall go
freely forth, and shall be carried unto the place whereas they that have the
charge, shall think it convenient or else they may remain safely within the
town until the said

That all horses or, baggage belonging to any officers of the King of Spain
being now absent, shall pass freely, and be conducted with the rest of the
soldiars.

That all men at this time residing in the town of Groaning, of what nation or
condition soever. Offcers and others, as well Clergy men, and two Jesuits as
other temporal men, may depart with their wives, children, families, cattle
and goods, and enjoy the same conuoy and safety.

And if any of the said Inhabitants, be it man or woman, by reason of some let
in their affaiers, cannot depart with the said men of war, they shall have
six months granted them from this present accord, during the which they may
stay here and do their

The Lieutenant Colonel, Captains, Officers and souldiars, this accord being
signed shall presently without any delay, depart out of Groaning and
Schuyten-dyep.

Made in the Camp before Gronning the 22, of July. 1594. behold how this
strong 1594.


After that the rampars of the town of Groaning were repaired, all the trenches
of the eampe laid even, and the law and Magistrate renewed, Prince Maurice
carrying Prince Maurice return ^s victorious to the Hage.
back his army, entered victoriously into Amsterdam, where he was received
with great pomp by the Magistrate, with all shows of honor, love and joy. The
like was done in other towns where he past returning to the Hage, with goodly
and rich presents, the which did stir up his young and noble courage to
greater attempts, tending unto virtue.

This summer the Emperor called an assembly of the Princes of the Empire at
Rheinsbourg, William Frederick Duke of Saxony administrator of the Duchy of
Saxony. Frederick Lodowick Palsgraue of the Rhine. Maximilian duke of Bauaria.
Casimire and Ernestus brethren Dukes An assembly of the Princes of the ^mpire
in Germany.
of Saxony of Coborch, whose father was prisoner in Gothia. Frederick duke of
Wirttenberg: George Lodowick Lantgraue of Luchtenbourg, the young Duke of
Holst, Christian Prince of Anholt with diverse others, and the Deputies of
sundry Princes, and imperial towns: And for the King of Spain and the house
of Bourgongne there came Charles Phillip Barron of Croy, Marquis of Haurec and
others. Besides the three spiritual Princes Electors, there were the Bishops
of Salsbourg, Writenberg and others.

In this assembly the Emperor moved the Princes of Germany for aid against the
Turk the which was granted: whereas there grew some controversy among the
Mathias Flaccus Illiricus and Iacobus Andraeas again mayntained throughout all
the territories of Saxony, the which had been somewhat moderated by the
deceased Princes, so as he caused all such as any way opposed themselves to be
persecuted and expelled out of all universities and other places, under the
names of Caluenists and Zwinglians, whereupon in Lypsick and many other places
the Caluenists were spoiled and their goods violently taken from them, whereupon
many fled, and were received into the Palsgraues Frederick was much spoken
against as differing from his father in points of relligion, there was a
confession of the faith made in his name, the which was published in these
terms.

I am not shronke nor fallen from the relligion which my father held, the which
was grounded upon the writings of the Prophets and Apostels; who in his life
time believed neither in Martin nor James, but only in Christ, the like
Simbolum, and the like grounds of faith I do also constantly hold, defend and
protect, and will do to my Frederick (...) of the Rhine makes consessio^ of
h^s faith.
Vbiquitari and Flacciani, that is if the truth, the power or the presence of
Christ upon the earth were denied by them. But herein I am more fortunate then
my father, for that I know that under the name of Caluenists, the truth of the
relligions Orthodoxie is by the contentious people Augustus the father and
Christianus the Son (being great, valiant and wise Princes) began to
discover. D. Luthers writings I do no less esteem then my father did, but yet
I hold them unwise which esteem whatsoever was written 1594.
Ernestus: yet being in hope of some good means, they resolved to send
certain Princes unto either party, to reconcile them if it were possible, or
else to make report in whom the fault was, that according

Although the Prince had yet time enough to do some good exployt the rest of
this summer 1594. and means to recover some place or two in that quarter of
Freezeland: yet by reason that the French King demanded succors, the Estates
army was in good A new desseinge to murder Prince Maurice.
time put into garrisons. In the beginning of November there was a certain
soldiar taken near unto Lillo; he was of Niuelle in Brabant, and his name was
Peter du Four having served sometimes in the foot company of Prince Maurice
his guard; who came expressly

Whereas, Peter du Four borne at Niuelle, a prisoner at this present and freed
from The sentence pronounced against Peter du Fou^
his bonds, has voluntarily confessed, that some years past being in service
under the united Provinces, as a soldiar in diverse companies going from one
unto an other, in the end he left the garrison of Breda to go into France,
where he served under the artillery, both in the town of Capelle in Tyrasch,
during the seege, and in the camp Laers in Launoy, until the taking thereof,
from whence being returned into the enemies country, he continued with some
kinsfolks and friends of his: and among others with Gheertrude Maribo his
Aunt, dwelling near unto Niuelle, whereas he was persuaded to serve the enemy,
for the effecting whereof, and to make him known unto La Motte the said
Gheertrude (who was well known in his house) led her kinsman unto Brussells,
who being brought unto La Mott, he asked him what resolution he had to serve
the King of Spain, whereof the prisoner finding himself assured, he opened
unto him an enterprise upon this town of Berghen, and had diverse conferences
with La Motte concerning that matter: In October last he was presented to the
Archduke Ernestus, to whom La Motte having declared that it was Maurice of
Nassau, making him great promises to do it, teaching him certain sense his
retreat from that place, he had served the French King, and had a sufficient
1594.
Facete quel que m'auete promesso, amassate quel Tyr^: which is, do what you
have promised me, kill that Tirant, whereupon the priso^er answered him, Io lo
faro. I will do it. The which having thus promised unto the Archduke, he was
the more confirmed in this wicked dessigne for that d' Assonuille told him
that by virtue of a mass which should be said in his presence the next day, he
should be invisible both during the execution, and after the deed done. To
which end he was the next day brought by the Secretary to a mass in the
Chapel at Brussells, then was there certain money delivered unto him, besides
that which he had formerly received.

At his departure he was admonished by some of the said council, that if he
should by mischance be taken prisoner, that he should beware to reveal the
fact so simply, as he had done which lately had undertaken to murder his
Excelency, who revealed it indiscreetly by his own fault, for if he should be
a prisoner, he must of necessity die, and they would always deny what he
confessed and give him the lie. With this wicked and murtherous resolution, he
parted from Brusselles, and went to Antwerp, having letters of commendation to
the gouerner of the castle: from whom he had a pasport who termed him a
merchant, that he might pass their forts more covertly, as he has done,
coming near unto the fort of Lillo, where they went to Peter du Four a
prisoner, has forfeyted both body and goods, according to the which they have
and do condemn him to be led to the public place of Justice of this town,
and there bound to a gibet and strangled till he be dead, then his head to be
cut of, and his body to be quartred, which shall be hanged at four parts of
the town, and his head to be carried to Lillo (the place where he first
arrived) there to seauenteene of November 1594. Signed by commandment of the
said commissioners, 1594.


IN November Prince Maurice marched with his army and the council of Estate of
the ^ited Provinces toward the town of Arnhem in Gelderland, as if he had
some great exployt in hand in that quarter, in Freezland, or in the diocese of
Cologne, as at Rhynbecke or some other place. But in the end he sent Cont
Phillip of Nassau his cousin with two regiments of foot, five cornets of horse
and some field pieces toward Luxembourg, to join with the Duke of Bouillons
army, whom the French King had made his Lieutenant in that joint war with
the Estates. But the said Earl understanding that there were four thousand
Suisses come to serve the Spaniard, Charles of Mansfeldt might charge him, he
thought it good to take his way heigher by the Country of Treues, and to send
back Sir Francis Veer with all his horse, except two Cornets. And so the Earl
marrcht with his troops by Sarrebruche coasting the town of Metz, the Earl
of Mansfeldt still following at the heels, to do him an affront, if he might
find an advantage; But Nassa^ marched always in good order of battle, still
making head, so as Mansfeldt durst not charge him, and the ninth of November
the Earl of Nassau joined his troops with the Duke of Bouillons army, Sir
Francis Veer returned with his horsemen by Herman Vanden Bergh attended him at
a passage toward Maestricht, marching along the Rhine the which he past the
nineteenth of November, and arrived safe in the country of Geldres, to the
great content of the Prince and the Estates, who were in a manner unfurnished
of all their horse.

During the seege of Groaning, the council at Brusselles being much troubled to
pay six hundred thousand gilders to the mutinous Spaniards in Saint Pol: the
Italiens began also to mutine, first there were six companies of Don Gaston
Spinolas regiment, being not above three hundred and fifty men, which lay at
Arschot who had been six or seven years unpaid, these being in mutine, they
procured two other companies William Stanleis regiment. These being all old
soldiars, and some two thousand strong, they chose for their Electo or general
one Stephano Capriano a Millanois, for their governor Ieronimo Spadino; for
Sargent Mayor one Sacramuss^, and for assistants Biotti and others; for
pay-maister one Fracassa, and for General of their horsemen they made choice
of G^orgio Malagna, and of Baptista for his corporal, who had served twenty
years in the wars, with diverse other officers, chasing a way their Captains:
these troops sent for victuals and munition to Louaine and Die, and made the
whole country to contribute (...) Iaco^o Bellgioige an Italien Earl unto them,
who after much entreaty, received from them in the end eleven Articles the
chief whereof were.

1. That they would be paid all their arrerages.

2. That they would have a general pardon.

3. That they might have fifty pasports, for their officers to depart freely
out of the country whether they pleased.

4. That they might have a place of retreat for such as were sick or hurt in
the Kings (...) service.

5. That the arrerages due unto any that died in the Kings service, might be
paid unto their heirs.

6. That they should not be kept from any munition for the space of a whole
day, upon pain of corporal punishment: with such like demands which the
Archduke 1594.
Ernestus and his Spanish council did much mislike, which made them to entreat
the rest of the Italiens very mildly, and to send Camillo Caractiolo, Prince of
Anelino, to see if he could bring them to any better conformation, but it was
in vain, whereupon the Spanish council resolved to force them to obedience
desiring the said Prince to accept of that charge, but he refused to fight
against his own contrymen: then they propounded it to Mounsieur La Motte who
with diverse others thought it not convenient to be done. In the end they
resolved to send Don Louis de Velasco thither with certain Spaniards, among
the which there were some private soldiars which refused that service, for the
which some were secretly put to death, and others banished. This did incense
the Italiens the more, seeing the Spaniards which were mutined at the same
Georgio Maragna and Giouanni Baptista Rossi with other captains, who put the
Liegios to flight, and slew some 70. of them, so as the Bishop thought it
fittest, for him to compound with them for 15000. gilders. When as Don Louis of
Velasco with his Spaniards (with whom were joined the Spaniards which had
mutined in Saint Pol (who had received six hunderd thousand gilders) with some
Wallons of the Earl of Solms regiment, and others, being in all four thousand
men* had begun to insconce themselves neerevnto the Italiens, they then
complained that this disgrace was offered them Pedro Portacarero cousin to the
Earl of Fuentes, with forty seven captains and officers more and small loss
unto The mutinous Italiens and Spaniards fight.
themselves: But in the end the Spaniards took certain forts from the
Italiens and forced them to abandon the town of Sichem, not without loss of
either part. Prince Maurice and the Estates were not in the mean time without
some fear that if during the sharp winter they should be reconciled they
might through means of the ice (the frost being great) attempt some thing upon
Holland, or some other place, wherefore they wrought so as the Italiens offered
their service to the French King, so long as the King of Spain should retain
all there pay, and not satisfy them al arrerages whereupon they did write unto
the French King the last of November, entreating him that he would be pleased
to receive into his service and under his protection them and The mutined
Italiens offer their service to the French King.
all their companies being a thousand and two hundred foot and seven hundred
horse, all old soldiers. The King having seen their letters, and what they
required he referred the business to Prince Maurice and the general Estates of
the united Provinces, John Baptista Sossy and Homodormy, to the Hage in Holland
with letters of credit, and power to treat with the said Estates, or their
deputies in the town of Breda, upon safe conducts demanded by them. Their
letters were written when they were yet in the town of Sichem, whereunto
answer was made that if they were forced to leave the town they should be
assisted. And being afterterwards forced thereunto, the Estates and the
governor of Breda promised to retire them under the said town, and into
Langh-strate, and that they might come freely into the said town to buy their
provisions and necessaries. This mutine of the King of Spaines Italiens, fell
out happily for the Estates, for the Spaniards spent a

In the end of winter they were offered by Ernestus to have their pay, with
many 1595.
Maurice) so as in February 1595. with the priuitie and consent of Prince
Maurice (from whom openly they confessed to have been relieved) they obtained
the foresaid Articles, and were to remain at Thienen, the which they A
composition made with the mutiners.
might fortify, until they were fully satisfied, and in the mean time they
should receive daily from Brusselles thirty stiuers for a horseman, twelve
stiuers for a footeman, thirteen crowns for the Electo, ten crowns for the
Council, and six crowns for the Sargaint Mayor every day: So as altogether
amounted to some 500. crowns a day: And for hostage they had Francisco de
Padiglia, whom they kept safely. This was about the time that the Archduke
Ernestus dyed: And thus they continued seauenteene months, until that
Cardinal Albertus came into Mario Homodormy, Baptista Rossi and two others
(who were their Comitties in Breda) most shamefully proclayming them enemies,
for that Fuentes had so done; but they were pitied by some of them, who sent
them mayntenance: At the last in the year 1596. when as the Cardinal went to
beseege Hulst, they were accounted with, and received three hundred and thirty
thousand crowns, and the contribution which they had received amounted to
three hundred sixty thousand crowns, besides the

As for them upon Pont Sambre, being once pacified, they were sent under the
command of the Prince of Chymai to stop the courses of them of Cambray upon
the country of Henault, and they were lodged about Haurec, whereas they
remained so long as they ruined the whole country thereabouts of Henault and
Arthois, more then any enemy could have done. The Duke of Bouillon Lieutenant
to the French King of his army in the country of Luxembourgh, and Cont
Philipe of Nassau Commander of the Estates troops, being joined together in
Luxembourg, having taken the towns of Yuois, Momedi, Vireton-Srete and other
places, after they had spoiled Mansfeldts footmen, through the which he past,
with the loss of three score men, and two of his Captains: the which happened
for that the Duke by reason of the high waters could not succor him. But two
days after those two Noblemen meeting with eleven of Mansfeldts Cornets,
defeated them, whereas many were slain upon the place, besides the prisoners,
among which was Mansfeldts Lieutenant. Afterward the said Duke and Earl had
sundry disseignes which succeeded not, as upon the town of Thionuille and
other places, and as they needed the French Kings Army elsewhere: And the
general Estates had also very great need of their troops; Cont Philip returns
by Sea.
from whence he returned into Zealand: Holding it very unfit for him to
return the same way he came, by reason of Cont Mansfeldts troops, who at
that time went into Hongarie to serve the Emperor against the Turk, where he
discharged himself faithfully and honorably being Lieutenant to the
Archduke Mathias of Austria, general of the Christians army: during the which
service the said Earl died (after that he had obtained goodly victories
against the Turk) in the town of Graen the year following.

The French King being at Amiens did write his letters on the seventeenth of
December The French King writes to the towns of Arthois and Henault.
the which he did advertise them that if they did not forbear to succor the
rebellious Leaguers upon the Frontiers of Picardie and elsewhere, he was
resolved to make war against them, giving them time to consider thereon
until the end of January following. To which letters they made no answer:
upon the receipt of this 1595. The Archdukes proposition in the Ass^mblie of
the Estates at Brusselles.
Richardot. There were present in this Assembly, Stephano D'ybarra and Don
Diego de Varra, but the Earl of Fuentes came not, for that the Duke of Arschot
had protested he would not give him the place next to the Archduke, which
honor the Emperor and his Majesty had given him, the which he would not
suffer a stranger to take from him: Where-vppon the Earl of Fuentes and
Charles Earl of Mansfeldt (who took the Dukes part therein) meeting together,
they beheld each other, without any salutations on either part: But nothing was
done at all the first day, the which was spent in complements after the high
Dutch manner: VVhereat many of the Assembly, especially the Bishops and
Clergy murmured.

The next day the Duke of Arschot laid open the general necessities of the
countries The duke o^ Arschots speech in the Assembly.
of Arthois and Henault, and the miseries they endured by reason of the French
invasions, and how requisite it was his Highness should provide some speedy
remedy for these mischiefs, the which for many urgent considerations ought
not to be deferred: Saying that they had long since understood his Majesty's
good will, the which should be apparent to all the world, if they might once
taste the fruits thereof, which it seemed the Archduke would indeauor to
procure them, but when it was in manner too late, the whole country being
ready to revolt, if they once swarued in the least point of service concerning
their indifferent duties. They had long since complained, and made their great
wants and necessities known unto the King, who Amen, saying that it was their
whole intent, and that it required a very speedy execution. There was also
many Noblemen, as the Prince of Chymay the Dukes Son, the Earls of
Arembergh, Bossu, Solue, Barlaymont, Ligni and others, who all consented
hereunto together.

Then the Duke of Arschot made further complaint in the behalf of the
Provinces touching the great burdens which were laid upon them by strange
soldiers: especially by the Spaniards, who were countenanced and encouraged by
the Earl of Fuentes and other strangers, which ought to give place to the
natural borne subjects reasons, all tending to a peace with the united
Provinces, the which the said might 1595.
the united Province from all suspicion, and so they might treat with them as
with neighbors, and not as Rebels.

The Archduke Ernestus seeing the Estates to press him thus unto a peace, he
let them understand how much he had labored to reconcile the united Provinces,
who would by no means harken unto it, and that he could not proceed any
further therein, without some prejudice and blemish to his Majesty's authority
and honor: And therefore he desired their advice in three points. First
whether the necessity were so great, as the King must of force do it. The
second if it were fit and convenient to Wesenbeeke, as then remaining in
Wittenbergh) Ernestus letters sent unto the King of Spain in September, being
intercepted by the united Provinces, contained nothing else, but that there was
not any thing to be done in the Netherlands, but by force and violence. To the
like effect were the letters written by Don Guillaume of Saint Clement from the
Emperors Court, the which were intercepted: that the rebels should be brought
to that extremitiy, as they must be forced to seek and sue for a peace etc.
But their resolution pleased not the Archduke,

The French King seeing that they of Arthois and Henault did not vouchsafe to
1595. The French King proclaims war ag^nst the King of Spain.
make any answer to these his letters, he caused an Edict to be proclaimed,
made at Paris the seauenteene day of January, by the which (for the reasons
therein contained) he declared the King of Spain and the Netherlands under
his obedience his enemies, denouncing open war against them. The which he
did also cause to be proclaimed throughout all the fronter towns of his
realm.

According to which the like Edict was proclaimed in Brusselles on the King of
Spaines behalf, against the French King whom he called Prince of Biarne, and
The King of Spain proclaims war against the French.
or private persons, that within two months after the said publication shall
forsake him, and give sufficient testimony, that they are no enemies to the
Romish, Catholic and Apostolic religion, nor to his Majesty. This Edict
bearing date the seventh day of March, was in like manner proclaimed
throughout all the towns of the Netherlands under the Kings obedience.

The Archduke Ernestus on the 19. day of February had in his own name made a
proclamation and prescribed an order which he would have observed to defend
himself against the courses and attempts of the Prince of Bearne, carrying
himself (said he) for King of France, who had begun war: with other
points how they should govern themselves toward French leaguers, who had
before made 1595.


On the seventh day of that month of February, Cont Philip of Hohenloo, Barron
of Langenbergh did marry (in the castle of Buren) with the Lady Mary of
Nassau, daughter of the deceased Prince of Orange and of the Lady of Egmont,
daughter to Maximilian The Earl of Hohenloo marries the Lady Mary of Nassau.
Earl of Buren the which he had by the Lady of Launoy the only heir of the
house of Launoy. This marriage had been in question during the life of the
Prince her father, but for certain reasons it was deferred unto that day: The
general Estates Maurice his son, to whom he was and is yet Lieutenant, may
give sufficient testimony.

The same Winter the Vicont of Turene, Duke of Bouillon (having gotten the
title of duke by his precedent wife, who was duchess of Bouillon and the only
heir of the house of la Mark) married with the Lady Elizabeth of Nassau,
second daughter The duke of Bouill^ns marriage.
Carlot of Bourbon, the solemnities of which marriage were celebrated in the
castle of Sedan, whereas at this day they keep their Court.

The eight day of February the signior of Herauguiere Governor of Breda, having
with him twelve companies of foot and fourteen cornets of the States horse,
surprised the castle and then the town of Huy in the diocese of Liege, the
which is one of the Bishops palaces, situated upon the river of Meuse, with a
goodly stone bridge over the river, and within five leagues of the town of
Liege. Thirty men did this exploite lying hidden in a house joining to the
castle, and right against a windoe which they got unto with ladders made of
ropes. Having thus won the castle, Herauguiere follow with so great troops,
they laid down their arms and were content to receive a garrison into the
town, the which Herauguiere did place there and in the castle likewise, which
he began to furnish with all things necessary, reducing all the neighbor
country that was subject to the King of Spain about Namur and in Brabant to
contribution, being resolved to hold that place to have a passage and a
retreat on the other side of the river of Meuse. In the mean time, part of
the horsemen being in garrison in Huy, going forth to seek their adventure,
near unto Momedy they met with seven carts laden with Italien Merchandise,
as velvet and other sorts of silks, with gold and silver lace, appointed for
the A rich boo^y taken by the Estates men.
Grobendonc was upon the passage and attended them with some certain horse and
foot, they divided themselves into three ^roupes, whereof the one was
incountred and defeated. Besides the booty, Grobendonc took about some
threescore horses, most of the men being slain.

The one and twenty day of February after a long languishing sickness, the
Archduke Ernestus died, younger brother to the Emperor Rodolphus, and son to
Maximilian The death of the Archduke of Aus^.
of the Netherlands for the King of Spain his uncle, brother in law and
cousin. Some gave it out that he died of very melancholy and grief, to see
matters go so against the hair; Frst for the marriage of the Infanta;
Secondly for that he did see the affairs of the Emperor his Brother, and of
all the house of Austria, succeeded 1595
Maurice, by one Michell Renichon and Peter Du four; whereof (notwithstanding
his good disposition and all the excuses he could make) he could not purge
himself from suspicion. If it were so that he were culpable, (as he was
accused by them that were executed for this fact) such as have well known him,
say that it was much against his natural disposition, and seek to discharge
him, saying that Barlaimont and La Motte, had supposed

This surprise of the town and castle of Huy, did much trouble Ernestus of
Bauaria, Bishop of Liege, Prince Elector and Archbishop of Cologne, who
complained The Bishop of Liege com plain^s to the Estates for the taking of Huy.
to the general Estates of the united Provinces, demanding punishment of

The Estates answered them at the first, that they held not the place but for a
certain time, and not to do any wrong to the Inhabitants and subjects of the
country of Liege, but to serve them for a passage, the which might as well be
granted Huy taken again by assault by the Spaniard.
unto them as to their enemies in the towns of Bonne, Berke and diverse other
places belonging to the said Prince Elector. And as the general Estates were
very long (in his opinion) before they could resolve or agree, upon the
restitution and reparation by him required, he fled for succor to Brusselles,
to the Kings council, Barlaymont with the Lord of La Motte, who besieged the
town, and took it by an assault the thirteenth day of March with great
slaughter of them of the garrison, whereof some saved themselves in the castle
the which the Bishop caused instantly to be battred in the mines, wherewith
Herauguiere being terrefied, expecting no succors, he yielded up the place,
going himself forth with one horse, and the soldiars with their rapiers and
daggers, and as much baggage as they could bear.

About that time Prince Maurice went in person to an enterprise upon the town
Prince Maurice enterpri^e upon Bruges.
of Bruges in Flanders, but by reason of the darkness of the night the way
being very long from their landing, the troops being straied out of the way,
and the Princes

In the same month of March George Euerard Earl of Solms, Lieutenant to
Prince Maurice in Zeeland and Colonel of the Regiment of Zeelanders, Governor
of Hulst in Flanders, married at the Hage in Holland, the Lady Sabina of
Egmont, Daughter to Cont Amoral of Egmont Prince of Gaure and of Steenhuysen,
and of the Lady Sabina of Bauaria Palatin of Rhine. The general Estates did
honor the solmenyzing of this marriage with their Deputies, and did gratefie
them with rich and stately presents, in requital of the services which the
Earl of Solms had done them, and did them daily, as also for the alliance
which he has with the

The eight and twenty day of March the river of Meuse did swell and rise so
high, as about nine of the clock at night the banks were carried away near
unto Gorrichom; and that quarter of Papendrecht was wholly drowned. The town
of Schoon-houen did suffer much by this inundation, the which had carried away
1595.


They of Dordrect which is the first town in Holland, after the example of
Amsterdam and other towns of Holland and Zeeland, having long before designed
to make their town greater, toward that land which they had recovered from
the water, they began the four and twenty day of Iulie to lay their plot,
and to begin their first work, the which being finished will be a great
beauty and commodity to the said town.

Prince Maurice being camped with the Estates army before the town of Groll
in the country of Oueryssel, the Council of Spain at Brusselles, (to hinder
this design,) sent Mondragon with some troops, with an intent to make him
dislodge from thence, or to do some affront to his camp. The Estates being
advertised of his coming, (to whom they had made the Spanish forces greater
then they were) fearing that the Prince with his small army should be engaged,
they were of opinion not to hazard his person and his whole camp, for such a
paltrie place, but that he should retire from thence under the town of
Zutphen. Mondragon seeing he could get no advantage of him, and thinking that
he had won honor enough to draw him from that place, and made his camp
frutlesse for that year, (which was declyning) he made his retreat to go and
pass the river of Rhine at Berck above Wesel: Prince Maurice pursues Mondragon
in his retreat.
was, meaning to give him a Camisado before his retreat, persued him with his
troops beyond the river of Lip.

The second day of September Cont Philip of Nassau a valiant Nobleman and
exceeding resolute, was sent by the Prince (his cousin) to view the Spaniardes
camp: upon the way he incountred two of the enemies cornets of horse, the
which he defeated, although the Prince had commanded him not to fight until
that he were come to him with the body of his army. Some of these horsemen
that were defeated, escaped, and gave the alarm to their whole camp:
whereupon Mondragon Philip Earl of Nassau and Ernestus Earl of Solms hurt,
taken prisoners and die.
endured their enemies long, in the end they were both overthrown, sore hurt,
and taken prisoners: they were carried to Bercke, whereas within very few
days after they died. Mondragon entreating them and using the best manner and
order he could, causing them to be carefully dressed, and sending the Princes
own Surgians unto them, and being dead he sent their bodies honorably to
Wesel. Cont Ernestus of Nassau Brother to Cont Philippe (of whom the Estates
and the Prince

The Princes army being somewhat amazed at this route, it was nor thought
convenient wilfully to pursue a victorious enemy, although it were a dear
victory for him, having lost three men for one. Thus Mondragon past his army,
the which he safely conducted home into Brabant, and the Prince turning head
again, was advised by the Estates to send two thousand men to serve under the
French King.

In this year of our Lord 1595. there fell a great quarrel betwixt Edsard A
controversy betwixt Edsard Earl of East-Friseland and Emden.
John Brother to this Earl Edsard, a peaceable man, zealous to the reformed
religion, and a great protector 1595
the other side Edsard provoked by his wife (who was daughter to the King of
Sueden) and would gladly have commanded like a Queen in that town
(notwithstanding their Imperial privileges) sought to change the Estate of
religion, according unto the confession of Ausbourg, with the constitutions and
customs of the said town, as well in matters of policy, as Church
government, even unto the distribution of the public alms, and other deeds
of charity, the which the Earl would have depend upon his sole authority.
Against the which the Magistrates and Burgers opposed themselves constantly,
and their heart-burning grew so great on either side, as they fell to arms.
But as the Earl (who had his Castle within the said

The town of Ham except the Castle, in the country of Vermandois, and that of
La Fere, were then (having been before delivered unto the Spaniards by the
Leaguers) in the King of Spaines power. The French King had at that time his
Army lying before La Fere (the which was a camp ill governed and tedious,
although the King were there himself in person) the Earl of Saint Pol and
the Lord of Humieres hearing that the Seignior of Gomeron Governor of the
Castle of Ham, was at Brusselles, and had agreed to deliver the said Castle
unto the Spaniards for a certain sum of money, and that he had sent word
unto the Seignior of Deruillers his Brother in law and to his wife to yield it
up.

The said Deruillers refuzing to do it, made a contrary accord with the Earl
of Humieres to give them passage by the castle to win the town upon
condition (as the said Gomeron had engaged himself for the delivery of the
said castle) that he should have the chief prisoners of the Spaniards that
were in the The town and castle of Ham recovered for the French King
same town delivered him to redeem his Brother in law. The Duke of Bouillon
and the aboue-named two Noblemen being entered with good troops into the
castle the twentieth day of June, they of the town were presently advertised
thereof, who intrencht themselves against the castle, so as they must needs
attempt it by force.

The French Kings men having been twice repulst, dispayred in a manner to
become masters thereof, if the Duke of Bouillon and the Lord of Humieres had
not assured and encouraged them to continue, so as after twelve hours fight
and la Croix, with some twenty Gentlemen and about six score soldiers, where
there were s^aine above seven hundred Spaniards, Italiens, French Leaguers and
Germans, the rest were taken prisoners, among the which were the Collonell of
the Neapolitans, the Colonel of the Germans, and Marcello Caracio, for whom
the Seignior of Gomeron was redeemed. The King did much lament the death of the
Lord of Humieres his Lieutenant in Picardie, a brave and valiant Knight, who
had done him faithful service.

The Earl of Fuentes a Spaniard, being then Governor by provision of the
Netherlands Albert of Aus tria the Emperors Brother) had then sent the Prince
of Chymay, now Duke of Arschot and of Croy, to beseege the town of Chastelet
in the same country of Vermandois, whilst that he himself was with the body
of his Army before Cambray. Mons de la Grange was within Chastelet with 600.
soldiars, where he defended himself valiantly 1595.


Chastelet being thus won, the Earl of Fuentes went to beseege the town and
Castle of Dourlans, a small town, but well seated upon the river of Anthy:
Valentine de par dieu, Seignior of la Motte, governor of graueling, General of
the Artillery for the Dou lans beseeged by the Spaniard.
King of Spain, (being near unto the Artillery to prepare the battery) was
shot into the head from the town, whereof he dyed soon after, and was carried
to be buried at Saint Omer: making an end of so many wars, and so great
services which he had done unto the King of Spain, being now grown very old;
not long before he had purchased La Motte slain before Dourlans
father and he (being young) came to serve the Emperor, at the Camp before
Teroanne, at the first he was entertaynd by the Lord of Bignicourt, a Knight
the of order, where he had his first advancement in quality of a Squier to the
said Nobleman: until His disposition.
he was captain, then in the beginning of the troubles, besides his company,
he was Sargent Mayor of the Earl of Reux his Regiment, during which time he
committed great cruelties in Flanders, against them of the religion. Then he
went to be Lieutenant

Mounsier de Villars governor of Rouen and Newe-hauen, being come with certain
troops of horse and foot to relieve the beseeged within Dourlans, was
incountred and charged by the Earl of Fuentes men, and put to rout, many of
his men were Villars and his troops defeated near unto Dourlans.
slain, he himself being overthrown from his horse, was taken prisoner,
having his leg broken, afterward the Spaniards stabd him with their daggers in
cold blood for that he had forsaken the league and reconciled himself to the
King. Dourlans being in this sort beseeged by the Spaniards and the Castle
furiously battered, the forts betwixt the town and the Castle won, and by
the blowing up of a mine, a Dourlans taken by assault by the Spaniards.
forced, at a confused cry of victoria, victoria, the beseeged grew amazed and
abandoned this breach, every one beginning to fly and to save himself as he
could. And so the town was taken at this assault the last day of June, whereas
the slaughter was very great, but their insolency against wives and virgins
exceeded all measure. It is a strange thing that a thousand five hundred men
which were within it among the which there were so many bragging Gentlemen and
of the Nobility, About that time the Earl of Fuentes (under coullor to punish
a certain mutiny 1595.


For which consideration, the Estates both of the Clergy and the Secular, of
those Provinces which remained under the King of Spaines obedience, but
especially the Nobility, were moved of themselves to seek some means of
peace, and after diverse Maurice. The Estates under the King of Spain seek
peace of the united Provinces.
They deputed the Seignior of Lyesvell sometimes Chancellor of Brabant, in the
Duke of Anious time, with Hartius and Maes Lawiers, with a Secretary of the
Duke of Arschot. The which on the fourteenth of April came into Zealand, where
they conferred with Prince Maurice, being accompanied by James Valck Tresorer
general, and Christopher Roels Pentioner of the County of Zealand, requiring
that they might be admitted to propound some way of an Accord betwixt the King
of Spain and his reconciled Estates, with the said Prince and the confederate
Estates

Where-vppon the Prince made answer, that the general Estates confederate, had
no intent to treat but with the said Estates of the reconciled Provinces, and
not Prince Maurice his answer to the Deputies of the reconciled Estates.
with the King of Spain, against whom (as their mortal enemy) they were
allied with other neighbor Princes, who were also his enemies, and that they
had long since abiured him: Wherefore they held him so irreconcilably offended,
as they knew well he could never forget the wrong, which he holds has been
therein done him. But that upon the first opportunity he would be revenged,
building upon the Canon of the Council of Constance: Cum hereticis non est
seruanda fides. But if the Estates under the King, would faithfully and
sincerely, enter into any conference

1 First, that they should cause all strangers and soldiers to depart out of
the country, and to reduce themselves into an absolute freedom, whereby they
might treat of a peace without the King, and that the Deputies and Estates of
the said Provinces Articles propounded by the united Estates.
which should treat of a peace, should be appointed by them without the King,
with whom the general Estates of the united Provinces would then treat, as
desiring nothing more then to see those long and bloody wars converted into an
assured and firm

2 Secondly that nothing should be altered nor changed in religion, but it
should be referred to the discretion of the Estates of each Province: and that
no man else should deal therein.

3 That the Provinces which were willing to treat of a peace with the united
Provinces, among other conditions must be content to enter into treaty with the
French King and the Queen of England, and to undergo all the charges of the
whole body of the general Estates, all the debts where-into the united
Provinces are fallen, for the defense of their liberties against the Spaniards
and other strangers.

4 Lastly that peace being made upon those and other conditions, the said
united

In this case the said Ambassadors had no other commission, but to move a
treaty of peace, betwixt the King and his Estates on the one part, and the
united provinces 1595.


The Articles of the confederate Estates were by some (which held the King of
Spaines party) very ill taken, and by others (which desired a peace) in some
sort tolerated saying, that they were not altogether void of reason, and that
by a good conference they might be easily moderated. And therefore considering
the quality of the time which pressed them, and the poverty and lamentations of
the people, they should not let slip so good occasions without treating: and
if they did absolutely reject the

And the rather for that by the said Articles, the confederats did not demand
that the reconciled Provinces should change their Princes, Estate, Government
or relligion. And that of all which should be concluded by the said
conference, the confederate Diverse opinions upon the Articles propounded by the
con^ederat Estates.
Estates should more trust the reconcyled, then the King, by reason of their
distrust and fear of his power, and desire of revenge, the which they needed
not to fear in them. Besides that by this treaty of peace, they should much
weaken their enemies,

Whereupon such as were Spaniards in heart, and who preferred the Kings
affaiers before al other things would in like manner have his honor,
greatness, authority, reputation and generally his rights and prerogatives
preferred and be first observed: and that they should rather force the
confederats to reconcile themselves unto his majesty,

Besides it did not belong to them to prescribe conditions to their Sovereign
(that will they ever acknowledge him with a good heart, whatsoever is done to
them. 1595.


Thus spoke they which from the beginning of the troubles in the year of our
Lord 1566. would never hear the other party and who inricht themselves by the
civil wars, at the charge, and with the sweat and blood of the poor
commons: speaking in this sort directly against the opinion of all good and
well affected countriemen: to whom these violent courses (for thirty years
past) could not be pleasing. All these allegations of either side, betwixt the
reconciled Estates, the good countriemen, and Our King is mighty etc.

About this time there was a letter dispersed abroad and in many men's hands,
some The opinion of a learned man touching the peace.
said it was written by that learned Scholar Iustus Lipsius, who being
desired by certain counselors to deliver his opinion whether it were better
to have war then peace, made answer bearing date the third of January in the
year of our Lord 1595. Saying, that the King had three several enemies: the
French, the English and the united Provinces, two of them were foreign, and
the third a domestical enemy, rather to be termed a rebel then a right
enemy; for the first two, if the house of Austria stood not in fear of the
inhumaine and barbarous Turks, the King might easily

The cause why she entertained these wars, was more for fear then for any
great hatred: the greatness and power of the King, and the valor and
dexterity of the Spaniards for these threescore years had been fearful to
all neighbor Princes. Wherefore to bridle that great power, and to free her
from fear, making no show of any ambition she would dissolve this union, for
deeds and not words exalt kingdoms.

The like was also to be hoped of the French King, who very secretly and
Spain would desire to make a peace with him or not, he knew not but to make a
truce 1595.
Sextus Pompeius in the war he made against Augustus Caesar, holdding Sicilia
and Sardinia, he brought all Italy into extreme want and misery, who by a
short peace procured his own ruin: where it was concluded betwixt them that
all such as had fled away, might return home again, and that the soldiars
should be discharged and sent away, whereby Menas Pompeis chief Captain was
secretly corrupted Pompeie, who not long before was held another Neptune,
commanding both sea and land, was forced to fly in a small ship, and to yield
his neck unto his enemies sword, and so within less then a year that great
war was ended: This he held to be the best course, finding that war was
the cause of all corruptions and miseries, and was able to bring the might
kingdoms to ruin.

At this time the better to satisfy the common people a rumor was spread abroad
that the Princely Cardinal Albertus should come to govern the Netherlands,
and Ships of Holland and Zeeland discharged in Spain.
Ernestus, and to make him the more acceptable and pleasing unto the people,
many Esterlings and Netherland ships (which had been stayed in Spain, to go
as men of war, to meet with the Indian fleet which was then to come home)
were discharged in diverse havens, and set at liberty: And in Siuille the Duke
of Medina Sidonia told the merchants, and sailors of these ships, that the
King had expressly commanded it should be done, being moved thereunto by the
Cardinal of Austria, and that from henceforth all the Netherlands ships
might freely come into Spain and pass away again, to the which end all men
that would desire it should have pasports granted them, hoping that in time
they would be more mindful of the Kings gracious favors, and submit
themselves under their natural sovereign Prince. And Phillip of Nassau (who
is now Prince of Orange and Earl of Buren, who had been long restrained of
his liberty in Spain (free and at liberty, but as it is thought at the
instance of the Prince of Spain, and the Cardinal aforesaid, that he might
go with him into the Netherlands.

After the taking of Chastelet and Dourlans, as we have said, the earl of
Fuentes meaning to be spoken of and to make his authority eminent during the
time of his prouisonall government, limited until the coming of the cardinal
Albert of Austria, and Cambr^y beseeged by the Spaniard.
to return with some honor out of the Netherlands into Spain, undertook a
greater action then any governor before him had ever done: which was to beseege
John of Monluc Bishop of Valence. In this seege (during, the which there
entered into the town, but very late, (the hearts of the Bourgers being lost)
the Duke of Rothel, son to Lewis of Gonsague Duke of Neuers, brother 1595
Balagny had done them, and for the insolences and oppressions of his
soldiers, not able to endure any longer, on the second of October after they
had won the Suisses that were in garrison within the town, to be at their
devotion, and not to hinder their treaty with the Earl of Fuentes, having no
hope of succors, they yielded up the town by composition, and upon certain
conditions among Cambray yielded by the Burgers.
others, that they should have none but Wallons in garrison (remembering still
how badly they had been entreated by the Spaniards, being there in garrison
in the Balaignies time. The French garrison which was within the
town (seeing the Swissers agreed with the Burgers to treat of the yielding up
of the town) retired into the Cittadell to Balaigny: where at the first they
made show to defend themselves, but having been summoned once or twice upon
promise of a good composition if they yielded, and threats if they should long
contend (which accord Fuentes said he would make in favor of the Duke of
Rothel and of the Duke his father) it did so tereifie Balaigny, as on the
seventh of October, he delivered the Cittadell into the Earl of Fuentes
hands, in the name of the King of Spain.

About September this year the Governor of Breda had an enterprise upon Lire
in Brabant two Leagues from Antwerp, with certain troops of horse and Lire
surprised and lost again.
foot: which town he surprised by Scaladoe, having put the Sentinel and the
Court of guard to the sword, and breaking open one of the Ports about five of
the clock in the morning, he drew in his horsemen and the rest of his foot.
Against whom Alonso de luna Governor of the town made some resistance in the
Market place, and at the towne-house; but finding himself to weak, he
retired over one of the Ports with his men, resolving to make it good, until
he had some succors from Antwerp, whether he had sent with all speed: the
which arrived the same day by the same Port, whilst that Herauguieres men (who
should have labored to dislodge them and Herauguiere did cry out, importune,
threaten, and strike. There were above 500. of them slain, besides prisoners,
and the loss of horses. This should serve as an example for all other
undertakers.

Cardinal Albertus being upon the way toward the Netherlands, and bringing
with him Phillip of Nassau, Prince of Orange and Earl of Buren: the Estates of
the United Provinces being advertised thereof, they wrote a letter unto the
Prince, bearing date the 22. of December 1595 as follows.

My Lord, it was no small joy and contentment unto us all to hear of your
delivery The united Estates write to the Prince of Orange.
from so long and undeserved imprisonment, as well in remembrance of the great
services which this Estate has received from my Lord the Prince of Orange your
father of famous memory as in regard of the murder which was committed upon
his person, which considerations do continually bind us to love and affect all
such, as have the honor to belong unto him, especially your Lordship, who have
so pitifully spent not only your youth, but even the best time of your life in
the tedious and melancholy prison, the which you could not bear without great
grief for the death of your honorable father, the which was procured as
unjustly as your imprisonment: and yet your Lordship unto us, to have any cause
to alter and withdraw that entire love and affection which 1595.

to send your honor long life and happy days.

This letter being delivered to the Prince coming to Luxembourg, he made
answer thereunto, bearing date the first of February, as follows.

My good Lords, I thank you most heartily, for the contentment you receive by
my liberty, and for the good remembrance you have of me, as appears by your
letters. The prince of Oranges answer to ^he Estates.
And although until this time I have not been allowed to make my love known
unto you, who have always so well deserved; yet I hope by this good occasion
of my delivery, to show you such effects to your good likings and contents, as
you shall have no

Philippe William of Nassau.


The Executors of his fathers testament upon the last day of December against
his coming, sent him ten thousand gilders in ready money, as part of his own
goods: The Prince of Orange meets with his sister in the Duchy of Cleues.
and in October after, at the said princes instance, by means of intercessors,
it was concluded that there should be a meeting in the Duchy of Cleues,
between him and his own sister by the mothers side, now Countess of Hohenlo,
where they did salute and visit each other, conferring about their patrimoniall
goods; where she had license to send him tapistry, hangings, and other household
stuff, making great shows of love and friendship one unto an other. The
general Estates sent Mounsier Hessels one of the Council

ALBERTVS CARDINAL OF Austria, 1595.
Lieutenant and Captain general for the King of Spain in the Netherlands.
ALBERTVS. D. G. ARCHIDVX AVSTRIAE. BELG PROVIN: GVBERNATOR.


Fifth brother of the house Imperial
Of Austria was I borne, and seeing fate
Failed ^ne, in lands and means proportionate
To my great birth, became a Cardinal
But my great Cousin having evermore
From my green years accepted my advise
In points of statisme; by his Kingly choice
Graced me with place of chief Inquisitor.
And thinking none of all his lineage bore
Perfection fitting such a match of price
As Isabel, chose me, but first of all
Styled me these lands Lieutenant general.
THE Cardinal Albertus of Austria (long attended with great devotion 1596 The
Cardinal of Austr^a comes to go ^rne the Ne therlands o^ the wing of ^ne.
that he would bring a good peace, and an assured reconciliation with the
united Provinces) arrived at Brusselles the eleauenth of February, bringing
with him Philip of Nassau Prince of Orange elder brother to Prince Maurice,
having been kept as it were in a prison at large in Spain since the year of
our Lord 1569. where he was received with great pomp, every man casting his
eyes upon him as upon the author of the countries quiet. But contrary wise
(instead of propounding some means of union and peace, at his first Ernestus
had done) he was no sooner acknowledged for Governor, but he prepared to make
war both against the French and the united Estates. And for his first
beginning he would attempt an exploit long before proiected by Valentin De par
Dieu signior of La Motte, Governor of Graueling: the which the Earl of Fuentes
(not content with his victories of Chastelet, Dourlans and Cambray) would
willingly himself have put in execution in his time: but it was reserved for
the first fruits of honor which the Cardinal should get in the Netherlands at
his arrival, which was the taking of the town of Calais, a sea port of great
importance, which the French recovered from the English in the year 1558. the
which he went Calais besieged ^y ^he Cardinal.
and besieged: whereas the signior of Vysdossein Nephew to Mounsier Gourdan was
Governor, who had commanded there since it was conquered by the French, until
his Maurice sending him some succors, he would receive but two companies,
which were those of captain Dominique and of Gron, who had not the credit to
enter into the town at the first, and much less into the castle, but they
were put into a poor ruined sort at the head of the haven, called Richbanc
(the which had been a stately ^ort built by the English and ruined at the
conquest of the French, the Gourdan nor his Nephew Vysdossein never took any
care to repair, as it was requisite, considering the importance of the place
where it was seated) and some part of them in the suburbs along the haven, and
before the port which they call Courguet, the which was nothing fortefied:
where as the Cardinal made his first attempt, so as those two companies were
chased from thence, after they had fought valiantly, there was captain Gron
slain, the rest retired fighting into the town, whereas Richbanc and Courguet
won.
they had small assistance and credit given them by the Inhabitants. As the
Cardinal wanted no inteligence nor favorers within the town, the inhabitants
were easily persuaded to yield it up by composition, which was, that every one
should remain quietly in the possession of his house and goods. Vysdossein
never made any offer The town of Calais basely. yielded.
round about) entered into the castle behind, with some hundred men. Where
being entered, he sought to order all things, and with the Estates souldiars
(the which at the yielding of the town, had retired thither) and those which
were of the ordinary garrison, having encouraged the signior of Vysdossein,
and could him how highly the King was displeased for so yielding up the town,
he resolved to attend all extremities rather then to harken to any accord.

But the disorder was great, the ordinance being ill mounted, wanting Gunners
and many other things necessary for the defense of such a place, so as the
Cardinal having made a sufficient breach, he gave at the first a general and
very furious assault, at the which the signior of Vysdossein, (who desired
rather to die, then to leave the place being taken, in regard of his honor,
whereof the King did so 1596 The castle of Ca^ais taken by assault.
Dominique and his Lieutenant were taken prisoners.

The Cardinal having had such good success at the taking of Calais, which was
the seventeenth day of April, he went presently to set upon the town of
Ardre the which is held the strongest little place in France, in the which
there was a good garrison, for so small a place, of twelve hundredth men, and as
well furnished with ordinance (where there was a Magasin of munition like unto
that of Calais) as any small town in France. Yet as soon as the Cardinal had
at his first approach taken Ardres besieged and base^y ^lded to the Cardinal.
ditches and rampars) having planted his ordinance before the town, and
begun to batter the Rauelin, the which they call the feast, (so named by
reason of a feast which was sometimes made there betwixt the Ambassadors of the
Emperor, and the Kings of France and England) the wall being nothing at all
shaken nor the parapet beaten down, neither yet their defenses broken: the
signior of Bois de Annebout Governor of the town, yielded it, and the
Cardinal had it good cheap, having camped before it eight days.

To speak truly, many were amazed at this sudden yielding, and at the small
I. Petit.
Calais was) to loose all. If this be not the motive, I know not what else
could move the Governor to yield, unless the vnfortunatnesse of the French
made them then to faint and to forget their duties, for that as Mounsire la
Noue says, the success of arms is variable.

During these two sieges of Calais and Ardres, the Fench King was yet before La
Fere, the which seven days after the delivering up of Ardres, in the end
yielded Montlimart one of the league, and Don Aluarez Ozorio a Spaniard, having
with their souldiars endured all the toiles and all discomodities that could
be invented, having the town full of water two or three foot deep, and
suffered a thousand difficulties for the space of five months and more that
they were besieged. The composition was very honorable An honorabl^
composition at La Fere.
for the besieged, who departed with their colors flying, drums sounding,
with their full arms and bagage, drawing after them a double cannon marked with
the arms of France, and so they retired toward Cambresis.

When as the Cardinal of Austria, by the taking of Calais and Ardres, had
tried the courage and resolution of the French, meaning to return an other
time, he now meant to try what spirit was in Prince Maurice and the Estates
souldiars. Rhosne a French Leaguer, now Marshall of his camp, (before
Lieutenant to the Duke of Maine) to march with the number of some five thousand
men through Antwerp, as if he went to go to Berghen up Zoom, or to Breda.

Prince Maurice had no sooner news that the Spaniard had showed himself about
Rhosne (the which was given unto a Gentleman to deliver unto him, but not
before that he were come to a certain place near unto Hochstraten). This
letter contained no other thing, 1596.


In the mean time Colonel La Borlotte, an aduenturous soldier, and very
fortunate in his attempts: to enter into the territory of Hulst, having chosen
the flower of all the souldiars of his Regiment, with some others, he hazarded
himself with certain shaloupes or long boats, to pass a channel betwixt the
fort of the flower of Blomme, which the Spaniards had formerly built, and one
of the Estates fortes, called the petty Rape: the which he past
notwithstanding the Estates ships of war, the which did no way impeach him:
and yet Prince Maurice had expressly recommended

Prince Maurice seeing that the Cardinal had deceived him, he parted suddenly
from Berghen and came to Hulst, to give order for all things: Having
recommended the Prince Maurice returns (...).
town to George Euerard Earl of Solms his cousin, and furnished it with men,
to be La Borlotte caused more men to enter daily by small numbers. And when
as they were well fortefied, they of the town intending to chase them out
again, went forth to charge them, but they were so well entertained, as they
were forced to retire with shame and loss, amongst others captain Nyuelt and
Pottey were taken prisoners. The Spaniard being incorraged by this, and daily
fortefied with more men, he went and set (...) Rape (...)
upon the fort of petty Rape, wherein there might be some thirty men, the
which

After that time there were gallant skyrmishes made daily betwixt the
Spaniardes and them of the town, and the fortes of Moervaert and of Nassau,
which was a fort of one side of the town. On a Thursdaie amongst the rest, the
Spaniardes came suddenly to charge the trench (the first time that there ever
was any guard) betwixt Moervaert and the town, along the dike thinking to lodge
there themselves, and so divide the fort from the town, but they had such a
welcome, as having lost some thirty men, and many hurt they were forced to
retire, being chased even unto their quarter. Yet notwithstanding resuming
courrage and having fresh men, they returned with great cries according to
their custom, and forced the Protestants to recoyle (...) ^lotte (...) the
(...).
Broucsaulx Sargent and thirteen hurt, yet in the end the Spaniard was forced
to leave the party. At these two charges, there died of the Spaniards besides
the common souldiars, three captains, one a Fleming called Steenlandt, one
Diego a Spaniard, and Doyon a Frenchman: the which being sent for according to
quarter, were found dead.

The next day Colonel La Bourlotte came himself in person, and had almost
surprised them that were in the trench, having laid down their arms, and
laboring with the spade to fortefie themselves: yet he was so well
entertained, as having small hope of getting it, he thought it best to retire.
This trench did much import both the one and the other: Wherefore captain
Boeuvry and Haeve being Moervaert sallied forth with their companies, whereas
captain Haeve was shot in the knee. Captain Bercham was killed with a cannon,
and his Ancient was slain; for the better defense of this trench, the
Protestants made a point, in form of a halfe-moone.

Those of the town did often make gallant sallies, still getting something,
and 1596 The Spaniard (...) his Canon and plants it.
Maurices ships, of war. But notwithstanding all their shooting against
Moeruaert although they had made a sufficient breach, yet did it anayle them
nothing, for that they could not make their approaches, but they must first
take the trench which goes from the fort unto the town, being defeated by a
half Moon.

The Prince would gladly have recovered the petty Rape, which the Spaniard
took

On the eighteenth day of July there came forue Cornets of horse from Berghen
up Zoom, the which entered into the territory of Hulst, by the part which they
The Estates horsemen defeat some Spaniards.
call Campen: Where at their first arrival they defeated some three hundred
Spaniards, whom they surprised in the country going a free-booting, then
having burnt three milles to incomodate the Cardinals camp, they returned: for
they could not have stayed long there without great danger of being beaten: And
to have lodged in any fort, there was no likelihood, for want of forage,
neither could they have served to any great use.

The Spaniards to be revenged of this loss, came the same night at ten of
the clock with great fury to charge the counterscarpe of this great trench,
which was betwixt Moeruaert and the town: And did so tire them with redoubled
forces, as in the end The Spaniards win the great trenche.
with the late loss of their counterscarpe) fell presently into route and
fled, some toward Moeruaert, and some under the town, to their great
confusion, and the great joy of the Spaniard, by that means dividing Moeruaert
from the town. His Artillery in the mean time was not idle, continuing his
battery still upon the fort of Moeruaert with nine pieces, seeking to make a
breach and to assail it by the trenche which he had won. In the end having
made a sufficient breach, and finding that the Protestant soldiers began to
fainte, (whereof they did most tax the Frisons) Beaury commanded, who could
not persuade the soldiers, but they refused to fight; some putting out their
Matches, and casting down their arms; so as he was forced to The Forte of
Moeruaert yielded to the Spaniard.
yield up the place by composition to depart with their arms and baggage, the
which they did the ninth of July, retiring to the Fort of Spitsenburch to be
embarked there.

Prince Maurice was greatly grieved for this loss, and so much moved against
the three companies of Frisons which had been in it, as he would gladly have
punished them after the manner of the ancient Romans (which was to execute
the tenth man) Moeruaert, had free passage for all his army in the territory of
Hulst, then Hulst besieged near.
he began to approach near unto the town, and planted three Canons upon a
Mill mount, with the which he did much annoy the town, shooting at randon
through the streets and houses, so as the besieged were no where safe, but at
the foot of the rampar, 1596.
John of Egmont, Tack-hettinck Lieutenant to Cont William Lewis of Nassau, John
Piron, and Cont Solms hurt.
the Admiral of Zirixee. And when as the said Earl being shot in the leg,
could not go up and down, nor perform those duties which he had formerly
done with great care and diligence: Collonell Piron was appointed
superintendent over the other Colonels, who discharging his duty well, being
acquainted with such sports, caused three mines to be made, by the which the
besieged might when they pleased sallie

The Spaniard having stopped up the old Haven, and planted artillery there, he
thought thereby to annoye the Estates ships, and to cut off their passage to
the town, seeking in like sort to vex the Forte of Nassau, but it was so
far off, as they could do little hurt to either of them, so as it was no
hindrance unto the ships, but they went and came daily into the Town.

On the three and twenty of July this present year 1596. the besieged made a
sallie by the mine at the Port of Beguines, into the nearest trenches of the
Spaniards A brave sal^ie made by the besieged.
camp, out of which they chased them, having surprised them suddenly playing at
Cards: but they returning to the charge with new forces, the besieged retired,
always skirmishing, and the Spaniard pursuing them; but they were so well

The last of this month of July, Collonell Piron who never rested day nor
night from his charge, being upon the Rampar, he was shot in the cheek
under the eye, the which did make the besieged very heavy, for he was forced
to go out of the Town to be cured; finding himself unable to do any
service during Colonel Piron hurt.
this dangerous wound. In the mean time the Spaniard approached still nearer
and nearer unto the Town, so as on the first of August they began to fortify
even before Beguines, in the ditche of the Boulwarke, so as they had no more to
do, but to fill it up and to undermine the Rauelin: but the besieged had so
mined themselves, as it was all hollow, so as the Spaniard could have done
little good: having planted his ordinance in as many places as he could, the
which did sometimes batter the Rampar, and sometimes the houses and other
buildings of the Town at random; being but a harguebuze shot of. Yet for
that he could not do any thing against the Forte of Nassau, by reason it is
all environed with water, and that the Canon of the haven that was filled up,
was too far of, he could not hinder the passage of ships, but that five or
six Galleys and Shaloupes came in daily at a full Sea. And although the
Spaniard did continue A half Mo^ne made within the town.
(which the enemies Canon had torn and rent in pieces) a half Moon, with a
good and strong ditche, which had not been very easy for them to win: the
circumference whereof from the Port was all hollow with vnder-mining, the
which they might very easilye have blown up, if they had offered to force them
on that side.

The second of August the Spaniard having continued his battery all the day
long, with fourteen pieces of Ordinance, both against the Rauelin, the
Rampar, and the Port, about six of the clock at night, he gave a very
furious assault at the point of the Rauelin, which they called Duiuels gat, the
which he carried, but with great loss: but being, entered the beseeged blew up
the said point by their mine, which made 1596
La Cord and the Lieutenant of Captain Potey, either of them with two
squadrons as the Spaniard was forced to retire with loss: the cannon and
musket shot T^o furious aslaults at Hulst.
flew so thick, as (according to the report of a Wallon soldiar, who fled into
the town, for that (as he said) he had slain a Spaniard) in those two
charges, and the two days before, the Spaniard had lost abou eight hundred
men. Among the which Rhosne Marshall of the Cardinals camp was slain with a
cannon. There died in a manner all the Captains of la Borlottes regiment, with
some Noblemen of note. Of the beseeged Captain Poteys Lieutenant was slain,
with some few others, with seven or eight Frisons, the which were drowned
passing over a narrow planke in h^st at their retreat La Cord and his men,
with the favor and assistance of them of the town, who failed not to cast
wildfire and other burning matter upon the assaylants, so as they were still
forced to retire with shame and great loss. The Spaniards came unto the
assault armed in such sort from head to foot as they seemed little hills of
iron, which did move, and yet they got nothing by blows. Custom confirms and
assuers the courragious.
The beseeged being by daily continuance, and accustomed to receive them with a
wounderfull courage and resolution, and the more they did see the slaughter of
their enemies, the more resolute they were to die, although they had many
wounded, the

The fourth of August after noone the Spaniards returned to assault the Rauelin
at the port of Beguines, with great fury and fearful cries: but if they
assailed it valiantly, it was as resolutly defended: the two companies of
Zeeland (which were that of An other assault at the port of Beguines.
the Seignior of Cats, and of the Admiral of Zirixee) behaved themselves so
valiantly with all sorts of arms, offensive and defenciue, as the Spaniard was
forced to give ground and retire back. The sixth of the month the Spaniard
blew up a mine which he had made under the breach of the said Rauelin,
wherewith some of the beseeged were carried away, yet not many, the Spaniard
being in arms in his trenches, attending until the mine were blown up, he
came the fourteenth time to assail the said Rauelyn, and to chase away the
beseeged, as well by the ruins of the mine, as by the port, which was beaten
quite down. Here upon all they of Entretenidos, which are pentioners to the
King of Spain, as English, Scottish, Irish and many others.

After that the Spaniard had been thus chased from this Raueline, with great
slaughter of his men, the beseeged made a new trench in the midest of it in
form of a parapet, the which they kept until the mine (which they had in
hand) were ready to blow up, if the Spaniard should return, who in steed of
enseignes of war, in this 1596.
Egger a Scottishman was carried away with a cannon shot, and many other
soldiars were slain and hurt: From that time it was decreed, that of the four
Regiments which were within the town, every Regiment should have the guard of
the said Rauelyn in his turn, to the end that all the burden should not lie
upon any one of them. There were in the town ten companies of Zeelanders,
(which before had always guarded it) ten of Hollanders, ten of Frisons, and ten
of English and Scottish, those that were not in guard there, should be always
armed, and remain at the foot of the rampar. Moreover the beseeged (to
fortefie themselves the better toward the said Rauelin) made an other half
Dorp after the retreat of Colonel Piron (by reason of his hurt) was sent into
the town, where he did execute his charge Colonel Dorp in the place of
Colonel Piron.
with great care and diligence. The Spaniard having approached to Absdal,
planted three pieces of ordinance there, to hinder the entry of the ships by
the newhauen, and some Faulcons, the which did reach unto the fort of Nassau,
although it were far of, and withal they did batter the Churches and highest
houses in the town the which was made like to a heap of stoanes, for there
was noe safety for the soldiars but at the foot of the rampar, and in caves
and sellers for other men and women, whereof most part were gone out of the
town, sense the beginning of the seege.

The seventh day of the month, the beseeged being at the guard of this
Rauelin, took an alarume, and the Spaniard showed himself, then the beseeged
making a show to retier into their trench, the Spaniard poursued them into the
Rauelin, whereupon they of the town give fire to their mine, which blew many
brave soldiars of the enemies into the air, some being buried alive, and some
cast far of into the diches and other places, which was a pitiful thing to
here, the lamentable cries of men dying and wounded, so as there died many of
either side, but most of the Spaniards.

The thirteenth of the month the beseeged took twenty men out of every
company, the which going by night out of the forte of Nassau, lay close until
noone, A brave sally from the fort of Nassau
to make a bridge thereon, upon a little creek, the which they did and were
not discovered by the Spaniard: then they marched with a resolution to the
enemies trench, the which he left, and fled to his fort of Absdal, where there
were some pieces of ordinance, with the which they shot continually upon the
fort of Nassau, and at the ships: yet the beseeged going on entered this fort,
chased away the enemy, cloyed their artillery, slew about a hundred men, and
brought away prisoners, a Captain, a Lieutenant and an Ancient. The Spaniard
came in have to succor them with eight companies of foot and two Cornets of
horse, whom the beseeged did charge along a channel where there was a bridge:
the Spaniard thinking Potter in the head, and two Sargants which were cured,
carrying their first prisoners sasely into the fort of Nassau.

The same day about three of the clock in the afternoon the Spaniard mynding
presently, leaving only some little cranies open at the point thereof, toward
the 1596


This rauelyne being thus won, as we have said, having no other flanker
about The poor estate of Hu'st.
the town, it was easy for the Spaniards (having so long battered it
furiously with thirty pieces of Ordinance, and made a breach of above forty
yardes wide) to plant The besieged begin to parle
their resolution the day before to live and dye there, as they had also
promised A Capitulation made by them of Hulst
were in) was glad to give ear unto them: and the eight and twentieth of the
month the accord was made betwixt the Cardinal of Austria and the Earl of
Solms, in manner as follows.

The Earl of Solms with the Colonels, and Captains, Officers and soldiers
being within the town of Hulst, having sent yesterday to enter into
conference, and to yield the town unto the King of Spain upon reasonable
conditions. His Highness being very willing to favor such as do their
endeavors in any exployte of arms, does grant and promise in the word of a
Prince, unto the said Earl The articles of the accord
may go away freely either by water or by land, whether they please, with their
coullors flying, drums beating, matches lighted, bullets in their mouths,
1596.


2 In regard whereof the said Earl of Solms shall be bound to yield up the
town unto the King, with the Fort of Nassau, and to depart out of the said
town and Fort, as soon as the boats shall come: The said Earl promising
upon his faith to send for them with all the speed that may be: And to lodge
presently upon the breach* the Marquis of Teruicos regiment, who shall have
charge given them, not to do any harm, nor to pass any farther during their
abode there. And for assurance of their abode there shall be given in hostage
unto the Earl, the said Marquis of Tervico

3 All prisoners taken during the siege of any side, of what quality soever
they be, having not compounded for their ransom, shall be set at liberty
paying the charges only.

4 All Burgers and inhabitants without any exception, may freely depart with
their goods and moueables either by water or by land. And they shall have a
years time to sell, allienate and transport their said moueables and
inmoueables; and that time being past, they may enjoy them, causing them to
be governed by some receiver, which shall have his abode in some neutrall
town or place: and such Albert and George Euerard Earl of Solms: which treaty
was put in execution accordingly.

They had persuaded the Cardinal that the taking of this town was more easy
then he found it, thinking to carry it as lightly as he did Calais and
Ardres: The town of Hulst a dear conquest to Cardinal Albert.
But he found other men, and in better order then in these two towns: So as
it cost him at this siege (which continued about two months) besides his
great charge, about threescore Captains, besides other Commanders, Collonells
and men of mark, and above five thousand soldiers at the least, Yet (how dear
soever) he had the honor to carry it: unless he would say as Amurath
Emperor of the Turks, who being nothing joyful of the victory which he
had gotten near unto Varna, said: That he would not often vanquish in that
manner.

Touching the yielding up of this town, some judging of matters of war
according to their own imaginations (speaking their pleasures in their
table-talke) would have taxed the Earl of Solms and some Collonells and
Captains, as if they had yielded it out of season, imagining that if they had
yielded it but eight days longer, the Cardinal had been forced to raize his
siege: but they show not the reasons why, nor The Earl of Solms taxed for the
yielding of Hulst purges himself.
what should have moved the enemy to retire; and they do not dream of the
inconveniences (which are doubtful in war) that might have hapened in these
eight days. To stop whose mouths, the Earl of Solms in the name of all the
rest, yielded so good an account of that action, both to the general Estates
and to Prince Maurice, as they had good reason to be satisfied and appeased.
Only they of Zealand

The twentieth of November the King of Spaynepuplished a proclamation or Edict
given at Pardo, by the which he complains that the great quantity of gold and
silver which the Indies furnish him yearly, with all his revenues and treasor
are exhausted 1596. The King of Spain proclamation whereby he dispenceth with
himself for the paiement of his debts.
and expenses, which he says, he bears for the defense of Christendom and
of his dominions. The cause whereof he imputes to the great and excessive
damage he suffers, and interest, which he paies by the taking up of money by
exchange, and other contracts which are made in his name with the Merchants: by
reason whereof all his demaynes, aids, with the ordinary and extraordinary
reueneues are held by others, so as matters are come to that extremity, as he
has no treasor to help himself withal; seeing that the Merchants and
Bankers, (who until that time were wont to furnish him by exchange) excused
them selves and made difficulty to deal, for that they held in their hands,
and in their power all the revenues and

This Edict signed Io el Rey, and by commandment from his Majesty Gonzalo de
vera, bred a great alteration among the merchants, as well in Spain, Italy, as
at Many banquerouts by reason of this Edict.
Albertus letters of exchange being sent back unto him and protested, made him
for a time to loose his credit, and kept him bare of money, so as he could not
attempt any thing against his enemies for the space of three or four months.

About the end of August the Marshall of Biron being followed by some troops
The Marshall of Biron maks war in Arthois.
of horse and foot past the river of Soome, and the first day of September he
entered into Arthois, seized upon the Castle of Imbercourt, forced certain
good Borrough towns to redeem themselves for great sums of money, and being
accompanied with five Cornets of horse, he charged the Marquis of Warembon,
Governor Paul, took the town and some other places. Some peasants defended
themselves out of their steeples and quarries of stoane (as in such accidents
they have no other retreats) but they were roughly entreated in regard of such
as remaining in their houses did stay the violence of their enemies by
contribution of money and victuals. All this was done in eight days.

Cardinal Albert understanding of the taking of the Marquis of Warembon,
should loose it, r^red safely with them unto the frontiers of Picardie. 1596.
(...) ^nch (...) again (...) Arthois.


Being discharged the one and twenty day of the month they entered again into
Arthois, about Bapaulme, spoiling Hebuterne, Beruiller, Courselles and other
places, sacking the Peasants that made any head against them. The duke of
Arschot camped with his forces close under Arras, and intrencht himself
carefully, being resolved not to hazard any thing, knowing well with whom he
had to deal. The French set all places on fire, carried away more booty then
before and returned quietly, making a course toward Bethune, Air and
Teroanne, from whence they carried much cattle and many prisoners: then they
retired and camped in the plain of Agincourt, and yet no man made head against
them in this second voyage, for the space of ten days. The duke of Arschot
being renforced with eight hundred foot joined to the Regiment La Borlotte,
he parted from Arras the fifth of October, and went and camped at Saint Pol,
whereas the Marshall of Biron leaving him, he entered seven days after The
French enter the third (...) into Artho^.
with his horsemen again into Arthois, and being followed by his footmen,
he stayed at the Abbay of Mont Saint Eloy three leagues from Arras: and on the
thirteenth day he did run even unto the ports of Douay, then having spoiled
all, he returned into Picardie, about some four or five days after the Duke
of Arschot (having recovered Imbercourt) dismissed his little army, putting his
companies into garrison.

In the beginning of January in the year of our Lord 1597. Prince Maurice
being 1597. The Cardinals army at Tournhout.
advertised from diverse parts, that Cardinal Albertus was resolved either by
secret practices or by open force, to attempt some great exploit that winter to
the disadvantage La Borlottes Regiment, and that of the signior of Hauchicourt,
under captain Cocquielle his Lieutenant, these two Regiments of Wallons being
supplied with new men, in their places that were slain and dead since the
siege of Hulst, and of five cornets of horse of Nicholas Basta, Don John of
Cordua, Alonso Dragon, Grobbendonc and Gousman: having for Commander and chief
of the The Earl of Varax chief of the Spanish army.
Governor of Arthois, at that time a prisoner in France, the Cardinal having
commanded many companies of horse and foot, as well Spaniardes as other
Nations, to march toward that camp, with necessary munition for some great
action.

Prince Maurice to prevent him, studied how he might by some notable piece of
service, give a good beginning to the new alliance and confederation which they
had Prince Maurice resolves (...) set upon the Cardinals army.
lately made with the French King and the Queen of England. And although there
seemed to be many difficulties in this resolution of so great importance, not
only in regard of the discommoditie of the season, being in the very heart
of winter, and Francis Veere general of the English.

The same day the Prince arrived at Gheertruydenberghe, there arrived almost in
two 1597
Robert Sidney Knight (now Vicont Lisle) Governor of Flussing, with three
hundred of the choicest soldiers of his government, and the Lieutenant Governor
of the Bryel, with two hundred English more.

The Earl of Hohenloo, Lieutenant general to the Prince, having a little
before prepared himself (with the consent of the general Estates, and of the
said Prince) for a voyage into Germany, for his own private affairs, being
stayed some days The Earl of Hohenloo comes to the battle.
by reason of the inconstancy of the weather, and lying upon the frontiers of
the united Provinces, had news that the Prince had sent for (with all speed) a
good number of horse and foot toward Gorrichon, for the 21. of January,
whereby the Earl

The Earl of Varax General of the Spanish army, being advertised of the
Princes approach, with his forces and artillery: whereas he should have
fortified his lodging, or gone to encounter the Prince in good order, and chose
a place of advantage with his lusty men to fight with them that were wette,
weary, and tired with the length and discomoditie of the ways (the which
seemed the most safe and honorable for him,) who had the reputation among the
greatest Commanders, being in a manner as strong as the Prince, and both his
horse and foot held for the best The Earl of Varax retires from Tournhout.
retiring to Herentall, four leagues from Tournhout, a town of the King of
Spaines party, where he thought to save himself and his men.

The Prince coming to Tournhout at the break of day, and finding his enemy
gone, resolves to follow him, and to ouer-take him (if he could) with his
horse, commanding his foote-men to follow with all speed. A quarter of a league
from Tournhout toward Herentall a certain number of Spanish foot, through
favor The Prince pursues the Spaniard.
of a wood, kept the passage of a little river, the foarde whereof was long and
uneasy for horsemen, the which could not pass but one by one: and it was no
less Francis Veer, and Vander Aa, Lieutenant of his guardes, to charge them
with two hundred Musketeers, the which they did, and chased them away. This
passage being won, he followed and ouer-tooke the enemy a mile from
Tournhout, upon a plain, the Regiments marching a hundred paces one from
another. That of the Germans was the first, Hachicourt next, la Barlotte the
third, and the Neapolitanes the last: on the right hand marched their horsemen
in three troops, being covered on the left wing with the foresaid wood, and
their baggage was sent before: when as the Prince who with half his horsemen
(being divided into six troops) Francis Veere, Sir Robert Sydney, and the
rest of the horsemen, to set on them behind, and he with the body of the
army stood firm, to second and relieve them if they were repulst.

According to this order, the Earl of Hohenloo, and with him the Earl of The
Earls of Hohenlo and Solms charge first.
Solms, charged the enemy in flank, and the other Commanders fell upon the
reereward with such fury, as notwithstanding all their resistance, the
Spaniards ranks were broken, his horsemen put to flight, and both his foot
and horse which Carabins) the which are long pieces, that the horsemen (having
left their lances) carried in this battle.

In the which there were above two thousand men slain upon the place, with the
1597. The Ear^e of V^rax slain, and his army defeated.
Dounck a captain of horse was hurt, and died a while after, and a flemish
Gentleman called Cabillau, were two, and very few hurt.

After the victory the Prince went and lodged at Tournhout, where he had left
his artillery with some of his footmen, under the charge of the signior of
Herauguiere:

The Cardinal did much grieve at this loss, the which disapointed the
designs which he had as well upon the Island of Tolen, as in the country of
Zuyt Beuelandt. After which neither he, nor his did bouge, till afterward
seeking to be revenged of the French, the Governor of Dourlans, with the
Spanish garrison which was in Saint Polin Arthois, (being mutined, or at the
least making a show to be in a mutine) made Amiens surprised by the Spaniard.
him, and the town was taken without any resistance. The Earl of Saint Pol
being within the town, and finding no man to make head against the enemy,
seeing all lost, he fled away, abandoning his wife and all his family, unto
whom the Governor showed himself very courteous, sending back the Lady and
all her train, and not suffering them to receive any wrong.

The town being taken, the Spaniard showed himself tractable enough; but
six days after, making a show to mutine for their pay, they spoiled it, and
then ransomed the Inhabitants, without any respect of Clergy men, or others.
The King

The King was fully resolved to have made hot war this summer in the year of
our Lord 1597. in the country of Arthois, but the surprise of this important
town, and the taking of Calais and Ardres from him by the Spaniard; made him
to change his design, and turn all his thoughts to recover the town of
Amiens. The The Spaniard fails to surprise Steenwyc.
in the country of Oueryssell, after the manner which follows. The day
before, some troops assembled at Ham near unto Ommen, at a certain hour of
the night, from whence they parted by secret, and unknown ways, carrying with
them certain portiue bridges with the which they had means to pass, and not
go through any villages, so they were no where discovered: but about two of
the clock after midnight they came near unto the town, and lodged
themselves in gardines which are behind a rampar (called Rondeel in their
language) until that the Moon was quite down, which was little after three of
the clock: Being then dark they gave a hot alarm at Onighen port, and at
that of the hospital, with about

In the mean time about a hundred of them that were in the gardines, went
closely into the town ditch, carrying ropes, hatchets and sithes to cut down
the palissadoe on the North side, by the which they go from the rampar to the
Churchyard, where 1597.
Malagambo, approached to second and assist the first: then soon after came the
third troop of three hundred men under the leading of Captain Harman ven Ens,
who also gave a charge, the which continued almost an hour, with such a
vehement force and fury, as they hard it to Blocxyel and to Cuinderl. Those of
the

The assailants thinking to divide themselves into two troops at the foot of
the rampar, to charge in two places, seeing it prevailed nothing for the great
resistance they found, in the end they made a more quiet retreat then their
approach was, carrying away (through the favor of the night) as many of their
dead men and wounded as they could, so as there were but two of there dead men
remaining in the ditches, whereof the one was some Lieutenant, and at the foot
of the rampar eight or nine hurt and half dead: the which were dispatched:
except two that were carried in^o the town, whereof the one was Lieutenant to
Malagambo, who declared the project Cornellis Been slain, and one Martin
Jacobs a gunner hurt, whereof he died afterward, with some nine or ten other
Bourgers, and four and five soldiars lightly hurt, and soon cured. These
undertakers at their retreat, least in the town diches, all the instruments
which they had brought for that exployt, from whence (with the seauenteene
Wagons full of dead men and hurt) they carried little honor: yet the town made
a fair escape, for it was in danger to have been suddenly surprised. Prince
Maurice maks an enterprise upon Veuloo which succeeds ill.


In May Prince Maurice had an enterprise well laid but succeeded ill, upon the
town of Venloo in the country of Geldres, at the which he was in person with
some horse and foot. The exploite should be done with two ships at the
opening Mathis Helt and his Lieutenant did their endeavors well, about fifty men
that were in it, seasing at the appointed hour both upon the Kaye and the
port, but as the second ship being the greater, could not so easily mount by
reason of the violence of the stream, and for that the ships lay so before the
town, as he could not come near to land his men, which were more in number,
the Bourgers had time (whilst that the others kept the port) to put them-seles
into arms, and to charge captanie Mathis, and withal the mariners of Liege
which were in their ships shot at him and his men behind: so as being
vnseconded, the Bourgers recovered the port where as the said Mathis Schalck
Captain of the ship were slain, and Mathis Lieutenant being wounded, was
carried away upon pikes by certain English soldiars. And so this enterprise
failed, to the great joy of the Bourgers.

At that time Sigismond King of Poland and Sueden, at the request of the King
of Spain, sent an Agent of his unto the general Estates of the united
Provinces (who took upon him the title of an Ambassador (called Paul Dziali a
gentleman of his househould, Ambassadors from the king of Poland to the Estates.
and one of his Secretaries, who arrived at the Hage in July, and was very
honorable received by the Estates and Prince Maurice. His chief charge was to
move the states and the Provinces in his Masters behalf, (being a mediator for
the King of Spain) to Estates gave him the reception and did him the honor
which his quality and person 1597


The Emperor also sent in the beginning of August to persuade them to a peace,
at the instance of the King of Spain: the Agent which he sent to the general
An Agent from the Emperor to the Estates.
Estates and to Prince Maurice, was Charles Nutzel of Honderpuihel, his
councellor in the kingdom of Hongarie, who had audience the tenth day of the
said month.

His legation was, that the Estates would admit and hear certain Ambassadors
in the behalf of the said Emperor, and other Princes of the Empire, to
propound some means for a peace betwixt them and the King. To whom a short
answer was

The French King presently after the surprise of Amiens by the Spaniards, sent
certain The French King prepares to besiege Amiens.
troops of horse and foot about the town, especially to those places where
there are bridges upon the river of Some, as at Pont Remy, Picqueni, Corbie and
other places, attending until his army were ready, to besiege it nere.

Cardinal Albertus (whom it did much import to preserve this town for the
King his Master, as being the chief keye of France toward Arthois) sent
all his Spanish forces to the fronters, besides the garrisons which he had in
Cambraie, Chastelet, Dourlans, Calais, Ardres, Monthulin and diverse other
places in those Cardinal Albert resolves to succor Amiens.
so soon ready, for want of money, or otherwise, so as before he could bring
his army to field, the King had so well intrencht his camp, as the Cardinal
held it not convenient to charge him: although that having put his men in order
of bataile, with his artillery, he had once or twice made some show, yet
having no intent to hazard any thing, so as the town was forced to yield in
September following, even in view of the Cardinal.

Whilst that the Cardinal was in those quarters of Picardie, with the King
Prince Maurice goes to field with his Army.
of Spaines forces, the general Estates of the united Provinces and Prince
Maurice,

In the beginning of August in this year of our Lord 1597. the Estates and the
Prince having resolved for to free the river of Rhine, the aforesaid Prince
caused all his army, with the Artillery to march, as well by land, as by the
rivers of Rhine and Wahal, with three or four hundred ships of all sorts
toward Rhinbercke: and before he came there, passing close by the town and
castle of Alphen, and offered a good composition, if they did yield before the
Canon was planted, 1597
Alpen yielded to the Estates.
hands the eight of August, departing with their arms and baggage, seeing they
had not attended any force, but only threats.

The same day the Prince advanced with all his army before the town of
Rhinberck, the which was that night all invested by land, the ships of war
and boats remaining before Wezel in the country of Cleues, for that they
could not easilye Rhinbercken vested.
mount up the Rhine: but the next day it was in like sort invested by water,
and the town ships taken, with a little Island in the midst of the Rhine,
opposite unto the town, where the Prince planted some pieces of battery,
besides those that were

The besieged made not any sallye worth the writing, only they did importune
the Camp with their Canon, and among others they shot once near unto the
Princes Tent, into the Pauillion of the Siegnior of Sonsuelt his Councellor,
and in his youth his Governor, the which came close by his head, as he rested
himself upon a Mattras, touching only his breeches which he had laid at his
beds head, without any other harm: whereupon they made a terrasse the height
of a man or more, to defend the Princes Tents.

The nineteen day of the month, the Prince having planted his battery at the
strongest part of the Town, being about six and thirty pieces: he caused it
to play from ten of the clock in the morning, until four in the
afternoon, that the wall began to fall, and to make a breach: the which did
so amaze the besieged (who were not less then a thousand fighting men, which
being resolute might have endured many assaults,) that although there were not
a sufficient breach, yet they required (that whereas they were summoned to
yield) to parle: the which the Prince did not refuse to give ear to, to spare
his men, and the effusion of blood: so as they agreed that by the next day the
Governor, Captains, Officers, Soldiers and Mariners, should depart with
their full arms, colors flying, Drums Rhinberck easily yielded to the
Estates.
of Wagons, with good conuoye to conduct them unto the Town of Geldre: with
whom all men, as well Clergy as Lay men might depart, and all the King of
Spaines officers: upon condition that what belonged to the King of Spain, with
the ships, and also the mooueables of the Countess of Nyenwenart being in
the town should remain there still: and the Bourgers should be maintained in
their freedoms and privileges.

Without doubt it was a speedy and easy purchase, of so strong a town, and
or so great importance, which did so much harm to all her neighbors, and
especially to them of Wezel, for that they make profession of the Protestants
religion. The besieged might well for their honor have held it some certain
days, and endured Herman vanden Berghe, marched with goodly troops of horse
and foot to succor them, at the least to refresh them with men, the which he
might well have done, considering the distance of the guarders one from another
in the Princes camp.

But as it is an ordinary thing, the greatest braggers are not the most
resolute souldiars; so Captain Snater Governor of the town (who with his
great words had braued the Estates and the Prince in Nymegen before he yielded
it) was at the first sight so amazed and terrified, (fearing that his brauadoes
would be remembered) as he presently fainted and lost all courage: He was in
truth much to that they were in any sort punished, but contrariwise the same
soldiars mutined soon 1597


This town being thus yielded, to the disgrace of Captain Snator and the
beseeged, The Archbishop of Cologne de^nds Rhin^ck as natural.
the Archbishop and Chapter of Cologne (of whose jurisdiction the town is)
sent there deputies unto the Prince, being yet in his camp, and after-wards to
the general Estates at the Hage, requiring them to leave the said town, as
being of their jurisdiction, free and neutrall: but the examples of the towns
of Bonne and Nuys, with the harm which the said town did unto the Estates,
giving free passage to the Spaniards to go into Freezland, and the robberies
and insolences which were committed by the garrison thereof, was the cause
that at that time they gave them small hope to recover it so easily from them,
who had spent so much to

The yielding of this town did so amaze them that were in garrison in that
mighty fort, seated also upon the Rhine (which captain Camillo Sachini
governor of the The fort of Camillo a^doned.
town of Maeurs, had caused to be built and called it by his own name the
fort of Camillo) being two hours going from Rhinebercke, as without attending
any seege, seeing only two ships of war approach, having set fire of it,
they abandoned it with two pieces of Artillery: which the Prince seeing he
caused it to be presently ruined, whilst that he was busy to repair the
breaches, and to make plain the camp before Rhinebercke, then having viewed
the town and Castle of Meurs, the situation and the country about it for the
planting of his camp: Schaef, he caused all his army to march the twenty six
of M^urs besee^y the ^es.
the month toward Meurs, the which he beseeged, making ready to force it;
but the seventh day following, which was the second of September, before they
had endured one cannon shot, although both town and castle were places of a
reasonable strength, and had eight or nine hundred men in them, wanting nothing
for their defense, especially in the castle: yet they were so faint-harted by
a soden amazement which took them, hearing the sommonce that was made to
yield, and thinking of the little or no means that was made to succor
Rhinberck, which was much stronger and of greater importance, hoping for no
succors when they had Mures yielded
drums beating, bullets in their mouths, matches light, and besides to carry
away one field piece the which had never been used during all the Estates
wars, but to win time (having much work elsewhere) they did grant them
all they demanded: More-ouer they had some Wagons granted them to carry away
their baggage, and a good conuoy to conduct them to some other place of more
better

Prince Maurice having thus freed the Rhine and cut of the Spaniards passage
into Freeseland, after that he had settled a good order in these three towns
and Castells, the which he had gotten in one month, with a little labor or
loss, he resolved in like manner to go and free the country of Freeseland
and Oueryssell: Prince Mau^ (...).
so as on the eight of September he past the Rhine with all his army, at
Rhineberck, causing his ships of war and munition to fall down the Rhine
at Ysseloort into the river of Yssel, unto Dousbourg in the Conty of Zutphen,
being determined to set upon Grolle, the which having beseeged two years
before, he left, for that the Spaniards under the leading of Colonel Mondragon
governor of the horse, under the command of Cont Frederick vanden Bergh,
brother to Cont 1597 Grolle beseeged.
Harman who then carried himself as governor of all Freeseland for the King
of Spain.

The first thing which Prince Maur ce did after that he had well intrencht his
camp, was to draw the water of the diches, and then to make galleries through
them, even to the foot of the rampar, that they might go covered to the sap.
The town was reasonable strong and could not be easily won without a good
battery, as well to take away their defenses, as to make a breach to come unto
the assault, wherefore he planted twenty four pieces of ordinance: so as John
Bovuier master of the fire-workes played the devil in sending forth his fiery
bullets, the which set fire of the town in diverse places, so as the beseeged
were much troubled to quench it, who in the mean time did their best endeavors
to defend Grolle somoned.
he would first sommon Cont Vanden Bergh and the beseeged to yield, the which
he did the seventeenth of the month, promising them a good composition, if
they did yield, and not attend the fury of the cannon: otherwise if he were
forced

The beseeged seeing the Estate of their town half burnt, the galleries,
sappes and mines, the great store of ordinance and all things ready to force
them, having little hope of succors and much less then the towns taken beyond
the Rhine; they were willing to yield to a good composition, and not to attend
any further extremity, promising to yield, and to depart the next day with all
there arms and baggage, And yielded.
leaving their Enseignes and Cornets, upon condition not to serve against the
Estates on this side the Rhine for the space of 3. months, and that they
should retire beyond the river of Meuse. The horsemen leaving their horses at
the Princes descretion; Va^den Bergh, although he wear his Cousin German
Brother and Sisters children. He granted them in like manner a great number
of Wagons to carry away their hurt men and baggage, unto the Rhine. Thus was
the town of Grolle yielded, at which seege there was no great loss of men of
either side, but the loss fell upon the poor Bourgers, who had their houses
burnt.

The Prince having laid the trenches of his camp even and put a sufficient
garrison Brefort beseeged by the Prince.
industry of man, as they seemed impregnable, being manned with three hundred
good soldiars which were sufficient for the capacity of those places, under the
command of a Lorraine Captain. The Prince the better to make his approches,
and to win a passage, caused many bauins and fagots, hardelles and plankes to
be cast in those places which were most inaccessible, upon the which on either

This done, and all things ready to force it, the Prince caused the beseeged to
be 1597.
Brefort Sommoned and refuses to yield.
not do them so great harm, as experience taught them afterward, but to
late: the Prince commanded to batter the Rauelins and ports of both sides with
all fury, the which was done from nine of the clock in the morning until
three in the after noone and a breach made at the Rauelin on the North side,
the which was son won by the bridges which he caused to be presently made:
The beseeged seeing this Rauelin beaten down, and that their began to be a
sufficient breach to give an assault, yea The beseeged desire to parle but to
late.
their first obstinacy was the cause that the Prince would not forbear, until
that he see an easy breach, and the women and children upon their knees,
holding up their hands and crying for mercy, the which preuayling nothing, and
the battery soon after ceasing, some soldiars advanced (it may be without
charge) to go and view the breach, where being aloft and seeing no man to
defend it, they entered, and were presently followed by others, who charged the
beseeged, which began to fly, and The town won by the breach and they retir^
to the Castle.
to make their retreat toward the castle, whereof there were some seauenty of
the hindermost slain. The Lorraine Captain durst not retier himself,
(fearing least his former wilfulnes would make his own men to kill him) but
he hid himself in a

The Prince would gladly have kept the town from spoil: and have spar^d, the
poor people, and avoided all disorders and insolences, which usually happen
in the like accidents, standing himself a long time in the breach to keep
and defend it, and would not suffer that any of the inhahitants should be taken
prisoner nor ransomed, yet was the town partly spoiled by them that entered
first: but being forbidden the spoil was not great: and the Bourgers had not
been in very ill case, if a soldiar seeking some adventure in the night, with
a wispe of straw burning (for The Castle yielded.
and could not be prevented, so as the whole town was burnt except eight
houses. The soldiars that were retired into the Castle cried out for grace,
yielding unto the Princes mercy: who gave them all their lives, leaving their
arms, and paying a convenient ransone, who having left the most apparent among
them for hostages for the said ransom, the rest retired toward their other
troops, as those of Grolle had done. The money which grew by these ransomes,
was divided by the Prince among the soldiars, reserving no penny to himself,
wherein he showed his bounty and clemency, for he might by the law of arms if
he had pleased, entreated these obstinat men roughly, as the Spaniard does in
the like case, causing all to be hanged

The Prince having taken the town and Castle of Brefort, and having given
order for all things, he turned head with his army toward the town of
Enschede, the which was great, but none of the strongest, nor yet of the
weakest places, meaning to make himself Master thereof before he past any
further. Enschede yields to the Prince.
Having made his approach with twelve pieces of ordinance, and caused it to be
somond, the garrison which was within it being better advised then they of
Brefort, Meuse. Thus the sa^d garrison departed the same day the Prince
arrived, being the 1597.


The next day the Prince went and planted his camp before the town of
Oldenzyel, in the same country of Oueryssel, reasonably great and well
peopled, having three Oldenziel besieged by the Prince.
double walls, and as many ditches, in the which there were six hundred
souldiars. The Bourgers who would not willingly see their town spoiled with
the cannon, nor their lives and goods in danger, knowing well that howsoever,
they must needs be taken by force or by accord, either soon or late: and
that attending longer they might have the worse composition, seeing the
ordynance and that they began to draw the water out of their ditches, they
persuaded the souldiars that they might And yielded
after a little parle, it was agreed that the souldiars should depart the next
day with their armies and baggage, upon the same composition that they of
Enschede did: And moreover that such as would depart, and could not so
speedily do it by reason of their affairs, should have three months time
to finish all their businesses, and then to depart freely without any
desturbance whether they pleased, with their goods and mouables.

Whilst that the Prince was before Oldenzyel, he sent his cousin the Earl of
Otma^sum yielded to the Estates.
Solms to besiege the little town of Otmarsum in Oueryssel, before the which
Charles Goor abandoned to the Estates.
they abandoned those places to the Earls pleasure, who presently caused the
forts to be ruined by the peasants of that quarter, who were very glad to be
employed about so good a work, whereby they might recover their quiet and
liberty. All the country of Ouerssel being freed, by the taking of Grolle,
Brefort, Enschede, Oldenzyel,

To finish the Princes victories for this year, and to free the countries of
Friseland, The towns and castle of Lighen ^emune in that q^rter.
Oueryssel and Gronning, so as the Spaniard should hold nothing beyond the
Rhine: there yet remained the town and castle of Linghen (places of great
importance) being Maurice, in recompense of the liberty which they had
recovered by his means and service.

Cont Frederic vanden Berghe, after that he had yielded up the town of Grolle
Cont Frederic in Linghen.
by composition, had retired himself into the castle of Linghen, which was all
that remained of his Government on that side the Rhine, being fully resolved
to keep that he should be besieged, he caused certain houses nere unto the
town to be burnt, 1597.


The Prince retyring out of the country of Oueryssell causing his army to
march that way on the twenty eight day of October, the same day he did inuest
the town, and for as much as on that side there were no enemies to be feared
but those which he besieged, he therefore (the better to accommodate his
souldiars) lodged them a little at large, and most of them in peasants houses,
the country being very much peopled. The Prince himself was lodged in a
Gentleman's house, nere half a mile from the town, and his horsemen dispersed.

The approches were easy to make, for that the town has many little hills
about it, so as in a short time (the season being reasonably mylde) his men
lodged in the The Prince does in^t Linghen.
counterscarpe, even upon the edge of the ditch, out of the which the water was
soon drawn, then were there certain galleries made through the ditches,
especially on the castles side. The slow arrival of the great ordynance, was
the cause the battery was not so soon ready: yet to take away their defenses,
the Prince did presently employ those few which he had brought with him: but
when the rest were come, he caused four and twenty cannons to be planted
against the castle: the which on the second day of November did batter with
such fury for eight hours together, at the two Rauelins, that Cont Frederic
seeing their meaning was against the castle, drew all the ordinance out of the
town into the castle, with the which he made an exchange

The galleries being finished against those two Rauelynes (whose work the
besieged could by no means hinder, by reason of the continual thundering of
the cannon and of the small shot, and that all the defenses of the rampar were
taken away) the Prince commanded his men to sap the said two Rauelyns:
Frederic perceiving it, and knowing his cousins usual course, which is, that
having a sufficient breach, he goes presently to the assault, he therefore
desired to make a good retreat in time, whereupon being sommoned, he desired
to parle, and to enter into capitulation.

The Prince did the more willingly give ear unto him, for that he feared the
season of the winter, which until that time had been very favorable, and to
Linghen yielded by composition.
win time to carry back his army. Wherefore on the twelfth day of the
month, Frederic accorded to yield, and to depart with arms and baggage,
furnishing him with certain wagons unto the next village: delivering the
castle the same day into the Princes hands, who instantly put men into it; the
Earl retyring his men into the town until the next day, that he departed.

It was a strange thing of these Brethren of Vanden Berghe, that of all the
places which the King of Spain committed unto them, they could never keep one
against the attempts of Prince Maurice their cousin, as Deuenter, Steenwic,
Grolle, Linghen,

Whilst that the Prince was camped before Linghen, the King of Denmarkes
Ambassadors came unto him, which were Arnold VVitfeldt Chancellor, and
Christian The King of Denmarkes Ambassadors in the camp before Linghen.
Bernekar a Councellor, who would not depart, until he was master thereof.
These Ambassadors returning from their Embassy out of England, came to Maurice
as they past along.

The some of their Legation which they did deliver as well by word as by
writing, 1597.


THat Christierne King of Denmark at this present reigning, remembering the
good love and neighborhood which King Frederic his Father had in his life
time with the deceased William of Nassau, Prince of Orange, the said general
Estates, and generally with all the Inhabitants of the united Provinces, who
had ever sought, and labored as much as he could possibly, that not only the
said united Provinces should be once discharged of those long, cruel and
devouring wars: but also that they and all Christendom might be restored to
an assured peace and quietness. So as it was to be hoped that this so holy a
design and intent of their said Lord and Elizabeth his dear Sister and Allie,
with all good and wholesome admonitions and exhortations, upon the horrible
amazements, doubtful events, and iminent dangers of this war; as in like sort
he would have them represented unto his Excelency and their Lordships.

His Majesty requiring also the said Estates, that all neutrall persons, which
have no community with this bad war, might have free navigations, comerece and
traffic of Merchandise, into any place whatsoever, so as they forbear to
carry any munition

Then afterward having been intercessors for Steyn Maltesen, Amptman of the
castle of Bahuysen in Denmark, that he might be paid the arrerages of his
account for the services which he had done to the particular Estates of
Holland and Friseland. The said Ambassadors having in his Majesty's name wished
all happiness and prosperity unto Prince Maurice and the Estates, with offer
of his love and good neighbor-hood,

Whereupon the general Estates of the united Provinces made aswere unto the
1597.
as follows.

THat the Lords of their assembly deputed and representing the said general
Estates, The Estates answer to the Ambassadors.
had been exceeding glad to here and understand the good remembrance which his
Majesty had retained, of the friendship, neighborhood, correspondency, and
ancient contracts which had bin of long time betwixt the crown of Denmark,
Norway etc. with the Provinces of the Netherlands in general: and especial of
the good opinion which the worthy King Frederic the second of that name King
of Denmark etc. had of them, and of the worthy remembrance which he has had
of the deceased William

That the said Estates will never forget the good affection which the deceased
King did carry to these Provinces, desiring to retire them from under the heavy
burden of war, and to restore them to peace and rest: assuring themselves
that his Majesty now reigning, has not only inherited his fathers Kingdoms
and Estates, but also Maximilian, having sent the Earl of Swarlsenbourg
thither: at the which refusing to yield any thing in the Kings behalf,
touching the reformed religion, nor allow the general Estates of all the
Netherlands to assemble together to that end, in like manner there came no good
of it. But during the time of the said convocation, the Spaniardes did so much
by their practices and warlike attempts, as in few months they got more upon
Holland and Zeeland, then otherwise they had done in many years.

Afterward as by the grace of God (the which the King of Spain has sought by
all means to break) the Provinces subject to the oppression of the Spaniards,
freed themselves, being assembled and in the end confederated with the said
Prince and the Estates of Holland and Zeeland, and their associates in the
town of Gant. Whereas they have made the pacification which followed, with an
order corcerning relligion, 1597.
Don Louis of Reguesence, and before the conclusion of the said Pacification,
Don John arrived in the country of Luxembourg: whereas many of the said
Provinces treated with him, and in the end agreed (notwithstanding the said
Pacification and union which followed) to receive him for their Governor,
except those of Holland and Zeeland and their Associats, who opposed
themselves, for that the King of Spain would not consent unto the said
pacification, nor the assembly of the general Estates, but conditionally that
it should not derogat, nor prejudice the Popish and Romish Relligion, and that
the said Estates should sweat to entertain the same. And Don John being
received into the said government, Don John: But when they could not attain
unto it upon reasonable and just conditions that were propounded unto him, they
were forced again to return to an open war, and to go

In the mean time the King of Spain sent the Barron of Selles, to the
general Estates assembled at Brusselles, who in outward show presented some
means of peace, but in secret he labored to corrupt the one and the other,
especially the heads of the army being then camped at Gemblours: whereof he
gained some, which was the cause. of the rout of the said army, by the absence
of those Noblemen that were retired at the same time: when as the Estates to
show their good and sincere intention and desire to a peace, called Mathias
Archduke of Austria to their government. After which rout, the said Archduke,
Prince of Orange and some others of the chief Noblemen, with the general
Estates, appointing to raise a new

Afterward there was an other conference of peace held in the town of
Louuaine, whereas the Ambassadors of the Emperor, of the French King and of the
Queen of England assisted: but for that they would not yield unto the least
point which was required touching reformation of relligion, all proved but
wind. As in like

So as in the end the states seeing that neither by intercession nor by any
other means King of Spain to be fallen from all right of Seigneurie and
command, which he 1597.
Rendezvous, and seat of war, to the oppression of all neighbor Princes,
and especially of them that were fallen from the Romish religion. The which the
Princes, chief Noblemen, and Estates of the said countries, being not able to
endure, the King of Spain took occasion to send the Duke of Alua with a
mighty army into these parts, to execute his said desseigne, by whom he
caused the Earls of Egmont and Horn to be apprehended, with a great number
Blout-raed, that is, a Council of blood, all

This was not yet sufficient for the King of Spain, that in those countries
there are above a hundred thousand persons dead for the religion, and that by
his charge

Besides in their particular Treaties with the Towns of Gand and Bruges, the
King of Spaines ministers propounded in the beginning goodly conditions, yea
for matter of religion: but when they came to resolve, they would not once
suffer them to open their mouths upon the least point. The fraudulent treaties
of the enemies, and the ways of hostility which the Spaniards have used
against the State and Crown of France, for so many years, do sufficiently
show, that all they do is have chosen Prince Maurice his son for the chief,
whom God has endowed with 1597.


That since the King of Spain has continued war against all Kings, Princes,
and Potentats, under color to maintain the Pope and his relligion: but the
true cause is to domineere over all Christendom, the which he has showed
plainly against

That the King of Spain has been always a persecuter of the relligion, the
government of Spain and Portugal, and the great council of the Inquisition
do sufficiently Defender of the Popes authority, who attributes unto himself,
and usurps the power to transfer kingdoms from one King or Prince unto an
other. Moreover the said Estates do most humbly beseech his Majesty to believe
that the beginning of a conference of peace with the King of Spain is full of
difficulties, and secret desseignes, which cannot be prevented. For as with
other Kings, Princes and commonweales conferences of peace do cool men's
affections to war, or at the least does hinder the means: the same reason
has greater efficacy with these Provinces and towns: for that many would
imagine that the reasons which had moved the said Estates to enter into
conference were so sollide, and built upon a foundation of such assured
conditions, as they could not fail to attain unto a firm peace, the which
would cause many inconveniences,

The said Estates do also beseege his Majesty to believe that they are very
sencible of the great miseries and calamities which these countries have
suffered and do suffer during these present wars, and of the effusion of
human blood. And in like manner they do duly weigh and consider of the
commodities which a good peace should Countries, as the ruin thereof and all
the inhabitants might thereby ensue. For these 1597.


As for that which the said Ambassadors have charge from his Majesty, to
insist unto the Estates, that all neutrall persons which have nothing common
with this war, might freely sail and traffic into all places, so as they
carry no munition of war to the enemy, and especially his Majesty's subjects,
in consideration of their

Touching Steyn Maltesen Collonell to his Majesty, and Amptman of Bahuysen, of
whom mention is made in the said proposition. The said Estates declare that
it is not long sense, that having taking information upon his pretensions in
quality of Lieutenant to the most famous William Lewis Earl of Nassau,
governor of Freezland, they have given him all satisfaction, and over and above
at his departure a gratuity of a chain of gold, so as in regard of his
services done unto the said Provinces, he cannot pretend any thing. And as for
the service which the said Colonel pretends to have Schagen, since the twenty
one of October 1580. unto the first of February 1586. that the Seignor Nicholas
Malte his Brother succeeded in his place, he was in like sort paid, as other
Captains which were in the same service had been, and are daily according to
the order and use of the country, with the which al soldiars content themselves
without any contradiction, leaving the rest of their pay unto the end of this
war. And in the mean time if it happen, that at the great suit and instance
of any Captains which leave their service, for some good considerations, be it
for their poor estate or otherwise, they come to accord with them, it is done
with such a small composition, abating

Finally the said Estates do humbly thank his Majesty for his good affection
toward them: beseeching God withal their hearts, that it will please him to
preserve his person, his realms, Estates, countries and subjects, in a happy
and prosperous government, good and long life, to the good and quiet of all
Christendom. As increase it. Thanking likewise the said Ambassadors of their
great pains which they 1597.


The said Ambassadors having received this answer, departed, after they had
been stately entertained by the Seignior of Pipenpoix, a Gentleman appointed
to that end by the Estates, as Steward: assisting at every meal to bear them
company, two of the Deputies of the Estates: and being richly and honorably
gratified with goodly presents, they went (as we have said,) to see, Prince
Maurice, in his Camp before Linghen, where they were likewise well entreated
and defrayed, as long as

According to so many Ambassages and pursutes tending to a peace, at the great
instance of the King of Spain: Cardinal Albert his Lieutenant, sent in the
beginning of the year 1598. his Commissioners unto the French King, the which
were, 1598. The king of Spain seeks sor peace.
the President Richardot, Joan Baptista Taxis and Lewis Verreyken, Audiencier,
to seek some good course for a peace betwixt him and the king his Master, who
should be his father in law (the Infanta of Spain being promised him in
marriage) whereunto the Queen of England and the general Estates of the
united provinces did also inuit him. For he knew well that so long as those
three great and mighty countries

On the other side the French King much incensed at the indignities which he
had received of his own subjects, leaguers and others; knowing the desolation
of his country, and that his subjects by this war were so impouerished, as
they could endure no more. And to recover that by the way of arms, which the
Spaniard had taken from him in two or three years before, he must employ much
time, loose The French King gives care to a peace.
means to feed an army there, for the recovery of Calais, Dourlans, and
other places: wherefore he was advised by his Council, to send his Deputies
thither, which were the Lords of Bellieure and Sillery, both of his council,
and the General of the Friars as a mediator; to enter into conference with the
Cardinals Commissioners, making the place of their assembly at Veruine, where
they continued long before they could resolve.

The Queen of England, and the general Estates sent their Ambassadors into
Ambassadors sent from England and (...) Estates into France.
France, concerning this treaty, as nothing pleased with this conformity of
the The Estates send Ambassadors to the Queen of England,
done concerning this peace: the said ambassadors were John Duyvenvorae knight,
Siegnior of Warmont, Admiral and great forrester of Holland; Master John
Vanderwerck John Hottinga a Squire, both Deputies of the general Estates. And
although it seemed according to the league made in the year 1596. betwixt
France and England, in the which the united Provinces were comprehended, that
the King should not have proceeded in this treaty of peace with the Spaniard,
without the consent of his allies: yet the French King thought 1598.


1. First it is agreed, that the Treaty of peace concluded and resolved,
betwixt the Articles of peace betwizt the French king and the king of Spain.
Henry the fourth, and Philip the second, in confirmation of the articles
contained in the treaty of peace, made at Chasteau Cambresis 1559. betwixt the
said Catholic King, and Henry the second the French king, deceased, of high
and worthy memory, which treaty the said Deputies have a new confirmed in all
points, without innouating any thing, but all shall remain firm, except that
which shall be expressly derogated by this present Treaty.

2. According to the which, from the day of the date of this present treaty,
betwixt the said Kings, their children borne or to be borne, heirs and
successors, realms, countries and subjects, there shall be a good, firm, sure
and stable peace, confederation, perpetual league and amity: they shall love
one another as brethren, procuring by all means, the good, honor and
reputation, one of another, and shall avoid as much

3. And by means of the said peace, and strict amity, the subjects of either
side whatsoever, may (in keeping the laws and customs of the country) go,
come, remain, frequent, converse and return in peace, from one unto the
other, in trade of Merchandise, or conuersing and treating together as they
shall think good, by land, sea, or rivers. And their subjects shall be
defended and maintained, paying the duties in all accustomed places, which
shall be appointed by their Majesty's, and their successors.

4. All letters of Mark and reprisall which have been given for what cause
so-euer, shall be suspended: and here-after none shall be given by either of
them, to the prejudice of the others subjects, but against the chief
offenders, their goods and adherents, and that in case of manifest denial of
Justice: whereof and of the letters of sommation and requisition thereof, those
that pursue the said letters of Mark and reprisall, shall make proof as it is
required by law.

5. The towns, subjects and inhabitants of the Counties of Flanders, Arthois
and other Provinces of the Netherlands, together with the realms of Spain,
shall enjoy the preuiledges, freedoms and liberties, which have been granted
by the Kings of France, predecessors to the most Christian King: and in like
manner the towns, subjects

6 It is also agreed in case the catholic King, should give or transfer by
testament, 1598.
Isabella his eldest daughter, or to any other, all his Provinces of the
Netherlands, with the counties of Bourgongue and Charolois: that all the said
Provinces and Counties, are meant to be comprehended in this present treaty,
as they were in the year 1559. together with the said Lady Infanta, or he in
whose favor the said King has disposed it, neither shall it be needful to
make a new treaty to that effect.

7. The subjects of either Prince, as well clergy as secular men, shall
return (although they have served the contrary party) into their benefices and
offices to the which they were preferred before the end of December 1588.
except Curates,

8. And the said subjects and servants of either side shall return into their
immovable goods and rents, notwithstanding all donations, concessions,
declarations and sentences given by contempt, in the absence of the parties,
and they not heard, by reason of this war, which sentences and judgments
given, both civil and criminal shall remain void, without any effect, as if
they had not been, restoring

9. Such as have been preferred to benifices of either side, being in the
collation, presentation or disposition of the said Kings, or other lay persons,
shall abide and remain in the possession, and enjoy the said benefices, as
being duly and orderly preferred.

10. In favor of this peace, and to give both the Kings contentment one of
another, it is agreed that they shall restore really and without fraud one
unto another, whatsoever shall be found to have been taken, seized and held
by them, or others having charge from them, or in their names, one in another
country. That is to say, the most Christian King shall yield unto the
Catholic King, the possession of the county of Charoloys, with the
dependances and appurtenances, to be enjoyed fully

11. And in like manner the Catholic King shall restore unto the said
Christian 1598.


12 In regard of Calais, Ardres, Monthulin, Dourlans, la Capelle, and
Chastelet, the said places shall be restored by the Catholic king or his
ministers, effectually without fraud, and without any delays or
difficulties, upon any pretext soever, unto him or them that shall be deputed
by the most Christian king, precisely within two months, from the day of the
date of these presents, in the same estate they now are in,

13. As for Blauet, the restitution shall be also made effectually and
faithfully, without any delay or difficulty, under what pretext or color
soever, to him or them that shall be deputed by the most Christian king, and
that within three months from the day of the date of these presents. And the
said Catholic king may ruin and beat down the fortifications made by him or
his, in the said Fort of Blauet, and other places,

14. Restoring the said places, the Catholic king may carry or cause to be
carried away all artillery, boullets, arms, victuals, and other munition of
war, which shall be found in the said places at the time of the restitution.
And the soldiers and men of war, which shall depart out of the said places,
may carry with them all the mooueable goods which belong unto them: but it
shall not be lawful for them to exact any thing of the inhabitants of those
places, nor of the champian country, nor to endomage their houses, nor to carry
away any thing belonging to the said inhabitants.

15, And to the end the soldiers which are in Blauet, may the more speedily
retire into Spain, the most Christian king shall fit them with ships and
mariners: in which

16. The Deputies do promise for assurance of the restitution of the said
places, as soon as this present Treaty shall be ratified by the most
Christian king, to deliver him four hostages, such as he shall choose, being
subjects to the said Catholic king, the which shall be well and honorably
entreated, befitting their qualities: which restitution being made, and really
performed, the said hostages shall be duly set at liberty without any delay.
Provided always, that the restitution of the six

17. And touching matters contained in the Treaty of the year 1559. which
have not been executed according to the articles thereof, the execution shall
be made, in that which is to be executed, as well for the tenor in fee of the
contie of Saint Pol, the limits of the countries of both Princes, lands held in
surcease, exemptions of customs, and foreign impositions pretended by them of
Bourgongne, Bishoprike of Teroane, Abbay of Saint John of Mant in the Duchy
of Bouillon, restitution of some places pretended of either part, according to
the said treaty, and all other questions which have not been decided, as it
was then agreed: there shall be deputies and arbitrators

18. And for as much as in the division of the lands appointed to the diocesses
of Arras, Amiens, Saint Omer and Boulogne: there are some villages of France
under the Bishoprics 1598.


19. All prisoners of war being detained of either side shall be set at
liberty, paying their charges, and what they may otherwise justly owe, without
being tied to pay any ra^some, unless they had first agreed and promised it:
and if there be complaint made of the excess thereof, the Prince in whose
country the prisoners are detained, shall moderate it.

20. All other prisoners subjects to the said Kings, which through the
calamity of the wars may be detained in their Majesty's Galleys, shall be
presently delivered and set at liberty without any delay, upon what pretext
so-euer, demanding nothing for their ransom nor charges.

21. And there shall be reserved unto the said Catholic king of Spain, and
the Infanta his eldest daughter and their successors, all their rights, actions
and pretensions, which they pretend to belong unto them in the said realms,
countries and siegnories, or elsewhere, for any cause whatsoever, the which
neither he nor his predecessors have not expressly renou^ced, to make his
pursuit by an amiable course of Justice, and not by arms.

22. And touching that which has bin said by the Catholic kings deputies,
that to Gaspar of Geneue, Marquis of Lullin, councellor of Estate, Chamberlain
and Colonel of the said Dukes guards, his Lieutenant and Governor in the
Duchy of Aoust, and the city of Vrce, his Deputy as appears by his
commission hereunto inserted, that the said Duke his master has the honor to
be issued from the brother of the Christian kings great grandfather, and from a
cousin german to the Queen his Mother: that his intention is to give the
king contentment, and as his most humble kinsman to acknowledge him with

23. It has bin concluded and agreed, that the said Duke shall be received and
comprehended in this treaty of peace. And to signify the desire which he has
to give the most Christian king contentment; he shall restore the town and
castle of Berra, within two months after the date of these presents,
faithfully and without delay or difficulty, upon any pretext whatsoever: and
the said place shall be delivered by the Duke, to him or them that shall be
deputed by the king precisely within the time, and

24. It is also agreed, that the said Duke shall disauow and abandon Captain
la Fortune, being in the town of Seure in the county of Bourgogne, and that he
shall not give to him ^nor to any other that shall usurp the said town
against the most Christian

25. And touching all other questions and differences betwixt the most
Christian king and the said Duke of Sauoy, the said deputies in their name do
agree, for the good of the peace, that they shall be referred to the judgment of
our holy father Pope Clement the 8. to be decided by his holiness within one
year, from the day of these presents, according 1598


26. And according unto this it has been agreed, that from this present there
shall be a firm and stable peace, amity and good neighbor-hood, betwixt the
said King and

27. The subjects and servants of either side both Clergy and temporal,
although they have served a contrary party, shall return and enjoy all their
goods, offices and benifices, as has been said for the subjects of the two
Kings, the which is not to be understood of Governors.

28. As for prisoners taken in the wars they shall be entreated as it is
agreed betwixt the two Kings as it is before expressed.

29. And the treaties made heretofore with the most Christian Kings Kenry the
second in the year 1559 at Chasteau Cambresie; Charles the 9. Henry the 3. and
the said

30. Notwithstanding there is reserved unto the said most Christian King and to
his successors, al their rights, actions and pretensions, which they challenge
to belong unto

31. In this peace shall be comprehended by a common consent of the most
Christian and Catholic Kings (if they will be comprehended). First on the
Catholic Kings part our holy father the Pope, the holy Apostolic sea, the
Emperor of Romans, the Archdukes his brethren and cousins, their realms and
countries, the Electors, Princes, towns and Estates of the holy Empire,
obeying him: the duke of Bauaria, the duke of Cleues, the Bishop and country
of Liege: the Hans towns, and the Contie of East-Friseland. And the said
Princes do renounce all practices, promising hereafter not to Farneze his
brother, the duke of Mantua, the duke of Vrbin, the chief houses of Colonne
and Vrsins, Plombin, the Earl of Sala, the Earl of Calorino, to enjoy in the
like manner the benifit of this peace, with an express declaration that the
most Christian King may neither directly nor indirectly, by himself, or by any
others molest any of them. And if the most christian King pretends any thing
against them, he may seek it 1598.


32. And on the behalf of the most christian King shall be comprehended, if they
please, the Pope, the Apostolic Sea, the Emperor, the Princes Electors, Clergy
and Secular, towns and commonalties of the holy Empire and especially the Cont
Palatin Elector, the Marquis of Brandenbourg, the duke of Wyrtenberg, the
Landtsgraue of Hessen, the Marquis of Hansbac, the Earls of East-Friseland,
the Hans towns, according to the ancient alliances, the king and kingdom of
Scotland according to the ancient treaties, allyances and confederations which
are made betwixt the Realms of France and Scotland. The Kings of Poland,
Sueden and Denmark, the duke and signiory of Venise, the thirteen Cantons of
Suisses, the three Cantons of Grisons, the bishop and Siegneury of the
country of Valays, the Abbot and town of Saint

33. And there shall be also comprehended in this present treaty, all others
which by common consent of the said Kings may be named, so as within six
months after the publication of this treaty, they give their letters of
declaration and bond, as is requisite in that case.

34. And for the greater assurance of the peace, and of all points and articles
contained therein: this treaty shall be veryfied, proclaimed and registered, in
the court of Parliament at Paris, and in all other Parliaments of the realm of
France, and chambers of accounts of the said Paris: as in like manner it shall be
proclaimed, verefied and registered

Which points and articles above mentioned and comprehended, with all that is
contained in every of them, have been treated, accorded, past and promised by
the deputies, in the names above mentioned. The which by virtue of their
commissions have promised and do promise upon bond of all the present and
future goods of their said Masters, that they shall be by them inuiolably
entertained, observed and accomplished, and also that they shall deliver one
unto an other autenticall letters, signed and sealed,

The Cardinal Albertus of Austria, to whom the Infanta of Spain was promised,
and 1598 The Admiral of Arragon sent Ambassador to the Emperor.
Ernestus, and the petty Kings of the League in France with hope of this
alliance) had before the treaty of peace, by the Kings advice and
commandment, and of his council of Spain, sent Don Francisco de Mendoza,
Marquis of Guadalesta, Admiral of Arragon, in Embassage to the Emperor, to
demand six points of great importance of him, the which if he had obtained
and put in execution, they would have greatly served for the augmentation of
the lymmits of his Estate, joined to them of the Infanta, and to make war
with more ease against the general Estates of the united Provinces. To every
of which points, answer was made by the Emperor, and replied unto by the
Admiral, and by his Imperial Majesty again

That it would please his Imperial Majesty, (for the reasons which had been
afterward The first of the six points demanded of the Emperor.
delivered unto him) to make the King of Spain viccar of Becanson. This
vicariat or Vicontie of Becanson (which is an Imperial town in the County of
Bourgogne) did belong unto the deceased William of Nassau, Prince of Orange,
whose goods (which were very great) the King of Spain had confiscated, lying
in the French country, and throughout all the countries of his obedience.
Wherefore he required that the Emperor using the right of confiscation,
against the said Prince, and his children;

That his Imperial Majesty was not ignorant, how much it did import the towns
under the King of Spaines obedience that were neighbors to Becanson, that the
said town should be maintained in peace under the devotion of the Empire.

The Emperor seeing himself thus importuned and pressed, desiring first to see
what the issue should be, as well of the treaty of peace which they expected,
as of the marriage of Cardinal Albertus his brother, and of the designs
already proiected upon Germany, being loath to do any thing in have, which
he might afterward repent and reap small honor by and the French King take
it in very ill part: he answered again. That for certain great
considerations he must confer with the Princes of the Empire touching the
asoresaid Vicariat. And to

That his Imperial Majesty would openly declare himself against those that
hinder the 15981 The Admiral^ second demand.
progress of the peace betwixt the Estates of the Netherlands. This was as
much to say as by an intestine civil war to set all Germany on fire, which
was the maine point whereat the King of Spain and the Pope had long aspired:
whereof they had oftentimes seen some little flames, the which notwithstanding
by the wisdom of the Princes were soon smothered and quenched. Whereupon the
Emperor answered. That upon this article he attended the report of such as had
been deputed by the Empire, whereof his Imperial Majesty would not fail to
advertise the King of Spain upon all occurents: and how much his Imperial
Majesty desired that the said countries might be reduced to a good peace.
These deputies were certain Ambassadors, as well from the Emperor, as from the
Princes of the Empire, who sent Charles Nutzel of

By this reply the King of Spain could not more openly accuse the said
Princes of the Empire then he did, councelling him to punish them, as those
which by their winking and dissimulation, gave nourishment unto the mischief,
hindering the course and advancement of the peace. But the Admiral did therein
much mistake himself, being ignorant, or at the least not considering, that
the Estates of the united Provinces, having absolutely rejected and abiured the
King of Spain, refusing to trust any more in him: had resolved never to enter
any more with him into any conference of peace, nor with any other coming on
his behalf. Wherefore the Emperor (who had so often

That his Imperial Majesty would appoint a Governor and council in the
countries of The third demand.
Cleues and Iuilliers etc. Thereby the King of Spain or the Cardinal Albertus,
his future son in law, did plainly descouer, how they did gape after these
dutchies of Cleues and Iuilliers, and the other Estates and Signeuries of Duke
John of Cleues, rainging at this present in good and perfect health. Grounding
upon this hope, that the said duke being without children, and therefore his
Duchess, Earldomes and Signeuries, should by right Albertus. Or else, (the which
has appeered by the effects) that he would not attend duke John's death, but
seize upon them by force and practices in his life time, as the said Admiral
sought to do soon after, and in deed did too much, yea he was expressly
commanded from the court at Brusselles (as we will show hereafter) not to
desist for any thing in the world, from the conquests of the Dutchies of
Cleues, Iuilliers and Berghe: seeing there was speech of marrying this Duke
John, with the Duke of Lorrains daughter, as after happened. Wherein the
Emperor seeming to be of the same hope and expectation with the King of
Spain, answered: As for the countries of Cleues and Iuilliers, should have no
cause to enter into suspicion: which the Emperor himself is forced to 1598.


This answer did the more confirm the King of Spaines designs, and the
sylent pretention of the Emperor unto the said countries of Cleues, Iuilliers
etc. So as it seemed this was the very fable of the Bears skin, for his
reply. He required that it would please his Imperial Majesty, to declare as
soon as might be his intention touching Cleues and Iuilliers, that thereupon
the Catholic King might have his forces ready. He required also that his
Imperial Majesty would send for the Princes pretending right to the said
countries, that hereafter they should not meddle, nor seek to make any
Innouations, tending to the blemish of the Emperors authority, or the
prejudice of his Catholic Maicstie, yea that his Imperial Majesty should call
away the commissioners

This reply did plainly lay open the King of Spaines designs upon the
countries of Cleues and Iuilliers, requiring that the Emperor, would send for
the Princes pretending right (the which are Princes of the Empire that is, the
duke of Prusse, and the two Brethren dukes of Dieux Ponts, by their wives,
Sisters to duke John) and to charge them not to attempt any thing to the
diminution of his Imperial authority, Authors of bad practices:) and the
deputies of the King of Spain, who in this Diet, made show not to fear any
thing more (with a certain Nuncio of the Popes who was of the same metal)
then that these countries should fall into the hands of some Protestant Prince,
(whom they called heretic) such as the Princes pretending interest are, which
would be (as the King said of the town of Aix) to pernicious a thing for his
neighbor countries, which might be infected with the poison of their heresies:
As for Cleues and Iuilliers he would send for the Princes pretending right,
that they should not meddle, seeing it belonged only to his Imperial
Majesty to dispose among them, hoping they would obey him. Wherein the Emperor
might have been deceived, for these Princes would not so soon have yielded
unto him: and this had been an occasion to put all Germany in war and
combustion.

The forth demand was. That the sentence given against them of the town of
Aix, might be presently put in execution, without any delay. It did greatly
import the King of Spain and Cardinal Al^ertus, for the attayning unto their
designs, to have the town of Aix (situated in the country of Iuilliers,
near unto Lembourg) at their re-establishment of a Catholic Romish Magistrate
in the said town, the extirpation 1598.
Albertus with the assistance of the Bishop of Liege, the executioner of the
said sentence, by virtue of the Emperors commission, has done since, to the
disolation of the said town, and especially of those that did pursue it, who
for the most part died soon after their re-establishment: and those which
remain languishing in misery. And although the Emperor touching the said town
of Aix, had the like desire with the King of Spain, yet the Admiral full of
choler replied. That in regard of them of Aix, they could not exceed the
bounds of ordinary Justice, as being unworthy, that they must exceed the
execution of the sentence, for that the lymmited time is almost expired, and
there is no likelehood that the time will draw them to obedience, but rather
make them obstinate: else the Catholic King shall be forced to provide for it by
such means as he shall think fit. What the Emperor answered to this rash
reply, may be seen in the demand following, which was.

That it would please his Imperial Majesty to provide some speedy remedy for
the Hans The fifth demand.
towns, to restrain the boldness of English pirates. The King of Spain to
play the good companion, and to make himself necessary to the towns of the
East country, as Lubecke, Rostich Hambourg, Bremen, Stoade and others (of whose
service he has most need) will let them understand by this demand, that he
has a care of them, although he knew well that the Emperor could provide no
other remedy then that which he had that his Imperial Majesty, had
propounded in the last imperial Diet held at Ratisbonne, diverse complaints of
many Hans towns, to the Estates of the Empire: the advice of which Estates was
written unto the Queen of England, who did answer so impertinently and
discourtuosly, as it is better to conceal it then to publish it. Whereupon his
Imperial Majesty has thought to surcease, until other like or more grievous
complaints shall come, to provide for it by the Imperial authority: the which
his Imperial Majesty is fully resolved to employ, whereby they may easily
conceive that there is not any thing ommitted that The sixth demand.
As the King of Spain had no other means to reduce his rebellious subjects to
obedience, saying. That it was fit to attend the report of such as are deputed
to make motion of 1598.


It is the ordinary practice of the Spaniard rather to suffer the Turk to rule
and dominier, then to cease making war against the Protestants of the
relligion, especially against the united Provinces, whom they hold to be worse
then Turks. Whereunto his Imperial Majesty answered, that he could not grant
unto the King of Spain, a general pattent or leave to raise as many regiments
of soldiers as he pleased, seeing that in former times it was not done: they
might well have given leave heretofore to raise some Regiments along the river
of Danou, confining upon the Turk, wherein he

The Estates of the united Provinces had a very expert Master of their
fier-workes, The death of John Bou vier the master of the fire works.
called John Bouvier a Liegeois, who by his inventions had made sharp war
against the Spaniard, in all the towns which Prince Maurice had beseeged,
coming to the government unto that day. In May being busy with his servants
to fashion certain grenadoes or bales of wild fire, with other fire works for
provision in the town of Dordrecht, in the places appointed to that end, it
happened by misfortune, that the fire with the which they do use to melt the
rosine and other consuming and twice, having some respite betwixt, the fire
lying smothered in that ruinous matter, so 1598.


At the same time there was another treason discovered, the which was
undertaken An other treason against Princ^ Maurice.
at the persuasion of the Jesuits, against the person of Prince Maurice, by a
Flemming called Peter Pan, a poor banquerout, borne in the town of Ypre.
Who upon certain speeches delivered by him, and some suspicion gathered
thereby, was apprehended

Whereas Peter Pan borne at Ypre, a Cooper by his trade, having been a
Broker His sentence.
or banquerout Merchant, and at this present a prisoner in the behalf of the
Scout or Bayliffe of Leyden, has confessed, being out of Yrons, and free from
torture, that some years past he being accustomed to make provision of Butter
for the College of Jesuits at Douay. It happened that one Melchior
Vande-walle, servant to the said Jesuits, cousin german to the prisoner,
about fiueteene days before Shrouetide, came unto the prisoners house at Ypre,
requiring him to send Butter for their College. And as the prisoner was then
absent from his house about his affairs, the said Vande-walle Mary ^oyets his
wife, who was much addicted to the Jesuits, (as she afterward told him) to
kill his Excellency, whom he called Duke Maurice. That being returned to his
house, the said Melchior Vande-walle had used some speeches to him of it,
building upon the prisoners words that he was wonderfully decayed in his
estate, having no means to satisfy his creditors. The said Vande-walle
telling him in effect, that he knew how to free all, if he would go into
Holland and find the means to kill his Excellency. And as he made some
difficulty to do it, he was solicited by his own wife thereunto, saying,
that he should make no difficulty to kill such seducers and peruerters; and
that if she had been a man, she would undertake it and execute Melchior
Vanden-walle desired him to go with him to Douay, to confer with the
Fathers, assigning him to the Rector of the Jesuits. Afterward the said
Vande-walle being returned to Douay, the said prisoner to reckon with diverse
persons, and to make his business straight, especially with the said Jesuits
at Douay, went of Ashwednesday from Ypre toward Lille, from thence to Tournay,
and so to Mons, where he was for a time arrested for debt; from thence he
returned toward Tournay, and so went back again to Mons, where he was again
arrested, but being delivered, he went to Valenciennes and so to Douay, where
he was in the Rogation week, and did eat three or four times with the
Provincial, Provost and Rector of the Jesuits, with whom he made his
accoumpts, so as there was coming to him some five pounds Nicholas of Lalain a
Merchant of hemp. That being with the said Provincial, Provost and Rector of
the Jesuits, they had some speech again with him, of that whereof Melchior had
spoken, which was to murder his Excellency, showing him the means, that
being a Cooper by his trade, he should go into Holland, where he should
work some five, six or eight months, either at Delft, Leyden, or at the
Hage: And in the mean time he should watch some opportunity to kill the
Prince, either with a knife, Poynard, or Pistol, which he should buy and
carry in his pocket, to use, were it at the Court, in the street, or in any
other place, where he might find his best advantage. And the more as well as
he could. And if it should chance that he should dye there, 1598
Hansken Pan his son should be made Chanoine of Tournaye. Upon all which
presentations and promises the said prisoner having confessed himself the next
day to the Provincial, going to say mass, he had absolution, and thereupon
received the Sacrament. During the which confession he promised again to
execute this design. Whereupon the Provincial said unto him, these words, Go
in peace, for thou shall go like an Angel in the guard of God. And to advance
his voyage he received a letter of exchange from the said Jesuits for twelve
Francis Thibault dwelling near the Iacopins, with which dispatch and
resolution the prisoner parted from Douay, came to the Abbay of Flines from
thence by Orchies to Tournay, then to Oudenarde, Dendermonde, Basserode and so
by boat to Antwerp: where having received the said twelve pounds, he sent
eleauen pounds with his cloak and his breaches to his wife by one Deric Bull
dwelling nere the corn market of Zeeland, to maintain her house and to clothe
her children: sending withal a letter to his wife, and writing that he went
into Holland for the business she wot of, and that she should pray unto God
for him. So the prisoner, with this resolution and without pasport, having
hidden himself in a ship came

All which being of bad consequence, having in this sort intended to kill and
murder the said famous Prince Maurice, borne Prince of Orange, Earl of Nassau
etc. Governor and captain General of the united Provinces, and by that means
deprive the said Provinces of their head and of the great and notable services:
which they receive, and which by the grace of God he does for the defense and
protection of the said Provinces and the good Inhabitants thereof, together
with the preservation and defense of the Christian reformed religion, and of
the freedoms, liberties and privileges of the said countries; to the rooting
out of the imperious rule of the Spaniards: and to put suffer himself to be
seduced and suborned, by this bloody and murtherous Iesuitical 1598.
sect, the which as it is notorions to all the world, seek out a thousand
practices, treasons and murtherous designs, and put them in practice, to
murder all Kings, Princes and Potentates, which will not adhere to the Popes
superstitions (which they call the Catholic, Romish Religion). Whereupon the
Sheriffs of the town of Leyden, having seen and heard the criminal
conclusion taken by the scout of the said town against the prisoner, for the
causes above mentioned. Having also heard the consession of the prisoner, with
the informations and all other circumstances. And having thereon the advice of
the deputies of the Estates of Holland and West-Friseland, with opinions of the
great and Provincial councels, being thereto required by the said Estates,
having considered all with mature deliberation and council, doing Justice in
the Francis Vander Merwen, Ian Isenhoursen Vander Nesse, Franc Cornelisen Van
Thorenvlyet, Cornellis Thibour, Clais Cornelisen Vanden Noort and Ian Van
Baesdorp the younger, the two and twenty day of June, and the same day the
prisoner was executed.

The King of Spain sent unto Cardinal Albert in the beginning of this year,
about Four thousand Spaniards sent to the Cardinal.
four thousand foot of Spaniards, under the leading of Don Sanchio de Leva,
being commanded by four Colonels, in forty ships great and small: whereof the
smaler entered into Calais without any danger, for that the Estates ships of
war were forced to way anchor by reason of the foul wether. But the torment
being past, they came time enough to take one of the greatest, in the which
there were 150. Spaniards, Alonzo Sanches de Villareal and two Pilots; and to
make four more run on ground, the which the Spaniard did willingly to save the
soldiars that were in them. These pilots being brought to Flussing and
examined, confessed, that there were twelve Gallions sent to the Tercers, to
fetch the treasure which was come from the Indaes: and that they had left some
70. ships at the Groyne whereof four were furnished like men of war, with
about Sanchio de Leva having lodged these troops in diverse parts in Flanders,
went to Brussels, which made many suppose that the Cardinal did not greatly
trust the soldiars that were borne in the country, which made them begin to
contemn him. On the other side the general Estates of the united Provinces,
perceiving that the traffic and negotiation with Spain (by reason of the The
united Provinces sail to the Indes.
daily arrests of their ships, goods and mariners) decayed: finding themselves
freed from the bridle of the Spaniard (who would never suffer them to sail to
the East or West Indes, to Ginney, nor to the Molucques) they gave leave to
their merchants to sail thither, yea they assisted them with artillery and
other munition, to go and seek trade in the East Indies, and in those
Islands, whereas the Portugal had no command. So as four Maurice, (of the
Princes name) the 2. Holland, the 3. Amsterdam, and the 4. being but a
pinasse, was called the Dove: these having doubled the Cape of Bona Espranza,
seen the Island of Madagascar, bin at Sumatra, at Iaua Mayor, in the town of
Bantan, at Saint Helena and in many other Islands, from whence they brought
certain boys whom they caused to learn the Dutch tongue, they returned into
Holland in August the year before. And this year 1598. (as in the first
voyage they had not made any great proffit) meaning to return with the same
ships, an other company of merchants joined with them raighting forth eight
ships, all called by the names of the eight united Provinces: their

Balthazar of Moucheron (who had before sent to descouer the straight
northwards) did also send two ships out of Zeeland to the said Islands, the one
called the Lion, the other the Lioness. And in the like manner certain
merchants of Middelbourg sent forth three, the Sun, the Moon and an other:
the Moon discharging her cannon 1598


An other company of famous Merchants of Rotterdam did set forth five ships,
whereof the Admiral was called the Hope, and commanded by James Mathieu a
worthy merchant. These parted the 26. of June from the Island of Bryele, with
about five hundred men, among the which there were many soldiars: taking their
course to Bresil, and to the Straights of Magellan, and so farther to seek
their adventure and traffic. Maurice, under the conduct of captain Julian
Van Cleerhagan, as general (of whom mention is made in the tumult of Vtrecht)
and of Gerard Stribos as Admiral, having all charge to go to the Island del
Principe. Their voyage in going was not so fortunat as Moucheron would have
desired, for whereas it is commonly sailed in two months, they were almost
five upon the way, having great contrarieties of wind, and some mischances,
they arrived at the Islande del Principe on the ninth of August, whereas they
found the ship of Anthony Clear which was of their company, in the which
Cornellis of Moucheron Nephew to the signior of Moucheron commanded. Who being
well known in the said Island, by reason of his great traffic he had
Cleerhagen, by the which he made himself master of the place without striking
stroke, for the said Cornellis had advertised the Islanders before, that the
signior of Moucheron was in person in the fleet, who passing that way was
desirous to salute them, and to recommend his men unto them, who commonly past
that way; entreating them in his name that they would go aboard his ship. So
as both the new and the old Governor, the father Vicar of the place, and all
the officers unto the number of fifteen of the chief came aboard, where they
were very kindly entertained.

Then after they had made good cheer, the general Cleerhagen lets them
understand Maurice, of whom they depended. These Islanders seeing themselves
thus surprised; seemed to be very glad of their coming: and consented
presently to their demand, and after they had taken an oath of fidelity in the
hands of the said Cleerhagen, they went all to land, whereas the general was
in the name of the signior of Moucheron proclaimed Governor of the Island.
There after the oath taken, the Spaniards and Islanders thinking to shake of the
yoke (which yet was not after the Spanish manner) made a conspiracy, by the
persuasion of the father Vicar, and in an instant came with great fury to
assail their men, but they were so withstood as their design proved vain,
which they finding they Cleerhagen carried himself in all his actions like a
disordered man, regarding more his own particular then his charge, having no
respect to the order that was prescribed him, and careless to build up the
forts which had been designed, having good means to effect it. The which the
Portugals and Islanders considering, they conspired again: which being come
unto Padre Vicario, meaning to make his process and to do Justice: And as
Francis Fort Nephew also to Moucheron, treasurer of the Island with Stephen
Quaresmo the Judge, went to visit the said Vicarios house, being negligent of
their business, they were both slain by the slaves of the said Vicario, which
caused a third tumult: for the 1598.
Vicarios process, who was condemned and hanged with one of his accomplices,
which made a friend of the Vicarios to send for succors to the Island of Saint
Thome, to the Governor Don Antonio de Meneses, who about a month after sent
the Governor of Castle del Mina^in Guine with five hundred soldiars: who so
persuaded the slaves and the Islanders, as they resolved all jointly together
to make head against the signior of Moucherons men.

In the mean time the general Cleerhagen, being suspected to have been of
the faction with them which had caused Le Fort and Quaresmo to be murdered,
and thereof accused and reproched to his face by one of the sea captains;
seeing his malice descouered, Cleerhagen the Admiral Stribos succeeded in his
place: who had not so good means to resist the enemy as he desired. Yet
taking courage, being very active and willing to take pains, not considering
the Clyma^ of the country, laboring at the fortification of the place (the
which Cleerhagen should have done in the beginning) to give example unto
others, he fell also sick, and having had the Government about three weeks
he died. The rest of Moucherons men seeing themselves deprived of their head,
made as it were a petty Senate of four Cornellis Moucheron, George Speelberch,
Adrien Leo and Stephen Iansen, upon whom all matters both for policy and
war in the said Island should depend. But after they had endured the crosses
of their enemies about a month, seeing themselves destitute of souldiars, the
began to faint, and to loose all hope to maintain themselves long in a place
so far from succors, against so many and so strong enemies, in regard of the
small number of men they were: In the end being neither chased nor forced away,
they did abandon the place, and the fort of Pauesson, after they had set fire
of it all, and then they embarked and went to sea. Fifteen days after their
departure, the said signior of Moucheron sent them supplies both of men and
victuals, but they came to late. Behold how this Island was won and lost in a
short time: the which is a place of great importance for the commodity of the
haven,

Many other ships went this year out of Holland and Zeelande, as well to the
East and West Indies, Bresil, Castle de Mine, as to other coasts of Affrike
and Guine^, the which were esteemed to be about four score ships: Besides
those which sailed into Suria and Greece, as to Constantinople, Aex^dria,
Trepoli, Patrassa, Chio, Al^ppo and others, by grant and preuiledge from the
great Turk, obtained by the French Kings Ambassador, under the banner and name
of the French King, as well as the French did in the year of our Lord 1569.
which preuiledge was dated in the month or moon Ranazan in the year of
Mahomet, a thousand and six, which comes to the

There fell out at that time a new trouble in the town of Emden, which was.
That New troubles in Emd^n.
the said town finding it self greatly indebted by reason of the precedent
tumults, and which did yet continue against the Earl of East Friseland their
Protector, as well for the pursuing of their right, as to pay the annual
pension which according to their treaty they did owe unto the said Earl.
Having now but small means left to maintain themselves against the practices
of the said Lord, but that the Magistrate with the consent of the Bourgois,
should raise some new Imposition to supply their wants. The which having
propounded to their citizens, the Earl laboring one that had some charge of
the treasor) to whom commission was given in writing, ^8
to stir up troubles, and to draw partisans unto him, who together might have
Cofrer came with his commission to certain men of the Flaccien sect, which is
a kind of relligion covered under the cloak of that of the Martinists (who
they say hold the confession of Ausbourg) of the which he won some so far
as they consented: among them he came unto one which had been of the said
sect, but he was retired and become of the Protestants Relligion; who
discouerd all this practice unto the Magistrate, who presently sent for the
Cofrer, and after some questions John Groenen brother in law to one Fonck who
at that time was at Brusselles with the Cardinal Albert, and had hereto fore
been prisoner in Holland for the like cause (but delivered without any harm)
was the chief conductor of this bvsines, with some others, who were all taken
prisoners, and their papers seized on. John Groenen, there were found many
coppies of letters and instructions written unto the Earl, and some letters
from Fonck: which said that seeing the Earl did find that he was abandoned by
the Emperor and the Empire (for that charge, writing unto Cont Willian Lewis of
Nassau, governor of the contries of Freezeland 1598.
Cofrer and of John Groenen, who were beheadded, and by the banishment of some
other prisoners, whereof some were condemned in great fines. Then the Earl
took occasion to complain of them of Emden to the Imperial chamber, accusing
them The Earl complains of them of Emden to the Imperial chamber.
to have broken the contract, whereupon he obtained a commission of
adiornement, the which was signified unto them, to appear in the said chamber
the 16. of August the John Groenen and John Kemps, after they had grievously
tortured them; to have unworthily entreated his two sons, the Earls John and
Christoper being at Emden with his instructions and by his commandment: to
have used a notary ill; to have forced a new oath from the youth of the town,
with other points, whereupon the Earl and they of Emden entered into new
quarrels one against another, and the old were revived; of the issue whereof
we will treat in the year following.

We have made mention of an Edict made by the King of Spain at Pardo, by the
which he dispensed with himself not to pay his debts, retayn^ng all his
assiguations The King of Spain makes a new contract for the payment of his
debts.
upon his revenues, given by him in payment unto Merchants which had furnished
him with great sums: But now meaning to discharge his conscience better, and
fealing himself at the graves brinke, he made another contract of the 14 of
February this year 1598. with Hector Pocamillo, Ambrosio Somola, Francisco de
Maluenda, and John Iacomo Grimaldi, having ample Procuration from all the other
Merchants, who dad negotiated with his Majesty for the lending of money. By the
which contract having first excused himself for that which was given at
Pardo, he confirms the assignations given by him upon the said demaynes, upon
condition that for an over plus and new Loan they should furnish him with the
sum of seven millions, and two hundred thousand ducatspaiable Albert, to
defray the charges of the war in the Netherlands, and that for the space of
19 months, whereof the first payment should be expired the last of January,
the said year 98. making for the Netherlands four millions and a half. The
rest to be paid in his realm of Spain, or else where, at his good pleasure,
And by this means the King of Spain (being resolved to give his daughter the
Infanta unto the Cardinal Albert) would show that he would not leave him in
need of money for the continuance of the war against the united Provinces.

There is in Flanders a fort called Patience, which a Wallon corporal in the
year 1595. delivered unto the Estates of Zeeland, there were this year some
French men in The fort of Patience sold by the French unto the Spaniards.
John Bradley, a man very expert in water works. The 9. of July the town of
Calais was restored to the French King, into the hands of the Earl of S. Pol
and the Calais and the other towns restored to the French King.
in August following: the like did they of Monthulin, Chastelet and la Capelle
in Tyerash: 1598.
Caesar Monsieur the kings Bastard and Duke of Vendosme with this Dukes
daughter, whereupon Blauet, and all other places which had been held in
Brittane, in the name of the Infanta of Spain, were yielded.

The King of Spain finding his strength and health to decay daily, being
desirous to see an end of the resolution which he had taken, to give the Lady
Isabella his eldest daughter in marriage to the Archduke Albert his Nephew,
although he were advanced The King of Spain gives his eldest daughter to
Cardinal Albert with the Netherlands and Bourgogne.
to great Ecclesiastical dignities, and namely to the rich Archbishoprike of
Toledo: he called in his presence (in the town of Madril) the 6. of May Prince
Philip his only son, being about 20. years old, being accompanied by Don
Gomes d' Auila Marquis of Vellada, governor and Lord Stuard of Prince Phillips
house, Don Christophel de Mora Earl Nicholas Damant Knight, councellor,
President and Chancellor of Brabant, with the secretary for the affaiers of the
Netherlands, Laloo, and no more, whereas the rosolution of the cession and
transaction of the Netherlands made by the King unto his said daughter, was
read, signed, and sealed in the French tongue as follows.

Phillip by the grace of God King. etc. To all present and to come that shall
see, read and hear these letters, greeting. Whereas we have thought it fit and
convenient as well for the general good of all Christendom, as of our
Netherlands, not to defer any longer the marriage of our dear and wel-beloued
eldest daughter the Infanta Isabella Clara Eugenia: A copy of the letters of
transaction of the Netherlands to the In^anta.
Albert, governor and captain general of our Netherlands, and of Bourgogne in
our name, having cast our eyes upon his person, and chosing him to be future
husband to our eldest daughter, as well by the consent of our holy father the
Pope, who has there-vpon granted his dispensation, as also having imparted it
to the most high, most excellent and most mighty Prince, our most dear and
wel-beloued brother, cousin and nephew, Rodolphus the second of that name
Emperor of the Romans, and in like manner to our most dear and wel-beloued
good sister the Empress his mother. All which considered, and to the end our
said daughter may (as reason requiers) have means according to her graces,
virtues Phillip our only Son and heir, according to the aduertisments which
have been given by us and our said Son, to the heads and Noblemen, knights
of our order, counselors and Estates of our said Netherlands, being under our
obedience, together with them of our country and Conty of Bourgogne, who have
showed and testefied by their want never affairs of great importance, by
reason whereof his presence is here very 1598.
Infanta, according to her merits and the greatness of her birth. Wherefore we
give all men to understand, that desiring now to put duly in effect, that which
has been resolved by us: to transport unto our said daughter the Infanta, in
advancement of the said marriage, all our said Netherlands and Bourgogne, in
manner and form, and with the conditions here-after mentioned.

1. The first condition is: that the said Infanta our daughter, shall join in
marriage with the Archduke Albert, and that by way of donation or gift, she
receive our said

2. Item, that the children and successors of this marriage, be they males or
females, lawfully borne and no bastards: although it were by a future marriage,
the elder going before the younger, and the male the female, shall from hand to
hand successively be heirs in the same degree of all the said provinces
jointly, without taking away or ecclipsing any thing. Declaring that the eldest
son or daughter of the father deceased, shall be preserre^ before the Uncles
or any other of the collateral line.

3. Item upon condition, that if there be neither son nor daughter (which God
Albert, or our daughter the Infanta, coming of this present marriage, the said
donation, cession and transport, shall be void and of no force. In which case
if our said daughter the Infanta should remain a widow, her lawful portion
on the fathers side, and her donation of the mothers side, such as shall belong
unto her, shall follow her: beside that which we or our son the Prince shall
do for the love we bear her. And if the said Archduke Albert, should survive
the said Infanta, he shall remain Governor of the said countries, in the name
of the Prince Proprietary, to whom they shall fall.

4. Item upon condition, that if all the descendants males and females
proceeding of their marriage should chance to fail, so as there should not any
one remain that is

5. Item, upon condition, that whosoever shall be Princess and Lady of the
said Netherlands, shall marry with the King of Spain or the Prince his son,
that shall be then living, with a dispensation, if need shall require. And if
then they have not the will nor the power to make any such marriages for
themselves, in that case the Lady cannot take any husband, nor meddle with any
donation, nor any part thereof, without the advice and consent of us and our
heirs and successors in our said realm of Spain, which shall be issued from
us. And in case of contrauention, all that has bin given and granted, shall
return, as if this donation, cession and transport had never been made.

6. Item upon condition that our said daughter the Infanta, nor any other
called to the said succession, shall not for any cause whatsoever, part nor
divide the said countries, nor give or exchange without our consent, and of
those shall succeed us in these realms.

7. Item that every Prince and Lord of those countries, shall be bound to marry
their sons and daughters with our consent, and of those shall be our heirs
Kings of Spain.

8. Item that our said daughter the Infanta, nor her husband, nor any of their
successors, to whom the said countries shall descend, shall in any sort
whatsoever, negotiate, traffic, or contract to the East and West Indies,
neither shall they send any sorts of ships, under any color or pretext
so-euer: upon pain that the said countries in

9. Item, that if the said Archduke Albert our good cousin, should suruie our
daughter the Infanta, leaving either son or daughter, that he shall have the
government of such son or daughter, with the managing of all their goods, as
if our daughter the Infanta 1598.
Albert; and not to be drawn in consequence. To the end that none of his
successors may urge any president, nor pretend right in the like case.

10. Item for that it is the principal and greatest bond above all others:
that all the

Ego Iuro ad sancta Dei Euangelia, quod semper ad extremum vitae meae spiritum,
sacrosanctam fidem Catholicam quam tenet, docet and predicat, sancta, Catholica
and Apostolica Ecclesia The oath of the Prince ^f the Netherlands.
^omana (communium Ecclesiarum matter and Magistra) constanter profitebor, and
fideliter firmiterque ^redam and veraciter tenebo; atque eam a meis subditis
teneri, doceri and predicari (quantum in me erit) curabo. Sic me Deus adiuuet
and hec sancta Euangelia.

11. Item, that for the greater assurance and confirmation of the peace, love,
and correspondencie which ought to be betwixt the King and his realms, our
descendants and successors, and the Princes and Lords of those countries, being
also our successors, enery one of the^ which hereafter shall come unto the
possession of the said Netherlands

12. And for a much as our intention and will is, that the said articles shall
take full effect by their meaens. We give, grant, quit, transport, renounce and
accord, in gift of fee, and in the best and most available form, way and
manner, that may be deuifed by law, to the Infanta Isabella, Clara, Eugenia,
our most dear and best beloved eldest daughter, All our Netherlands, and every
Province thereof, with the Country and County of Bourgogne, comprehending that
of Charolois therein, the Duchies, Principalities, Marquisats and forts, which
are in our Netherlands and Bourgogne, together with all the regalities, and all
sorts of jurisdictions, which we might pretend by reason of the same, as also
all preheminences, gards, and all other kind of sovereignty whatsoever, in the
same form they are now, or

13. And it is our intention: that in regard of this donation, our said
daughter the Infanta, and her future husband the Archduke Albert, shall be
charged and bound, to pay and acquit all debts, made by us, or in our name, or
by his deceased Imperial Majesty upon our patrimony and demaines of the said
Netherlands, and of the Contie of Bourgogne; and they shall be also tied and
bound to bear and discharge all the rents, annuities,

And so we do make, create and name by these presents, our said daughter the
Infanta, Princess and Lady of the said Netherlands, and Earl of Bourgongne
and Charalois.

We do also grant unto our said daughter, that over and above the particular
titles of every 1598
and name her self Duchess of Bourgoigne, notwithstanding that we have
reserved (for so long as it shall please us) for our selves, and for the prince
our son, the said title of Duke of Bourgoigne, with all the rights that may
belong unto us, together with the sovereignty of our order of the Golden
Fleece, whereof we retain the power unto our selves, to dispose hereafter as
we shall think most fit. We consent and agree, and do suffer our said daughter
the Infanta, giving her absolute and irreuocable power, of her own private
authority, without any further consent to be demanded, by her self, or by her
deputies sent to her future husband, to take full and absolute possession of
the said Netherlands, and of the county of Bourgoigne, and Charolois: And to
that end to cause the general Estates of the said country to assemble, or

In witness whereof we will and ordain, That the same letters patents be
delivered unto Philippes. And underneath, By the King signed A. de la Loo.

This resignation was also ratified by the letters patents of prince Philip, at
this time king of Spain, the 3 of that name, as follows.

Philip by the grace of God, Prince, son and only heir of the Realms,
Countries, and 1598
Philip the second of that name, my lord and father, To all present and to
come, greeting. Whereas my said lord and father has resolved to marie the
lady Infanta Isabella Clara Eugenia, our most dear and well beloved good
sister, to the Archduke Albert, our good uncle and cousin: And that according to
the same his Catholic Majesty has determined with our liking and consent,
being thereunto induced for certain great reasons and respects for the common
good, namely for the general quiet of all Christendom, and in particular for
the peace and tranquillity of the Netherlands, to the end that our said sister
may be provided for according to her quality and great merits, to give unto
our said sister the Netherlands, and the county of Bourgoigne, in that form
and manner as it has been made and past, as it appears by the letters
patents which my said lord and father has caused to be made, signed Philip
etc. All which being here above inserted, it is not needful to repeat.

We let them know, that having particularly understood all that is mentioned
therein, considering the public good that may thereby come unto Christendom,
especially by reason of the singular love which we are bound to bear, and do
bear unto our sister the Infanta, for her graces and great merits, we commend,
approve, and allow, and by these presents hold for good, notwithstanding any
prejudice that may grow thereby to us or our successors hereafter. And for the
same reason we consent, and are content by these presents, that the said
Netherlands and county of Bourgoigne and Charolois, shall be given and
transported to our good sister the Infanta, as my said lord and father has
done. And to the end it may subsist the better, Isabella Clara Eugenia, and to
her successors, conformable to the disposition of the king my lord and father.
And to the end it may take full effect, and remain firm and stable for ever,
we have renounced, and do renounce by these presents, in favor of our good
sister, for us and our successors, all benefits which may by right come to us
or them, to contradict Derestitutione in integrum, to the which we have
renounced, and do renounce by these presents: for our resolute and determinat
will is, that nothing whatsoever shall be of any force and efficacy against
this donation, cession, and transport, which has been made of the said
Netherlands, in the manner and form above mentioned.

Whereupon we have given our faith, and taken our oath upon the holy
Euangilists, which we have touched with our hand, to hold, maintain, observe,
and keep, and cause to be held, maintained, observed, and kept, punctually
all that has been said, without any excuse or exception, nor yet to suffer
any other to use any: The which we do affirm and promise by the word of a
prince, and that we shall give all aid and assistance for the full accomplishment
thereof, Dom Gomes d'Auila, marquess of Velada, our governor and lord steward
of our household, Dom Christophel de Mora, earl of Castle, Roderigo great
commander of the Alcantara, a gentleman of his Majesty's chamber, and butler
for our person, Dom Joan d'Idiaques great commander of Leon, all three of the
counsel of state, and Nicholas d'Amant, knight, also counselor of state, and
keeper of his Majesty's seals for the affairs of the Netherlands and
Bourgoigne, chancellor of his duchy of Brabant. Given in the Philip, and
underneath, By the commandment of my lord the prince A. de la Loo.

These two patents of the kings resignation, and of the princes agreation, were
both sealed with one seal in vermilian wax, with strings of gold.

These instruments being thus read, past, signed and sealed in autentike form,
the prince of 1598
Spain rising, went and kissed the king his fathers hands, thanking him for the
good affection he bare unto his sister: then going to his said sister, he did
congratulat with her, for the good which she had received that day; who rising,
in like manner went and kissed the king her fathers hands, and gave thanks for his
favors and benefits: as in like sort she did thank the prince her brother,
and so the assembly brake up. The rest of the day was spent in joy and sport in
the court; yet more had been continued, if the kings indisposition had not
been, who began now to grow very weak.

Two days after, which was the eight of May, the empress, sister to the king,
and mother to the archduke Albert, came to court, being accompanied by the
ambassador of the emperor, Dom Christophel de Mora, Dom Joan Idiaques, and
others, whereas the marriage spoken of was confirmed, the Infanta binding her
self by an oath in the hands of the empress, to marie the archduke Albert of
Austria, according to his Majesty's good pleasure: Whereupon the said lady
empress bound her self reciprocally, that the said archduke her son should
take her to wife, by virtue of a special procuration which he had sent. Then
the Infanta advanced to kiss the hand of the empress her aunt, and future
mother in law, but she retired her hand, and would not suffer it, and for a
greater show of her love embraced her very fast. In the end, after many kind
speeches and mutual courtesies, as the empress retired, the Infanta bending
down upon her knee, would again have kissed her hand, which she pulled back,
and making her to rise, the empress kissed her cheek, and so they parted. All

Isabella Clara Eugenia, by the grace of God Infanta of all the realms of
Spain, Duchess The Infantaes procuration to the archduke.
of Bourgoigne, of Lothier, of Brabant, Lembourg, and Luxembourg, Countess of
Flanders, Arthois, Bourgoigne, Palatine of Henault, of Holland, Zeeland, Namur,
and Zutphen, Marquess of the holy Empire, Lady of Friseland, Salines, and
Macklin, of the country and city of Vtrecht, of Ouerissel, and of Groaning, To
all present and to come, that shall see these present letters greeting: Whereas,
as well for the good of all Christendom in general, as for the Netherlands in
particular, and for other good considerations, it has pleased the king my lord
and father, for the advancement of my future marriage, by the dispensation of
our holy father Albert, with the good liking, allowance, consent and assistance
of the high and mighty prince our most dear and well beloved good brother, to
make a gift, cession, and transport, unto us, of all the Netherlands, and of
Bourgoigne, according to the letters patents which have been made and signed
respectively with their own hands, the sixth of this present month of May,
with other our letters patents, touching the acceptance of the said donation
and transport: To the end that the said Netherlands and Bourgoigne, might be
by us, our heirs and successors, held and enjoyed in manner and form, and
according to the conditions particularly comprehended and expressed in the said
letters patents; by the which his said Majesty has granted unto us, with
absolute power, and irreuocable, of our own private authority, not being
bound to require Albert, the full and entire possession of all the Netherlands
and county of Bourgoigne and Charolois, and to that effect to do in particular
according to the said letters patents. We therefore make it known, for the
reasons above mentioned, and to follow in every point the will and pleasure of
his Majesty, yea to advance all that in that regard may be necessary before
our departure toward the said countries, we have of our certain knowledge
and absolute power, authorized and given full power and commission irreuocable,
as well general as special, to our future spouse the archduke Albert, in our
name, and on our behalf, by himself or other his substitutes, as he shall
think fit, by virtue hereof, at once, or at diverse several times, to do all
things, as well in our name, and in our behalf, as in the of all the said
countries, and of every province thereof, and of all that does depend, to 1598
Albert, shall do all that we our selves might do if we were there in
person, without any more special commission, than is contained in the said
letters. Promising in the word of a princess, and upon our honor, to hold it
for agreeable, firm, and stable for ever, and to observe, and cause to be
observed, and inuiolably and faithfully accomplished, all that by the said
archduke Albert, our future husband, or by his committees and substitutes, by
virtue of the said letters shall be done and past, in regard of the said
absolute and real possession of the said Netherlands and Bourgoigne, in the
manner and form as it is mentioned in the said letters Isabella, and upon the
fold, By the commandment of the Lady Infanta, Signed A. de la Loo.

This procuration was accompanied with letters from the king and the prince his
son, unto the Netherlands, with promise not to be left in danger, for that
which should be needful Albert, at the court in Brussels.

About that time prince Ernest of Bauaria, archbishop and elector of Cologne,
and prince Ambassadors from the elector of Cologne, to the Estates, for
Rhineberek.
of Liege, sent his ambassadors (which were the young earl John of Nassau, and
the seigniour of Soppenbroeck, to the general Estates of the united provinces,
to pursue the restitution of Berck upon the Rhine (the which prince Maurice had
the year before taken by siege from the Spaniards) upon promise that their
enemies should have no passage that way. The Estates having answered
pertinently to the said ambassadors, yet considering that the said town
Maurice having counseled them to yield it, if they would not otherwise provide
for it; besides that it was too far from them, and not able to endure a long
siege, they resolved to deliver it upon certain conditions, if the said
elector could obtain them from cardinal Albert, yea in the end they would
have yielded it upon the electors simple promise, not to suffer it to fall any
more into the Spaniards hands, if the cardinal had not set the admiral of
Arragon on work about another design. Notwithstanding the towns of Moeurs
and Alpen were at that time, with the consent of the Estates and the archduke
Albert, restored free, the one unto the countess of Moeurs, the other to the
lady Dowager Palatine, widow before to Henry lord of Brederode.

The process against the magistrate and counsel of the imperial town of Aix
la Chapelle, A sentence against the magistrate of Aix.
having remained long undetermined in the chamber of Spyer, was (to the great
desolation of the said town) decided this Summer by sentence, the which did
banish and proscribe all them of the magistrate and the counsel, together with
their adherents, abandoning both their persons and their goods, appointing for
executioners of the said sentence, the archbishops of Treues and of Cologne,
with the duke of Iuilliers: who finding themselves too weak, called the
archduke Albert to their aid. This sentence was signified to them of Ayx by an
imperial herald: They were much troubled and perplexed at this rigorous
sentence, which they did little expect, having been assured from some princes
and towns, that the matter should never come to proscription (but Dom William
of Saint Clement, the king of a siege: whereupon they took a short resolution,
and defended all exercise of the Protestants 1590
archbishop of Cologne, prince of Liege, their neighbor, entreating hem to be
an intercessor for them; who did write unto them of Iuilliers and Lembourg, who
(not thinking what might happen unto themselves, and was so near them) began
to oppress them of Aix, driving away their cattle, and taking them prisoners
where they could catch them. These letters from the elector of Cologne, did
somewhat restrain the acts of hostility of them of Iuilliers, and of
Lembourg: Whereupon the magistrate continued in the government of the town, as
before, until it were otherwise ordained. Soon after their adverse parties
(which were those of the old magistrate, being fugitives for their lewd
demeanors) brought four or five hundred of the duke of Iuilliers soldiers
into the town, who displaced the one, and placed the other. Those The
lamentable estate of Aix.
some of the chief, especially two bourgmasters, the seignior Colin, and
doctor Vercken, seeing themselves threatened by the clergy, found means to get
secretly away. These magistrates being restored, were not only filled with
Catholic Romans, but they deposed all officers of the town, little and great,
base and other, and placed new, all Catholics, even unto the hangman: They
also changed all the midwiues, physicians, comforters and keepers of sick
persons, appointing all Catholics, and deposing the others.

Among them of the magistrate that were restored, there was one John Ellerborne,
a sheriff, who of himself, and without constraint had been a fugitive, having
since the year 1590 called many merchants, and other substantial men of the
Netherlands, that were fled unto Aix, Lewis Malapert, and Iean Viuien, great
merchants, from whom, especially from Viuien (although he died of the plague)
he caused all his goods to be taken, yea even his bed. Whereof complaints came
to the general Estates of the united provinces, who having written diverse
times to them of Aix, yea even with threats, matters were somewhat moderated
with Ellerborne,

About that time there was great preparation of men made for Brabant, with
provision as it were to raise a camp, whereupon the united Estates gave charge
to the earl of Hohenloo to guard the quarter of Bomel with twenty four
companies of foot, and four cornets of horse, that the Spaniards might get no
footing there, for that they saw that the archduke Albert did draw men from all
parts, coming from France and other places.

The duke of Cleues and Iuilliers having his senses better settled, was this
year put in possession The duke of Cleues recouers his senses
of many of his towns. Prince Maurice to gratify him, sent him two goodly
horses by his chief counselor the seignior of Sonsfeldt: and then there was
much speaking of a marriage betwixt the said duke and the duke of Lorrains
daughter, the which took effect the year Albert.

ISABELLA AVSTRIACA. PHIL. II. CATH. HIS. REG. FILL.
ISABELLA CLARA EVGENIA, INfanta 1598
of Spain, Duchess of Brabant, of Lembourg, etc. Countess of Flanders,
Arthois, Bourgoigne, etc. Palatine of Henault, and Namur. Lady of Salines and
Macklin.
My father minding for to make a royal marriage
Twixt me and the Archduke Albert, gave me for my heritage
The Netherlands, with Burgondie, and County Charolois,
To hold in chief of Spain (and I of him did make my choice)
But the conditions over hard, and far too strict withal,
Retained the Netherlands in too much servitude and thrall:
But Guelder, Friseland, Utrecht, and the Hollanders, also
Ouerissel, Groaning, Zutphen, and Zeeland, will not once show
Obedience to the Spaniard, nor the house of Austria,
And do the great'st revenue of my living bear away:
But Brabant, Flanders, and Arthois, Henault, and eke Lembourg.
To me are true, with Burgondie, Namur, and Luxembourg.

THE XV. BOOK. 1598

The Argument.
Cardinal Albert assembles the Estates at Brussels touching the donation of
the Netherlands. The articles propounded unto the Cardinal upon the receiving
of the Infanta. He leaves his Cardinals habit, and goes to fetch the Infanta.
He writes to the united provinces, and causes the prince of Orange to write to
prince Maurice his brother. The Estates resolve rather to war, than to a
fained peace, and send their Ambassador to the Queen of England to that end,
who does in like manner resolve to war. The Admiral of Arragon marches with
the king of Spaines army toward the Meuse, takes Orsoy Maurice camps at
Gelderscheweert. The death of Philip the second king of Spain. Ambassadors
from the princess of Cleues to the Archduke Albert, and his answer. The
murder of the Earl of Bro^ck by the Admirals men: He takes many towns in the
country of Cleues, besieges Rheinberck, which y^elds: he threatens them of
Wezel, and passes the Rheyn: against whom prince Maurice fortifies himself,
and brings his army to Doesbourg, where he attends him. The inferior circl^s
of the Empire assemble at Dortmont. The Admiral takes Deutecom. He wastes the
neutrall countries of Westphalia, Berghe, Marcke, and Munster, and takes many
neutrall towns, where his Spaniards commit horrible cruelties and
inhumanities. The princes of Germany take it ill, and procure a decree from
the Emperor against him, which he regards not, and against the Estates, who
justify themselves. The princes of Germany arm against the admiral. He
brings his army into the Isle of Bomel. The Estates army at sea spoils the
Canaries, and some other Islands. The army of the princes of Germany
consumes. The Spaniards retire from Bomel, and build S Andrews fort. Maurice
intrencheth himself in the head of the enemy. The archdukes army retires out
of the Isle of Bomel, leaving S. Andrews fort and Creuecoeur well furnished.
Soon after the garrisons mutine for their pay. Prince Maurice besieges these
two forts, the which yield, and the garrisons serve the Estates. The archdukes
and the Infanta's coming into the Netherlands, and their instalment. The
Emperor sends unto the Estates concerning a peace. The Estates resolution to
make war in Flanders. Prince Maurice besieges Nieuport, takes some forts
from the Spaniards: overthrows the archdukes army, he being in person, and
takes the admiral prisoner, the which is called, The memorable battle of
Nieuport: then he returns with his army into the united provinces. The
exploits of the galley of Dordrecht.

THe acts and dispatches of the donation of the Netherlands, made by the king
of Spain unto the Infanta his daughter, for the advancement of Albert Archduke
of Austria, as then a Cardinal, being come to Brussels in Iulie, the said
Cardinal Archduke caused them presently to be published, and copies to be
given forth; together with the agreation of the prince of Spain procuration
from the Infanta, and letters sealed up from the king and the prince his son,
to the governors and Counselors of all the Provinces, which were under the
obedience of Spain: commanding them to send their deputies to Brussels, with
commission and full authority, by the 15 of August following. Where the
deputies of every Province in particular being arrived at the day appointed,
the next day they assembled in the town house to show their commissions, and
to treat upon that which was to be done concerning the said act of donation,
Infanta by her procuration, and to take the oath unto her, in regard of the
privileges of the country, especially of the duchy of Brabant, the which
receives no princes but in their own persons: yet all being well considered,
in the end all controversies ceasing, the cardinal archduke, in the 1598


1 The first article contained the agreation of the donation and transport of
the Netherlands, A sum of the articles propounded to the cardinal at Brussels.
together with the marriage of the princess and lady thereof, with the said
cardinal. 2 The second, how she should be received, and the oath taken. 3
That his highness should consummate the marriage within three months. 4 That
the king shall give an act, that the twelve articles comprehended in the said
transport, shall not be in any sort prejudicial unto the Netherlands. 5 That
he shall free the country from all contributions, oppressions of soldiers,
and other exactions, and that hereafter his highness shall be contented with
his revenues. 6 That all foreign soldiers shall hereafter be under the kings
pay and entertainment, the which shall be employed in field upon the enemies
frontiers. 7 All Germane soldiers and such as are borne in the country, shall
be entertained and paid as far as may be, and that the surplusage shall be
discharged by the king. 8 That all offices and governments of provinces,
towns, and forts, shall within one year at the farthest be delivered into the
hands of the noble men of the country, to govern. 9 All extraordinary
counselors shall be reduced to the order that has been accustomed. And the
great council of Macklin, with that of Brabant, and the council of estate,
shall be filled with them that are natural borne in the country. 10 That all
provinces, countries, and towns shall be entertained and maintained in their
11 His highness shall be bound to return into the Netherlands by the month of
may next coming. 12 That her highness during her absence shall appoint a
governor in the said countries, which shall be of her blood, who shall be
bound to swear to all that which the king has sworn. 13 That it shall be
tolerable for the general Estates, by the interuention of his highness, to
enter into conference with them of Holland and Zeeland touching a peace. 14 And
until the country may be furnished with noblemen, natural borne of the
country, they shall depute three to go with his highness into Spain, and to
thank the king. 15 That his highness shall be bound to entertain all above
mentioned, and at his return with the Infanta to take the accustomed oath in
all the provinces. 16 That the governors, captains, nor men of war shall not
attempt any new thing during his highness absence. 17 His highness at his return
shall be bound to assemble the general Estates, to labor together for the
redressing of the affairs of the Netherlands.
All above mentioned being thus past, and the said cardinal archduke
sufficiently acknowledged and accepted for their future prince, according to
the promise of marriage betwixt him and the Infanta, meaning to vncardinall
himself, and to enter into the consummation of the said marriage according unto
the popes dispensation, he went to Hault a little town in Brabant The
archduke Albert leaves off his cardinals weed.
Our lady of Hault (in old times a famous place of pilgrimage) where he laid
down his cardinals hat and habit upon the high altar, the which he offered
unto the said lady. He had also upon expectation of this marriage, resigned his
archbishopricke of Toledo, by virtue whereof he was head of the Inquisition
(which of right belongs unto the said archbishopricke) by the which resignation
they said he retained an annual pension of 50000 ducats (for it is not less
worth than 300000 a year.) This done, he began to give order for his voyage,
and for the government of the Netherlands, to the which during his absence he
named his cousin a cardinal also, Andrew archduke, son to the archduke
Ferdinand, who was brother to the emperor Maximilian, and therefore cousin
german to Albert, joining with him the council of estate. He appointed
Francisco de Mendoza, Herman vanden Berghe marshal of the camp, with other
commanders and officers to put in execution, during his absence, the resolution
which was taken at Brussels touching the frontiers of Germany, whereof we will
hereafter discourse more at large. To bear him company according to the
articles, there were deputed Philip of Nassau, prince of Orange, etc. (to whom
his sister the countess of Hohenloo 1598
Holland and Zeeland) the earl of Barlaymont, and the earl of Sores (noble
men borne in the country) and many ladies and gentlewomen, amongst them the
countess of Mansfeldt widow to the earl, and dowager to the earls of Henin
and Hochstraten, and many other young noble men and gentlemen desirous to see
Spain, the triumphs and state of the prince of Spain, and of the said
archduke and Infanta.

All things being thus prepared, the archduke parted with his train from
Brussels about the midst of September, taking his way (as he said) toward
Prague, to see the emperor his brother, to confer with him of the affairs
of the Netherlands, and of his designs upon the territories of the empire: and
from thence to go to Grets to fetch the lady Gregory Maximilienne Charles of
Austria, who was brother to the emperor Maximilian the second, betrothed to
Philip of Spain. This princess was borne in the same degree with the prince
of Spain, that is, of her fathers niece; for the king of Spain and the
archduke Charles had either of them married his niece: which princess the
archduke Albert was to conduct into Spain, to accomplish her marriage with the
said prince, and the archduke his with the Infanta altogether.

The said archduke before his departure, had written on the 18 of August, to
the general Estates of the united provinces, containing in substance that he
went to marie with the Infanta, with whom he had the Netherlands in dower;
wherein he had already proceeded so far, as most, and the greatest part of
the provinces had received him for their lord and prince. That he

There were letters also from the prince of Orange unto prince Maurice his
brother, and from the duke of Arschot and the marquess of Haurec, containing;
That seeing the king of Maurice.

The peace betwixt France and Spain being concluded, and the towns yielded
on either side, as we have said; there was yet a time limited for them that
would be comprehended in this peace, according to the clause contained therein.
All this time they talked of nothing but of peace in England, many and diverse
discourses were made thereon: the Queen finding The Queen of England send^
unto the Estates.
Infanta in suspicion) sent sir Francis Vere unto the general Estates of the
said provinces, being general of all their English forces, to understand
plainly what their resolution was, either to peace or war: if not to peace,
then what means they had jointly with her to bear the burden of the war;
whereof she demanded a speedy and absolute resolution: whereof she desired to
be duly informed by men well qualified, having full charge and commission to
deliver their resolutions.

Whereupon the Estates meaning to advice and resolve in their general
assembly, all difficulties and discommodities on either side being
propounded, debated and well balanced, Daniel vander Meulen of Antuerpe,
remaining at Leyden in Holland, had suddenly been sent for, with a pasport
from the archduke, the which came from his brother in law, who fained himself
to be extremely sick) to confer with him before his death, and that he
should come to Antuerpe; Richardot and Assonuille, the abbot of Marolles, and
the marquess of Haurec, one after another; who demanded of him, if there were
no means to make a general peace among all the provinces of the Netherlands
(and this was only to hear his opinion) whereunto he answered, That concerning
that matter he had not any charge. Then they declared unto him, to the end he
might tell it again, That the king Goodly offers made by the archduke unto the
united Estates.
of Spain and the archduke Albert were intended to make a peace, in what sort
soever: and thereof to give such assurance as should well content them, they
would leave unto the united provinces their Religion, their form of
government, and they should have contentment given them, from the least point
unto the greatest. They said moreover, That the king was Maurice, held him in
great esteem, and desired not to impair his estate, but rather to confirm
and make it greater: yea, he would gladly see him General of the army against
the Turk; so much he was esteemed of all men for his virtues and valor. That
they would suffer all them that were in the government of the united Provinces,
to continue still in their offices, estates, and dignities, and would promise
to continue their children in them, being capable, if they would only give
ear unto a peace, and acknowledge the said archduke Albert for their lord and
prince. These and such like speeches were used unto him: being carried before
the archduke, he said as much to him in Latin, entreating him, that he would
make a good report thereof, when it should be fitting.

All this being understood by the Estates, they presently conceived, that these
baits tended to no other end, but to breed some division in the country, and
to move the commons: as if they desired to continue the wars without cause
or reason, whilst that they might (according to their saying) enter into an
assured way of peace. They did easily believe, that both the king and the
cardinal would gladly have seen prince Maurice in Hongarie, and that to him
and the united Provinces there should be made what promises they could desire,
if they could only get but that point of them, as to acknowledge the said
archduke for their prince, supposing if that were done, that he should easily
become master, first, of them that had charge of the government, and managing
of affairs (who would presently seek to creep into his favor) and then
generally of the government of the

Some thought these speeches were but a common bruit, to draw the Estates to
give ear to a parle, and to enter into conference, as some years before they
had in the like manner circumuented them of Bruges and Gant, which they caused
to be bruited abroad, only to make a trial, and then go back from it when
they thought good; such speeches serving to no other end. Thither were also
brought unto the Estates certain letters, intercepted both in France and in
England; by the which the king of Spain gave contrary instructions unto the
cardinal archduke, which were, That in the treaty of peace with France, his
Rebels (for so he called the united Estates) should not be comprehended, but
upon condition, that the Romish Catholic religion should be received and
established in all

This instruction conferred with the former speech, and with many other
aduertisements, the Estates seeing how they sought with fair words to abuse
and circumuent them, conceived that there could nothing grow of such a peace,
but a change of religion, and a translation of the government out of their
hands, unto banished men and Spaniolized, more covetous of revenge than the
Spaniards themselves. And therefore not any one having served or had any office
in the issue as it should please God to send them, rather than to abandon their
country, and to receive 1598
they should find needful for them, and especially to give contentment to the
Queen of England. Hereupon they appointed a greater number of deputies in
their colleges, and in the general Estates, sending into England as her
Majesty had required, certain notable ambassadors, to induce her to continue
the war with them against the Spaniards: the which were John van Duyuen
Word knight, seigniour of Warmont, of Would etc. John van Oldenbarneuelt
seigniour of Tempel, first councellor and advocate for the Estates, and keeper
of the seal of Holland and west Friseland, John van den Work councellor and
orator of Middlebourg, John van Hotting a esquier, councellor and deputy for
the general Estates, and Andrew Hessels chief councellor of the council of
Brabant established at the Hage, for that which depends of the Maurice, as
being of his ordinary council. Who being arrived in England, they had
audience of her Majesty, and were graciously received by her, sending them to
treat with her council of all matters, whereof her Majesty desired to be
satisfied, and for the which they were sent thither in the Estates name; so as
in the end having given contentment unto her Majesty, they agreed upon all
things the sixth of August. According unto which accord and resolute
determination of the Estates to maintain themselves by arms against the king
of Spain and the archduke Albert, her Majesty did also resolve for her part
to the continuance of the war, the which could not be so prejudicial unto
her as to the Spaniard, who being always armed both at sea and land,
entertained her rebels in Ireland to small profit: whereas her Majesty on the
other side,

The seigniour of Buzenual ambassador for the French king with the general
Estates of the united provinces, parted (presently after their ambassadors)
from the Hage, to go unto the king, and to know his pleasure, if after the
conclusion of the peace with the Spaniard, he should be continued in his
embassage: but the peace being finished, and he having dispatched

Whilst that the archduke Albert disposed of the affairs of the Netherlands
with the council of Spain, or Spaniards in heart, at Brussels, and made his
preparatiues for his voyage, Francis of Mendoza marquess of Guadaleste,
admiral of Arragon, and general of the Maurice hearing of his approach about
the end of August (the Estates having lien still all the summer, watching which
way he would turn the head of his army) made them also ready to stand upon
their guard, that the Spaniard should not pass the Rhine: and as there was at
the same time a ship of war of the Estates in the river of Meuse before
Venloo, whereof one John de Raet a Hollander was captain, the Spaniards
assailed it, took and burnt it, where they had but six prisoners, the rest
saved themselves by swimming.

In the beginning of September the admiral past the river of Meuse with all
his army near unto Ruremond; it consisted of 178 ensigns of all nations,
Spaniards, Italians, Bourguignons, Germans, Wallons, Irish, and others, making
about five and twenty thousand Iuilliers, the diocese of Cologne and country
thereabouts, so as approaching near the Rhine, Borlotte to pass first, and to
help to make the passage for the rest; 1598
the which he did at the village of Kerckraet, betwixt the towns of Cologne
and Bonne, whereas he drew down all the boats he could find: having past only
with eight hundred men of his regiment, and some field pieces, with the which
going down the Rhine lower than Cologne, he chased away all the Estates ships
which were upon the river. Having gathered all the boats he could together, he
past the rest of his regiment, and some more artillery. The admiral Cont
vanden Berghe and other noblemen of the army marched that way, and approaching
near unto the Rhine, they came first with their troops before the town of
Orsoy, seated upon the Rhine, and belonging to the duke of Cleues, being easy
to fortify, the which duke William had begun to compass in with rauelins,
after the manner of the castle Albert was parted from Brussels.

The Estates of the united provinces, and prince Maurice, being awaked at this
sudden invasion, began to think of their affairs, and calling together their
ordinary garrisons, which Schenks Sconse) where he had the first news of the
taking of the town and castle of Orsoy, and that one part of the Spanish army
had past the Rhine, and did fortify at Walsom, to keep the passage free and
open of either side.

The admirals men did run over all the countries of Cleues, Iuilliers, Cologne,
Mont, The oppression of the Admirals soldiers.
Mark, Munster, and other quarters of Westphalia, spoiling, ransoming,
killing, and murdering, finally committing all the excess and insolences
they could in any enemies country. Albert had granted unto the lady Dowager,
Palatinesse of Rhine, they seized upon the town of Alpen, and other places
thereabouts. The countess of Moeurs, who a little before had obtained the like
neutralitie, was forced to open her town, and to see daily against her will
the Spanish Hidalgoes at her table, having much ado to content them, and
fearing worse, but having no means to retire her self, she was forced to have
patience.

Prince Maurice being in the fort of Grauenweert having understood by a
prisoner of the Spanish camp, that one of the young earls of Embden was with
the admiral, soliciting him to send his army before Emden, being in
controversy, as I have said, with cont Edsard his father. The said prince and
cont William of Nassau, his cousin, governor of Friseland and Groaning,
Oueryssel, county of Zutphen, and other frontiers on the other side of the
Rhine: they sent 1598
to Doesbourg and Deutecom with some horse, to order things there (Doesbourg is
a town situated upon the river of Yssell, where the Spaniard might make the
shorter passage) upon the way he encountered with his aunt the countess Vander
Berghe, mother to the earls Herman, Frederic, and Henric, servants to the
Spaniard, being in the admirals army, who had solicited the general
Estates, and obtained it, that her castle of Wulft might not be demanteled, and
that the town of saint Heeren-berghe (in the which the Estates had a garrison)
being freed from it, and laid open, might remain a neuter town, showing
forth an act of the archduke Alberts, that he would not attempt any thing
against that place, whereby the country might receive any harm; making her
three sons also to promise the same, upon pain to forfeit all manner of
justice (the said town holding in fee of the duchy of Guelders) Poelgheest

In the mean time there were certain letters brought unto prince Maurice, the
which were Letters intercepted from the Spanish camp.
intercepted from the Spaniards camp, written by captain Henry of Chalons,
bastard son to Rene of Chalons prince of Orange (who had stolen away the
daughter of the earl of Mansfeldt, by whom he had this captain Chalons) unto
the said Peter Ernest earl of Mansfeldt his grandfather by the mother; whereby
he acquainted him with the estate of the Spanish camp, the taking of Orsoy,
the admirals resolution to hold and fortify the river of Rhine

The 13 of the month, after council held and resolution taken, where prince
Maurice might best camp with the Estates army, to make head against the
Spaniard, and to stop him from entering any part of their limits, were it into
the higher or lower Betuwe, or the Veluwe; the prince went and lodged at a
village called old Seuenter, not far from the town of Seuenter, den
Gelderschen-Weerd, that is to say, the island of Guelders) where he camped as
well upon the firm land, as in the said island, making a bridge opposite to
the Church of the village, and an other on the other side in the midst of the
island, about 100 yards long, made of fur boards, upon 44 great barks, to
pass his horsemen from the camp into the Betuwe, where they were commodiously
lodged, with danger of the Spaniard, who must of necessity pass the Rhine, or
the Wahal. In this isle of Guelderschen-Weerd, which he had entrenched and
fortified whereas the river was narrowest and easiest to pass at a low water,
whereas he planted ten cannons, five demie cannons, and ten field piece.
Thither came the earl of Hohenloo unto him, with some supplies of foot drawn
out of the frontiers of Flanders. the which the earl did perform happily, in
view of the enemy, who was not then 1598


Now I come to the declining and death of Philip the second, the catholic king
of Spain, I hope the curious reader will not hold it tedious nor impertinent
(if being related at large in the French inventory) I should here again make
a new discourse of the same subject, and in a manner in the same terms,
being so written by mine author. I am very loath to distaste the judicious
reader with any idle or needless repetition, but this being a matter which
does so much concern the subject of this history, I should wrong mine author
(who might be condemned of great negligence and indiscretion) if I should omit
to relate the catastrophe and end of that great king (passing it over in
silence, and as it were in a dream) who has been the maine subject of this
history, and has filled the greatest part of this volume

Besides it might hereafter breed a confusion in the reader, to have no
distinction made of the father and the son, seeing there are so many matters
following which have their dependancie upon his life and death.

The king of Spain (after the resignation of the Netherlands to his daughter
the Infanta) The end and death of the king of Spain
decayed daiely in his health, so as finding his forces to fail him, having
sometimes a fit of an ague, through the extreme anguish of his gout; being
devoutly addicted to his cloister of saint Laurence, and taking great delight
in his court of Escuriall, he desired to be transported thither, contrary to
the advice of his physicians: being brought from Madril thither within the
compass of six days, his pain increased in such sort, as he despaired of
Dom Garcia Loiola consecrated archbishop of Toledo by the popes legate, the
archduke Albert having resigned unto him, retaining a pension of fifty
thousand ducats a year.

After which, he had an apostume upon his right leg, and four others upon
his breast, the which did amaze his physicians, so as they called doctor Olias
from Madril, who altogether by the council of Licentiat Virgayas, applied
plasters to these apostumes, the which being broken, they cast forth a great
quantity of stinking corrupt filth, with great abundance of lyce, so as they
could hardly cleanse them, and he was therewith so extenuated, as four men were
feign to lift him out of his bed in a sheet. The physicians said those lyce

In the beginning of September he called for the prince his son, and the
princess his daughter, in the presence of the archbishop of Toledo and others,
and showing his body unto his son, he said unto him, See prince what the
greatness of this world is, behold this poor carcass, all humane help is
vain: willing them provide for his funerals. He called for his coffin, being
of brass, and caused a deaths head to be set upon a side cupboard, with a
crown of gold by it. Then he sent Joan Reys de Velasco, one of his chamber,
for a little casket, causing them to take out of it a rich jewel of precious
stones, the which he gave unto the princess his daughter in the princes
presence, saying, This jewel came from your This is blood of my blood: not
that it was his own blood, but the emperors his fathers, who did usually
punish his carcass, and to that end he had kept it to show them.

Then he disposed of all things concerning his funeral pomp; which done, he
recommended unto his children in the presence of the popes Nuntio, the holy sea
of Rome, the Pope, and the catholic religion, desiring the Nuntio to give him
absolution of his sins, and to bless his children, recommending his daughter
to the prince

As for the wife of Antonio Peers, sometimes his secretary, he commanded that
she should have liberty, and retire to a monastery. He pardoned all such as
had been put in prison 1598
My son I have desired you should assist at this last act, that you might not
continue in ignorance as I have done, whereby you may behold the end of kings,
and of their crowns and The kings speech unto his son.
scepters: death is ready to tear my crown from my head, to set it upon
yours. I now recommend two things unto you, that you continue obedient to the
church, and do justice to your subjects. The time will come when this crown
will fall from your head, as it does now from mine: you are young, I have been
so: my days were numbered and have their end; God keeps an account of yours,
and they shall likewise end.

It is reported that he enjoined him with passion to make war against
heretics, and to

The prince going out of the chamber, asked Dom Christophel de Mora, if he had
the royal keie, who answered, yea: give it me said the prince; to whom de Mora
answered, your highness will pardon me, it is the key of trust, the which I
may not deliver without the kings express commandment: whereupon the prince
said, It is well, and so past on. Afterward Dom Christophel returning into the
kings chamber, and finding him somewhat better, he told him that the prince had
demanded the said key, but he durst not deliver it without his Majesty's
leave: whereupon the king said, that he had done ill. Afterward Iacinthes,
whereof he said in taking it, that his mother the empress, a year before she
died had drunk the like; saying, that he should not die that day, nor the
next, for that a religious man had foretold him the hour of his death. Then
the prince returnig to see him, de Mora kneeling down, kissed the key and
presented it unto him, the which the prince took, and delivered it unto the
marquess of Denia. And as the prince and his sister were before the kings
bed, he said unto them; I recommend unto you Dom Christophel de Mora

He had not been much subject to infirmities in all his life time, he was
but of a mean stature, and of a fair complexion, flaxen haired, which grew
white, resembling rather a Dutch man than a Spaniard, he had a high and a
broad forehead, with somewhat a thick lip, the hereditarie mark of the
house of Austria: he had not the quickness of spirit which his father had, but
very vigilant and laborious, spending both the day and night in affairs, yea
sometimes whole nights. And notwithstanding his device, which Nec spe, nec
metu, yet he still aspired to great designs, which he conceived in his
imagination, the which did trouble him much more than was needful, or that he
could bear. Withal, he was always doubtful, yea fearful, so as sometimes
matters succeeded ill by his timiditie, the which having been undertaken with
a courageous resolution, had been far more succesfull. By nature he was
close and counterfeit, seeking to cover his faults rather with the prejudice
and disgrace of another, than of himself: and whosoever had once offended him,
was not easily received again into favor, yet he was more bountiful than
covetous, and more stayed than well advised* Having such great power and
means, both in lands, men, and treasure, he effected very little, and (except
the conquest of Portugal) he lost more than he won: he was devout in his
religion,

The paper which the king delivered unto the prince his son, being an
instruction to govern his kingdom, contained this discourse which follows,
or the like in substance. 1598


My son, I have been often in care to leave your Estates in peace, but
neither my many The king of Spaines instruction to the prince his son.
years of life, nor the help of other princes, could ever effect it. I
confess that I have disbursed in less than three and thirty years, above
five hundred ninety and four millions of ducats, the which have bred me
nothing but grief and care. True it is, I conquered Portugal, but as France
did lightly escape me, so may this be wrested from me. I would to God I had
followed the counsel of my deceased father, of most happy memory; or at the
least, that you would believe and follow mine: I should then bear my crosses
more willingly, and should die more contented, leaving you in this vale of
misery. Behold therefore what I leave you for an everlasting testament, over
so many kingdoms and states,

Be always very vigilant of the alteration and change of other kingdoms, to
make your profit thereby, according to occurrents. Keep good guard over them
that are most inward with you in counsel. You have two means to entertain
your realms of Spain; the one is the present government, the other the
traffic to the east and west Indies. As for the government, you must either
depend upon the nobility, or upon the clergy: if you favor church men, be
sure to keep the other still in awe, as I have done; but if you strengthen
your self with the nobility, curb the clergy as much as possibly you can.
If you seek to entertain them equally, they will exhaust you, and withal you
shall disturb your kingdoms, and never come to any certain resolution: the

On the other side, the Netherlands are populous in men, rich in shipping,
constant in labor, diligent in search, hardy to undertake, and willing to
suffer. True it is, I have given

Make use of nobles of the chiefest houses, and advance them to benefices of
great revenues: the vulgar sort are not so needful, for they will cause you a
thousand crosses, which will consume you: believe not any of them, if they be
not of quality. Discharge your self from English spies and French pensions:
employ some of the noblemen of the Netherlands, whom you shall have bound unto
you by fealty. As for the spacious, their merchants too wealthy, their
subjects too greedy of gain, and their servants 1598
may change; by reason whereof you must do two things: change your officers at
the west Indies often, such as you call home, employ them in the council for
the Indies: and so in my opinion you shall never be circumuented, but the one
or the other will make known the benefit unto you, aspiring to more honor.
See how the English seeks to deprive you of that commodity, being mighty at
sea both in men and shipping: as for the French, I do not much apprehend them.
Strengthen your self with them of the Netherlands, although they were part
heretics, and would so persist, upon condition that they might freely sell
their goods in Spain and Italy, paying the royal customs and other duties;
and in obtaining pasport to sail to the west or east Indies, they should put
in caution, and take an oath to discharge

My son, I could represent unto you greater matters, for the conquering of
other kingdoms, but you find in my study, the discourses which have been
offered me to that end. Cause Christophel de Mora to give you the key
presently, least such secrets should fall into any other persons hands. I did
cause some of the minutes of these instructions to be burnt the 7 of September,
I fear there are some imbesilled, be careful to seek them out. I have this
added, that if you can like of Antonio Peers, seek to draw him into Italy, or
at the least, that he Loo. Read this note often which is sealed, and written
with mine own hand. Have an eye always to your most secret counselors:
acquaint your self with ciphers, discontent not your secretaries, keep them
always occupied, whether about important affairs, or otherwise: make trial
of them rather by your enemies, than by your friends. If you happen to discover
your secrets to any familiar friend, keep always the substance thereof within
your own bosom, reveal it not to any.

This instruction was preserved from the fire, among those papers which the
king had

The sixteenth of September prince Maurice being advertised that a great
supply of victuals, artillery, and munition should come from the town of
Guelders unto the admirals army, with a conuoy of 1500 foot, and two cornets
of horse, he parted from his camp, being accompanied with the earls of
Hohenloo, Nassau, and Solins, and al his horsemen, leaving the seignior
sergeant mayor of the army, to have the care of the camp in his absence; and
having passed the river of Wahal in great boats, near unto Bomel, he thought
to watch for the said conuoie, betwixt Venlo and Orsoy, and there to charge
them; but the Spaniards having some notice thereof, provided otherwise, so as
the prince returned back without any

After that, some mariners of Bomel and of Tyel, which had run away unto the
enemy, A hardy attempt of certain mariners of the Spaniard.
came on the twentieth of September with a bark covered, to set upon one of
the Estates galleys, being in guard upon the Rhine, right against the town of
Rees, suffering their bark to fall down with the stream, as if it had been
through negligence, having but one man at the helm, until it came to strike
against the prowe of the gallie, whilst that the mariners were at their
prayers in the morning before beakefa^, not so much as dreaming of any surprise
by such a boat, whereof the mariners having lift up the covering with their
shoulders, and cast it into the water, they boarded the gallie, and began to
charge the men being thus suddenly surprised; whereof some of them were
Simon Ianson of Eeedam, saved himself, with nine more in his boat, and so
escaped their hands. So these mariners being masters of the gallie, they took
out their iron pieces of ordnance, and all that liked them, and abandoning the
galley for that it was old, they set fire on it. The 25 of that month, the
duke of Iuilliers estates 1598
attempts made by the admiral. Some among the said Estates did secretly favor
the admiral, knowing well that what he did was by the king of Spaines
commandment (with whose double pistolets they had bin long fed) and of the
archduke Albert, all which was done with a pretext to make war that way
against the united provinces, and after an other manner than all the other
governors (for those were the archdukes bragges at his coming into the
country) yet notwithstanding all difficulties, the said Estates of Cleues did
resolve to send and summon the admiral to restore the said town of Orsoy,
seeing he had said it was but to have a passage over the Rhine: and that if he
refused it, and that they must go by way of force, they would write unto the
earl Vander Lip, captain general of the inferior circle of

Sibilla princess of Cleues the dukes sister, had before and soon after
written unto the archduke being at Niuelli on his way toward Spain, and by
her ambassadors she made the dukes complaints and her own, of the taking of
the said town, and other the admirals attempts: to whom the archduke answered
in these terms.

Most worthy and dear cousin etc. The complaints and grieuances which your
Excellencies The archdukes letters to the princess of Cleues.
army; seeing they might well think and consider, that such a passage of a
royal army would be burdensome to your Excellency, and your subjects, and
that the lodging which they had taken in the town of Orsoy, would make many to
censure it diversely. But so it is (whereof you may rest assured) that we never
had any thought to prejudice your lands and countries with the kings army, nor
to give you any occasion of complaint. But seeing that we were once moved to
assail his Majesty's rebels, and them of your Excellencies by arms, the which
being concluded in council by mature deliberation, whereof we have thought
good to make you acquainted, that it must be exploited in that manner, your
Excellency, no more than our dear and well beloved cousin, we hope, will not
take it otherwise than in good part. As for that we do presently leave the
town of Orsoy as you demand, and ruin the fort of Walsom, your Excellency
shall understand, that for the present time, we cannot use any other passage
over the Rhine, to effect our design, but we will do it upon the first
opportunity, according to our promise: and that the kings soldiers in their
passages, and in the quarters where they are presently lodged, shall be held in
such order and discipline, as neither your Excellency, nor the duke your
brother shall have any more complaints of their subjects, as they have hitherto
had: and that we will entertain good and loyal neighborhood together, the
which we thought good to signify unto you by these presents, with our sincere
intention etc.

Contrary to these promises, all this month of September, whilst that the
admiral did soiourne enter into the town, upon promise that they would leave
the duke peaceably in his castle, the 1598
making the like demand, saying, that they had charge from the admiral, and
that in case they refused, they would seek some other means: but they
returned as il satisfied this second time, as at the first.

In this assembly of the Estates of Cleues, the duke and his sister being
there in person, the princess behaved her self courageously, encouraging the
said Estates and their nobility, yea sometimes with tears in her eyes: And
there were letters written on the dukes behalf and hers, unto prince Maurice,
thanking him for the good order he held to keep their countries from
oppression, entreating him to continue it, and to preserve them as much as he
could, and not to be discontented against them, that the enemy had lodged so
long in their country, but Vander Lip to the admiral, to pursue the
restitution of Orsoy: but it was far from thence, and the admiral made no
account to leave it so lightly.

Prince Maurice, whilst that the admiral did fortify Orsoy, meaning to take
a view of his whole army, he caused it to be put in battle, by squadrons
under the mountain of Elten, in a great plain of heath, if happily the
Spaniard, who had past the Rhine, should have any desire to charge them: but no
occasion being offered, the prince was glad to see the good order of his horse
and foot, and their resolution and desire to affront the enemy.

The admiral having finished his fort of Walsom nere Orsoy, on the 29 of
September he The admiral summo^s Berck.
Schaef governor of the town, whom he knew to be very sick of the plague
(the which was at that time very hot in the town) who made him no other
answer, but, That they were in conference with the prince elector of Cologne,
to deliver it into his hands, whereof he expected an answer, wherefore he
could say no more unto it at that present. Before Berck there was a little
island in the midst of the Rhine, whither prince Maurice (expecting it would
be besieged) had sent three companies to entrench themselves there; who
finding the place not only discommodious, but that at a low water the enemy
might pass easily over, and cut their throats, they retired into the town,
although they died very fast there, having not above four hundred men left.
The admiral not content with this answer, writ again to captain Schaef,
sending Maurice hearing of Schaefs sickness, had appointed captain Hedduic to
be governor of the town, so as the admiral being forced to use other
materials than ink and paper, on the 10 of October he came to inuest it.

They of Wezel, the chief town of Cleueland, goodly, rich, and a place of
great traffic, They of Wezel write to the admiral, (...) his answer.
and thinking to light a candle before the devil, they resolved to send him
some goodly presents to appease his wrath, that he should not force them, as he
had done other towns of the same country, on the other side of the Rhine,
writing unto him, and desiring a pasport for

The earl Vanden Broek, did in like manner write the twentieth of the month
unto the admiral, entreating him to send him a safeguard for his castle of
Broek, his family and subjects. Whereunto the admiral answered in these
covert and doubtful terms, alleging the contracts 1598
and preservation of the Catholic religion, and the public quiet: in which
terms the said earl maintaining himself according to his duty, he should
be received with all love into his protection, and honored according to his
merits, the which should be a firmer safeguard for him than paper.

Yet cont Vanden Broek having received certain aduertisements, that the
Spaniards were The earl of Broek besieged in his castle, and yields.
resolved to force his castle of Broek, on the 6 of October late at night, he
sent away his wife, daughters, and gentlewomen, meaning the next day to doc the
like with the chiefest of his goods, the which he could not execute: for the
next day his castle was wholly invested, some canons planted by the break of
day, and battered the same day. The 8 of the month the earl

The tenth day of the month the captain appointed for the guard of this
castle, came and The earl of Broek murdered.
told the earl, That he might go walk, if he pleased: Whereunto he answered,
yea, if it might be without danger. After dinner he had a desire to walk with
the captain, being in whose company he feared nothing: as he went he espied
much blood spilt upon the way, and said unto his page, See here the blood of
our servants, if they have an intent to do as much to me, I had rather to day
than tomorrow. Going on unto his water mill upon the river of Roer, he

A while after the Spaniards took the towns of Burick, Dinslaken, Holt, and
Rees, in the The admiral does ransom the town of Wezel.
same country of Cleues, and all other places and frontier forts thereabouts,
chasing away or murdering the garrisons that were in them, and committing a
thousand other insolences. The reason why the admiral did not receive any
presents from Wezel, was, that he meant to young men, handicrafts men, and
workmen, so as some of them had rather be doing against 1598
ground, right, or action: But the marshall of the country dissuaded them; and
it was their best course, for if the Spaniards had but burnt their suburbs and
their country houses, it had been thrice more prejudicial unto them: besides
the marshall laid before them, That admit they had repulst an assault, two or
three, yet the Spaniard would not have cared for it, but would have returned so
often (having men enough) as he would have carried it, and then should they
loose all without redemption. The dukes soldiers hearing this resolution of
the inhabitants, and that they were in terms to do the one or the other,
being in some fear of themselves, and making their excuse, that their time
limited was expired, they retired. The judge of the town hearing the obstinat
and unreasonable demand of the Spaniard, That if they were not content with
the first accord, and that it might not be otherwise, that with the help of
God they would provide for their own defense, and would rather fire the town
themselves, and abandon it, and seek their safeties as they could. This
resolute answer did cool the Spaniard, who was very glad to have the money.

The admiral having caused Rhineberck to be invested, his Spaniards entered
into the The admiral besieges Rhineberck.
island which is in the midst of the Rhine, both on horseback and on foot,
upon whom they of the town played with their canon at their pleasures, yet
they charged them that were there for the Estates being but lightly entrenched,
which trenches they won, they also planted two pieces upon the side of the
river, from whence they did shoot against the fort which was in the island,
which the bullets did pierce thorough and thorough: the which the governor

On the twelfth day the Spaniards having entrenched themselves within their
camp, they made three batteries, either of four pieces at the point of the
island, to take away their defenses: they planted two canons more, and two
lesser pieces before Cassell port and the bulwark.

The foureteenth day (being a mist) they approached nearer, unto a sluice near
unto the Rhine port, without the half moon which was before the town. Being
thus ready to batter it, Alphonso d'Aualos caused it to be summoned by a
drum in his own private name. In the mean time the magistrate of the town
persuaded the governor to demand a pasport of the admiral, for a messenger
which they would send unto the prince elector of Cologne, to see if they might
not obtain, that the said town might be neutrall. Whereupon, and for this
summons the captains, and Nicholas Wippart auditor, being assembled, they
resolved to hold out unto the end, refusing the magistrates propositions, to
avoid all doubt and jealousy: And although they had received instructions from
prince Maurice, what to answer when they should be summoned by the admiral;
yet seeing they were summoned privately by a Maurice, and the Estates unto the
last man, and that the said drum should return no more unto them in that
behalf, if he would keep himself safe from bullets.

This drum being returned with his answer, the Spaniard began to discharge
all his The powder in the town set on fire.
ordnance, so as about nine of the clock they set fire of a tower, whereas the
powder was, the which blew it up into the air, so as there was no more powder
left in the town, but what the soldiers had in their flaskes, and what the
gunners had by the ordnance. This tower was close by the castle near unto
Rhine port, and as all the doors and windows were well shut, they could not
judge but that the fire entered with a shot, the wall being not above a Lucas
Hedduic, governor of the town had been slain, and many soldiers which were
in 1598
they came to burn the portcullis, but they were hindered by fresh men that
were sent thither to succor the town.

The town having had this great mischance, the breaches being not easily to
be repared, and the besieged finding themselves in want of powder, the
captains being assembled with Rhineberck yielded.
the auditor, to confer what was to be done, they held it convenient to
treat of a composition, whereof any delay might be very prejudicial and
dangerous, being impossible to repulse the assaults which might be given them;
wherefore striking up the drum at Sant port, they required hostages, that they
might send their deputies to the admiral. Whereupon Alphonso d'Aualos sent two
Italian captains, and out of the town there went captain Loon Fouillan, who
in the end agreed to yield the town, departing with their arms and baggage,
but their colors wound up, without any drum sounding, or fire in their
matches: That all that would might depart with the soldiers, and they should
give them forty wagons, with a good conuoy to conduct them unto Zanten, upon
promise, that for four months they should not carry arms against the king
of Spain, nor the archduke Albert.

And in this manner the town was yielded upon the fifteenth of the month, unto
Dom Alphonso d'Aualos, who showed them great courtesy, in requital of the
good usage which prince Maurice had given him at the Hage, when as he was
taken prisoner in the Betuwe, when as the duke of Parma did besiege the fort of
Knotsenbourg, right against Nimeghen, and that part of his horsemen were
defeated, which forced him to raise his siege, and to retire from

Prince Maurice had the last day of September written unto the deputies of the
inferior circles Prince Maurice writes to the deputies of the circles.
of Westphalia, being assembled at Dortmont, hearing that they were come
thither to consider of the means whereby the lands of the empire might not only
be freed from the Estates soldiers, but also from the Spaniards; and in like
manner how the towns of either party, upon the territories of the empire,
might be delivered free to their princes and lords, the which was very
pleasing unto him to hear: Wherefore he would not conceal it from them, how
that the worthy prince elector of Cologne, had required of the general Estates
of the united provinces, to have the town of Rhineberck delivered unto him:
The which the said Estates were resolved to perform, yea to give caution that
hereafter their soldiers should not

And seeing the said Estates have not taken the said town from the prince
elector, but have wrested it by force from the enemy, so as by right they
might retain it, yet they were ready upon those conditions to yield it to the
natural lord, seeming to them as reasonable, that their enemies should deliver
the towns and forts which they held of the empire, not unto the Estates, but
unto their princes and natural lords, who by force, and contrary to the

After which letters on the foureteenth of October came to the princes camp
certain deputies from the duke of Cleues, to let him understand, how that the
admiral did daily swallow up and devour the towns and places of his
countries, and that those of the circles of 1598 Deputies from the duke of
Cleues to prince Maurice
towns, attending the emperors resolution, upon such disorders and
oppressions: for that the said duke of Cleues and the princes electors of the
Rhine, had written unto his imperial Majesty, That if it were not done now at
this very instant, when as his brother, the archduke Albert was with him, that
they were resolved to take the matter in hand, the said deputies protesting
before prince Maurice and the counsel of war, that whatsoever the enemy did
or practiced against them, was not by any counterfeit dissembling of them of
the dukes country, but by mere force, violence and outrage, to the great
grief of their prince, and of all his countries and subjects.

The admiral having received this money above mentioned from Wezel, and much
more Frederic vanden Berghe would gladly have had the army entered into
Ouerissel and Friseland, but Dom Lewis de Velasco refusing to march,
considering the latenesse of the season, and Winter at hand, said openly, That
to lead the kings army so far into a country whereas they might want
victuals and other commodities, was the way to ruin. Whereupon the admiral
took his way to Bocholt, writing to all the

Prince Maurice having heard this diversity of opinions of the commanders of
the Spanish army, meaning to work securely, fearing least he should come
suddenly upon him in this village, near unto Seuenter, where he was, and cut
him off from the towns of the county of Zutphen, his intention being to lead
his army to Doesbourg, and to leave that lodging, he caused the church in
that village to be fortified, where he planted three batteries

And as the rivers of Rhine, Wahal, and Issel, were risen seven or eight foot
higher than of custom, the prince caused a ship of war to come down from
toward Rees the last of October, to cut the dike of the river of Hetter, above
Emmeric, the which was finished the same night, the pioners being defended by
1200 horse, which the earl of Hohenloo had there, so as before it was day the
water running with great force through the hole, drowned the country whereas
the Spaniard was come to lodge. The Spaniard seeing this, went thither speedily
with many musketeers, which shot furiously at the earls men, who
notwithstanding stood firm, until the enemy having brought some artillery upon
the dike, they were forced to retire from thence, as the ship of war did in
like manner: and then the Spaniard labored with all diligence to stop this
hole, the which they the same night did, to their great

The admiral having brought his army as low as Emmeric (although that the
said town, at the instance of the deane of the Jesuits, had obtained, that
they should not be charged with any garrison, for the which they had an act of
the admirals hand) yet he caused it to be summoned, to give passage to his
artillery: the which being granted, he became by that 1598
man) seeing himself deceived, he went unto the admiral, with three of his
own letters of promise, that the said town should not be in any sort oppressed
(as the Spaniards mildness and courtesy was generally well known, where as
they might be masters) to whom seeing his resolution to enter, he spoke after
this manner. Without doubt the Gueux (meaning the Estates) The deane of
Emmeric's speech to the admiral.
have reason of distrust, seeing that the Spaniards promise much, and perform
little: You have by this army distracted the hearts of a thousand, that were
well affected to the king of Spain, who otherwise would have been devoted
unto him. Seeing it can be no otherwise, we must make our complaints unto God.
Whereunto the admiral made no answer, but, That the events of war were
variable, and changed ten times in an hour, but for the present he could do no
otherwise. Yet he did them this Maurice with the regiment of cont Ernest of
Nassau, and half the Scottish men, to the fort of Tolhus, that the enemy
should not slip into the Betuwe, the which he furnished with some artillery,
to keep it with the town of Hussen; the prince remaining with the rest of his
army at Doesbourg, to defend

The eight of November the admiral being come to the camp before Deutecom with
the rest of his army, without summoning it, he planted 4 pieces of ordnance
against the port of Doesbourg, thinking to take it suddenly, and so to terrify
all the other small neighbor towns, which battery continued until the next
day at noone. The town is small and weak, having then but four companies in
garrison, which were not sufficient to defend so poor a place, against so
mighty an enemy. The night following the admiral caused fourteen pieces
more to be planted on both sides of the port of Doesbourg: whereupon the
besieged seeing that port almost battered down, and thrice as many canons
planted, they began to saint, as well Ghyselaer and la Grappe, with two
bourgmasters, went forth to treat with the admiral, the captains demanding
that they might pass out as they came in, and that the bourgers might remain
there half a year quietly to sell their goods and retire afterward if they
please, and as for the others which would remain, they should be maintained
in their liberties and freedoms: Whereunto the admiral at the first would by
no means yield, commanding them to retire, if they would not yield simply to
his mercy. Whereupon the town captains propounding unto themselves, that

From thence the admiral went before the castle of Schuylenbourg, wherein
captain Dort commanded for the Estates, with his company: he caused him to
be summoned, that in case he attended the canon, both he and all his men should
be hanged: but the captain being loath to yield it so lightly, he caused it to
be invested the same night, and brought ten pieces of 1598
and most part of the night, making his preparations to assail it the next
day, with many boats (the castle standing in a marish ground, having but one
approach) ladders, hurdels, and planks. Captain Dort seeing this, and finding
himself too weak to endure many assaults, he gave ear to a parle, on the
eleventh day, and in the end was forced to depart with a white staff only.

Prince Maurice having news of the taking of Deutecom, and of the fort of
Schuylenbourg, thinking now that the admiral would come and charge him in his
trenches by Doesbourg, he attended him there in good devotion the 11, 12, and
13 days of November. But whereas by reason of the Estates neighbor garrisons,
victuals could not come freely to the admirals Frederic Vanden Berghe said,
Against his cousin (whom he called prince Maurice) there was nothing but blows
to be gotten. So as on the 16 of November after a

Whilst the admiral was yet in counsel what to do, prince Maurice having
some doubt of the town of Lochem, which had been so much recommended unto him
by the Estates, and of the town of Zutphen, he sent a company of footmen, and
some gunners to Lochem, thinking the admiral would go against it: and he
himself went to Zutphen, to see all things well ordered, where finding all
well disposed, he returned the same day to Doesbourg, having given order for
the making of two new rauelins, whereof he himself laid the plot, as he did
in Vander Lip was chief, and captain general, being yet assembled at
Dormont, hearing the complaints which were made from diverse parts, of the
admirals irruption upon the territories of the empire, and the oppressions and
insolences of the Spaniards, they decreed about the midst of November, to
write unto the emperor, and to the four princes electors of the Rhine, that
it would please his imperial Majesty, and their excellencies, to write both
to the admiral, and to Brussels to cardinal Andrew of Austria, bishop of
Constance, governor in the absence of the archduke Albert; and in like manner
to the general Estates of the united provinces of the Netherlands, that either
of them should restore the towns which they held by their garrisons upon the
territories of the empire, yielding every of them to his prince

That as soon as the archduke Albert was gone out of the Netherlands, Dom
Francisco de The deputie^ of the circles letters from Dortmont.
Mendoza, admiral of Arragon, duke of Veraguas, marquess of Guadaleste,
governor etc. had entered with an army of about thirty thousand horse and
foot, into the duchy of Cleues, and had taken the town and castle of Orsoy,
chasing away the dukes garrison, and passing a good part of his army over the
Rhine, had fortified the village of Walsom right against the said town. From
thence he went into the duchy of Mont, and besieged the castle, and abode of
the noble lord Wirick van Daun, earl of Falckenstein, seignior of Broeck:
which castle of Broeck (which is a fee of the said duchy of Mont) he had
besieged and battered, and notwithstanding that the said earl, upon condition
of faith and promise made of liberty strange and unheard of cruelty (whose
widow was come to complain unto them, notwithstanding 1598
to the said duke his lord, having before demanded (...) safeguard from the
admiral, expecting nothing less, than any such violence) spoiling and
carrying away all that they found in the said castle. Moreover, the Spaniards
and the admirals men had taken in the countries of Cleues, the towns of
Burick, Dinslaken, Holt, and Rees, by force, committing great insolences and
outrages, taken the frontier forts, murdered and chased away the garrisons
that were in them, ransomed the town of Wezel at an hundred thousand dollers,
and one thousand quarters of corn: We do not speak how that within these two
days they have summoned some towns in the country of Munster, and forced
them to receive garrisons for the king of Spain: besides, they have ouer-run
and spoiled the quarters of Essen and Werden, the seigniorie and castle of
Frankenbergh, belonging to the earl of Schauwenbourg, and Dom Gaston Spinola,
governor of Limbourg, Frankenburch and Heyden, from which places his men did
great outrages to all men they incountred. And in like manner the Spanish
garrisons exacted certain thousands of dollers from the villages of the high
quarter of Gueldres; with many other complaints: Requiring therefore that it
would please their excellencies to be mediators to his imperial Majesty, that
some remedy may be had etc.

Whereupon the said princes electors did write on the 12 of December, the
sameyere 1598, emperor after this manner.

Most gracious Emperor, we doubt not but your Majesty has been fully
informed, not The princes electors letters to the emperor.
only of the lamentable complaints of the afflicted circles of Westphalia,
which are too apparent, have been in hostile manner invaded, by the armies of
the two parties in the Netherlands, especially by the King of Spaines
soldiers, his towns and places taken, his poor subjects spoiled, taken,
ransomed, murdered, and otherwise tormented: whereof they would more amply
inform his imperial Majesty, by the instructions thereunto adjoined, quoted
A. B. C. Saying, That they must needs confess that such attempts will sound
strangely throughout all the empire, to the scandal of his Majesty, and
contempt of his decrees, which may prove very prejudicial to the members and
estates of the said empire, if such unreasonable attempts, irruptions, and
insolences of strange soldiers, were not prevented by good and sufficient
means, and their boldness suppressed. That not only the circles and countries
Albert archduke of Austria, should be spoiled and made a prey to these strange
soldiers. And to all the admonitions and entreaties that can be made, they
have no other answer, than that they can give no other reason for all this, but
that it is so decreed in the counsel of Brussels, that the holy empire with
all the dependances and allies, should be subjected 1598
Brussels, as it should please them to command, as being bound to bear all
such undeserved burdens as it would please them to impose. Wherefore in
consideration of these causes above mentioned, we princes electors, not only
upon the complaints of these afflicted countries, but in regard of the
consequence which may follow of all these oppressions, have given order to our
men, to remain in some commodious place, and to be watchful over all, and
foresee how they might prevent those invasions of the enemy; by whose reports
the forces of either side seem so great, as in our judgments there must be
fit remedies used: yet we have given the said archduke and the cardinal of
Austria's vicegouernor at Brussels, to under stand of all these disorders, to
the end they should command the captain general of the kings army, to
forbear hereafter from all such outrages, and insolences, with order for the
restitution

The which for the care we have of the good and quiet of the empire, we could
not forbear to show unto your imperial Majesty, with all humility, hoping
you will not take it in ill part, but rather will excuse us by reason of the
importance of the cause; and

And in case we may not have this charge and commission, and that a more ample
declaration from the holy empire be required, that it would please you to
advise the deputies of the deputies of the said Estates, in case they be
required by them that are oppressed, or others to call unto their succors or
counsel the other circles, and give charge to the deputies 1598
work worthy of his clemency, the which may serve for the assurance and
quiet of the afflicted countries, and of all those of the Empire: Praying God
etc.

In the mean time, and before these letters were sent unto the emperor, M.
Charles Nutzel, seigniour of Sonderspuhel, commissioner and counselor to his
imperial Majesty, being come by his commission to preserve the country of
Cleues, to have all things restored, and to treat of the dukes marriage with the
princess of Lorraine, he writ unto the admiral the last of October from
Cleues: By the which he complained, That according unto the promise The
emperors commissioner writes unto the admiral.
which he had made unto him in the town of Gueldres, to restore the town of
Orsoy to the duke that was lord thereof, within ten, twelve, or twenty days
at the most; and that after he had taken the town of Rhineberck, all his
troops should be sent out of the country: yet having trusted too much unto
his promises, and the word of a prince, he found himself circumuented and
deceived, having received nothing but words full of air, and seen the effects
full of hostility: reproaching him, that he had gone in person from one town
unto another, ransoming them, some for great sums of money, others for
victuals and munition, the which he said he had seen with his eyes: Being a
question how this will be taken by the emperor (in whose name he said he
remained there to preserve the country) and not only of the other princes of
the empire, but of all Europe, whom it does concern in general, the which
they may easily conceive, who having their lands and jurisdictions thus
afflicted, would gladly see them freed, and assured hereafter. That the houses
of

The oppressions committed by the Spaniards, whereof the commissary co^plains,
and which A discourse of the insolences committed by the Spaniards.
were sent by attestation, quoted by number and alphabet, together with all the
admirals proceedings, were, That his men took and spoiled, without any respect
of safegards, and much less of neutralitie, betwixt the rivers of Issel and
Lip in the duchy of Iuilliers, first the castle of Diesfort, 1598
notwithstanding the safeguard set up at the gate, the which they spoiled, with
all that the poor country men (trusting in the said safeguard) had brought in
thither for their refuge and succor.

Item, the castle of Billingof, belonging to them of Bernsau, the which being
taken at the third assault, they slew all they found within it, and then
spoiled it. The castle of Oberenbergh, belonging to the seigniour of Marnholt,
was also spoiled.

Item, after they had robbed the cloister of Schlenhorst, they drew all the
Nuns into a troop, stripped them naked, ravished them, and entreated them
tyrannously. The castle of Asseldt being taken and spoiled, they threw the men
which they found in it, Godd^rd Williche, was wholly spoiled. Wenge,
appertaining to them of Gar, and the village Domic spoiled. The strong castle
of Hynd, belonging to the seigniour of Graustein, was also ruined, and all
burnt that was about it. The monasteries of Mariendale and Fryet were spoiled.
And all the villages about the said castles, endured a thousand outrages and
Vanden Broeck, and what they did there: besides they have entered into the
rivers of Lip and Roer, spoiled the castle of Wewenhuys, belonging to them of
Hueffen, and burnt the base court of the castle of Fuert, appertaining to
George van Syburch:

Item, the castle of Mamich, whereof the widow of Capelle was owner, burning
the base court. The castle of Essand, belonging to the seignior Wittenhorst,
spoiled, beaten down, and burnt, with diverse others. And going higher toward
the country of Munster and Westphalia, on the three and twentieth of November
Dom Louis de Velasco, general of the Spanish artillery, came before the town
of Dortsen, with letters from the admiral, requiring making preparation to
assail them, about noone they shot fiery bullets into the town; 1598
that their prince was ignorant of all this, and too far to deliver them from
these attempts, being unable of themselves to resist them, in the end they
consulted how they might preserve their lives, wives and children, so as they
sent certain deputies unto the Spaniard, to offer him the town, upon the best
conditions they could obtain: the which being accorded the general Velasco
entered with thirteen hundred men, and demanded the keys, with all the arms
and munition in the town, the which was not done without great oppression of
the good bourgers.

The Spaniard having got footing in the jurisdiction of Reckelinhuysen, some of
his troops marched toward Dortmont, whereas they demanded entrance to lodge
one thousand Postule of Munster, archbishop of Cologne, seeing the Spaniards
bend toward Westphalia, had sent some of his counselors, and certain
deputies of the chapter of Munster, to the admiral, to entreat him, and
advertise him that those things were contrary to the constitutions of Contarez
a Spanish commissarie went in view of the archbishop, with certain troops
toward the towns of Alem and Brockem, which they surprised by policy saying
they were the Archbishops men, as also the towns of Rene, Warendorp,

They made no difficulty to command the town of Osnabrughe, to furnish them
a man of massy silver and gilt, or two hundred pounds weight of pure gold.
They made the like demand unto them of Badenborne, the which they ransomed,
commanding the bishop to chase away the Protestant ministers, nay there were
two Wallon colonels, the baron of Hachicourt, and the earl of Busquoy, that
were not ashamed to demand of the earl of Oldenbourg, provision of money to
pay their soldiers, or else they would send them to Winter in his country: to
whom the earl made as brave a refusal.

In all places whereas the Spanish army was lodged, they would not suffer the
bourgers and inhabitants to meddle with the corn which they had in their
garners, to feed their families, Vander Lip, and of Benthem, from whom they
did extort the seigniorie of Weuelickhoue, and others. When as some advised
colonel Barlotte to carry himself more modestly, and that the princes of the
circles might take it ill: he answered (pointing with his finger) As much as
that cow. And when any of the princes ambassadors sent to the admiral, had
their dispatches, the Spaniards made mouths at them, and asses ears, with
other

Besides the Spaniards insolences before rehearsed, they committed others in
the quarters of Marck, Westphalia, Munster, and thereabouts, where they did
hang up many peasants, some by the feet, some by the hands, and some by the
privy members. In the village of Reeke 1589
piece of flesh upon a spit. It is not possible to express the execrable
rauishing and forcing of wives and maidens which they committed, whereof we
will relate some. Seven Spaniards having bound the judge of Duslemont in a
chair, they presently after ravished his wife before his face. They bound a
young virgins hands and feet to four stakes in the ground, and the hair of her
head wound about the fifth, and then they forced her: the like they had done
before to a maiden in the castle of Broek. It was not enough for them after the
taking of the castle of Billichouen, and other gentlemen's houses, to have
forced many honest wives and virgins, but they did set their heads downward,
and their legs upward (being stripped naked) in the feathers of beds, and in
this manner did use them so inhumanely, as it is a shame to write it; with many
other barbarous acts, which are not fit to be written.

All these detestable cruelties were set down in writing, and sent unto the
emperor, and to many princes of Germany, whereupon the duke of Brunswick made
a proclamation over all his territories, of the nineteenth of December 1598,
wherein were briefly contained all the attempts and cruelties of the Spaniards,
exhorting all his subjects to take arms against them. The archbishop of
Cologne who was much interessed, did write unto the Landtsgraue of Hessen, on
the ninth of December, requiring his advice what was to be done in these
occurrents. The six princes electors by their letters on the 12. of December,
did write unto the Emperor at large, aduertising him of all these cruelties,
and complaining greatly that his imperial authority was contemned and trodden
under foot by the Spaniards; for the redressing whereof they desire succors.
The archduke Albert being come to Milan, he writ in Vanden Broeck to have
done acts of hostility against the kings men, as if he would say (and as the
admiral has since said) that he had well deserved it.

Upon the letters from the electors, the emperor did write unto the archduke
Albert on the thirtieth of December, complaining, that notwithstanding so many
letters written to cardinal Andrew of Austria, then governor of the
Netherlands, and to the admiral; namely, on the 24 of October, and on the 14,
19, and 29 of November, by the which he commanded Andrew of Austria,
admonishing him of his duty, that his imperial Majesty be not forced to
take another course to remedy it by his imperial authority. And in like
manner he sent unto the admiral, the complaints which he received daily, of
the excess of his men of war, commanding Vanden Broeck corporally, restore
unto his wife her jewels, and all that had been taken out of the castle, upon
pain of default, that he should be forced to use his imperial authority etc.
this letter serving but for a kind of advertisement.

The emperor did write the like unto the Estates of the united provinces, of
the same date, and from the same place, that for their parts they should quit
those places which they held upon the territories of the empire, releasing
prisoners, and forbearing to attempt any further etc. To which letters of
advertisement, both to the one and the other, the emperor added his
proclamation, or imperial commandment, the which we have thought good to
insert The emperors proclamation against the admiral.


Rodulphus by the grace of God, elect emperor of the Romans, always Augustus
king of Germany, Hongarie, Bohemia, Dalmatia, Croatia, Sclauonia, archduke of
Austria, duke of Bourgoigne, Stiria, Carinthia, Crain, and Wirthemberg, earl
of Tyrol etc. To our well-beloved 1598
Dom Francisco de Mendoza, admiral of the kingdom of Arragon, Marquess of
Guadaleste, commander of the knights of the order of Val de Peunas, captain
general to our most dear brother Albert, archduke of Austria, and to all
commanders of the said army, colonels; captains, lieutenants, ensigns,
officers, and in general to all men of war, both of horse and foot, of what
name, estate, condition, or quality soever they be, to whom this present
Imperial commandment shall come, or be signified, so far as they shall be
found camped, or lodged upon the lands, or in the towns, forts, places, and
rivers, belonging to us and the holy Empire, or the members, estates, and
allies thereof, either by water or by land: We let you know, that the princes
and estate of the circle of Westphalia, and especially of the most famous John
William duke of Iuilliers, Cleues, and Berghen, Wirick Daun, earl of
Falckenstein, called Broeck, made his residence, they battered it with the
canon, so as in the end the earl yielding, upon faith and promise of assurance
of body and goods for him and all his; yet most part of the soldiers were cut
in pieces, and the said earl, notwithstanding that he had required a safeguard
from the admiral, not fearing any inconvenience, as he went to walk, with
the consent of the captain of the castle, was very miserably murdered. In the
mean time the said soldiers Alexander Vehle, a colonel, having presumed to
offer unto the bishops vicar, and the counselors of the diocese of Munster, a
list of the quarters of merchandise must needs cease, with many other
concussions and violences; for the 1598
and other princes of the empire, in the behalf of the poor afflicted and
desolate. Considering that all these invasions are done wrongfully and
unjustly, and are not excusable, that you admiral have presumed to invade our
said countries, and those of the holy empire in hostile manner, before
peaceable and quiet, being bound unto us by oath, with so mighty an army,
without defiance, summation, or advertisement; and especially at such a time,
when as neither we, nor any of the other princes, nor Estates, did expect any
dislike or quarrel from the king of Spain, and much less from our dear
brother the archduke Albert, nor yet from the general governors of the
Netherlands; but rather attended all good and sincere friendship,
neighborhood, correspondencie, and neutralitie, and not to Vanden Broeck does
displease you, you shall cause all them that murdered him, to be corporally
punished, according to their merits, restoring unto the countess his widow,
all the goods, gold, silver, jewels, and plate, which were taken from her, or
the just value thereof. That all persons as well ecclesiastical as civil,
armed and unarmed, be set at liberty by you, without any ransom. And that
hereafter you shall not attempt any thing more against the said countries,
places, subjects, or others, nor oppress them in any sort whatsoever, nor yet
show your self slack, nor disobedient, if you will avoid the above mentioned
pains, according to the which you shall order and govern your self: for such
is our intention and will. Rodulphus.

The emperor did write in like manner to the general Estates of the united
provinces, commanding them to retire their forces out of the country of
Westphalia, and other places of the empire, upon pain of imperial
proscription, in substance as here immediately follows.

Rodulphus etc. To all and every the Estates general of Holland, and Zeeland,
and the provinces associate unto them, their colonels, commanders of horse, and
their lieutenants, The emperors commandment to the general Estates.
captains, ensigns, officers, and generally to all their men of war, both
of horse and foot, howsoever they be called, and of what quality or condition
soever towns, forts, and castles. We give you to understand, that we have
seen and heard the 1598
John William duke of Iulliers, Cleues, and Mont, our most dear and well
beloved cousin, how that in autumn last, as well the king of Spaines soldiers
as yours, have entered and lodged in the said quarters, committing great
spoils: and that among others, many electors, princes, and noble men, had
instantly required and besought us to interpose our imperial authority. And
although we have written thereof at large unto the commander and captain
general of your united provinces, by letters of the nineteenth of September,
and the second of October: yet we understand, that you have not only neglected
it, but do even at this hour maintain your army in the territories, of the
duchy of Cleues, and that of late you have taken the town of Seuenter, and
the fort of Tolhus, called

Wherefore we command you all in general, and every one in particular, of our
imperial Rodulphus.

To these two imperial commandments directed to the admiral of Arragon and
his Spaniards, on the one part, and to prince Maurice and the general Estates
of the united provinces on the other, there were letters added from the
emperor, bearing the same date, admonishing them to obey the said
commandments respectively. But for that the admiral did not much regard his
letters and commandment, but continued still his old course, delaying

We have showed in the year 1595, before the archduke Alberts coming into
the Netherlands, how favorably they dealt in Spain with the Netherla^ders,
releasing al their ships and men which had been stayed for the kings service,
and granting them free liberty to traffic into Spain: but this winter news
came out of Spain, that they made strait search and inquiry, among all the
Dutch ships which were found in any ports of those countries, of the masters
and sailors to prison, and putting many of them in the galleys; yet a great
number 1599
and fled away, being forced to leave both ship and goods behind them. In
Andolousia and some other places in Spain, if they did but suspect any
Netherland merchant or sayler to have been in the Indian fleet, or at the
taking of Cales, they examined and tortured them, and being confessed, they
were made galley-slaues without redemption. In Portugal they dealt more mildly
with the Netherlanders, for that the Castilians which governed there, durst not
presume any way to break their privileges, so as most of them got safely home.

For confirmation, and to excuse this rigorous proceeding, Andrew cardinal of
Austria, A proclam^tion in the (...) name* forbidding all traffic into Spain.
governor of the Netherlands for the Infanta, by a proclamation bearing date
the ninth of Er^stus and the cardinal Albert to be governors over them, for
that they complained so much of the Spaniards government, which his favors and
kind usage they also despised. In the end the king of mere compassion and
love, resolved to give the Netherlands unto some Albertus, who in her name had
assembled the Estates at Brussels, commanding and suffering them to write unto
the united provinces, to reconcile them unto the king, whose messengers
returned without any resolution, which proceeded from an obstinate
unthankfulness toward God, their prince, and native country; having no
commiseration nor compassion, to think that the empire was much troubled and
oppressed by their wars, Christendom invaded by the Turk, and the Netherlands
miserably spoiled and ruined: making the simple people believe that they loose
not thereby, but that they have free trade of seafaring, fishing, and
merchandise, growing richer and mightier by war, than ever they were; which
grew, for that they were suffered (by pasport and license) to trade

For which cause, the king her brother had forbidden them all traffic into
Spain, until they should show themselves obedient subjects, as they had
been in times past. And therefore she by the good advice and counsel of the
governor, cardinal Andrew her cousin, and of the council of Estate, did
forbid all communication, traffic, and trade of merchandise, with the
aforesaid Hollanders, Zeelanders, and their adherents, whether it were by their
substitutes or others, until such time as they should be reconciled unto his
Majesty, or unto her, as their sovereign and natural lady and princess:
forbidding all men to transport any money, or wares etc. by sea, rivers, or by
land, directly or indirectly unto them, nor yet out

This proclamation being published, the second of April 1599, another was
made by the A proclamation made by the united Estates to forbid traffic with
Spain^.
united provinces, to forbid all trade into Spain, or into those countries
which were subject unto him, as also concerning the giving or receiving of any
safegards from their enemy, thereby to traffic or fish freely, upon pain of
punishment and confiscation of 1599
withal forbidding all sailors and pilots which should be taken prisoners by
the enemy, to pay any otherwise than was appointed by them to be paid:
ordaining that all ransomes and losses should be levied upon the officers and
subjects of the villages of Brabant, Flaunders, and other provinces under the
enemies command; besides the contribution which they used to pay unto them
for the common cause, giving the charge and command thereof unto certain
committees thereunto deputed.

The general Estates also caused a proclamation to be published in Friseland,
against the A proclamation made in Friseland forbidding contribution to the
enemy.
enemies safegards, who by letters and threatenings sought to force them of
Friseland to pay them contribution, upon promise of safeguard and defense from
them; and for that cause

This year there were three ships set out of Holland, to discover a mine of
gold about

This winter the united provinces prepared not only for a defensive war, as
they had done some years before, but also to offend the enemy, who lay so
strong upon their frontiers Ernestus earl of Nassau, a commission to levy a
regiment of high Duchess of ten companies, every commission being two
hundred men, the which were raised about Emden. Monsieur la Noue had charge to
bring two thousand men out of France into Holland, of those which had so long
served the king there at their own charges, hoping the king would be the more
willing to restore the money which they had disbursed for the entertainment of
those men, especially the money being paid unto his own subjects and
vassals. They also entertained a thousand Suitsers which had served in France:
they added nine cornets more to their horse men, one cornet being under prince
Maurice, his lieutenant was Ioncker Walrauen van Gent, son to the lord of
Oyen, two cornets Timpel, Balen, John Bax, La Sale, Cloet, and Hamelton a
Scottish man. The Scottish footmen were also made comple^, every company
consisting of an hundred and fifty men, and the colonels company of two
hundred. They would willingly have had more supplies out of England, but they
durst not 1599
sent over, for her wars in Ireland, offering to send 2000 new soldiers in
their places, which they could not refuse; and for that at that time there were
27 companies of English, they sent six whole companies, and out of the rest
they chose the worst men they could find to make up the number, which was ill
taken: in whose places the Queen sent over about two thousand new soldiers
under Sir Thomas Knowles, who expected to be colonel over them, but he could
get but a company, and the rest of the men did serve to fill up the other
companies.

They further made a proclamation concerning their musters, for the preventing
of all deceit, Orders made by the Estates for their horse and foot.
by keeping their companies full, with all other orders necessary for the
wars: as first

At that time they used no more lances, for that they could do but small
service, unless they were running in their full cariere, but in stead thereof
they did use pistols or short pieces, and did wear cassockes or liueries as
launciers were accustomed to do. The footmen which carried pykes, were to have
a headpiece, a gorget, a back and a breast, a sword or rapier, a pyke of
eighteen foot long, and that upon a penalty, and the one quarter of those
that did bear pykes, were to have poldrons to their elbowes.

The musketeers were to have a headpiece, a rapier, a musket, carrying a
bullet whereof

In the end of January 1599, certain cornets of Reisters of the united
Provinces, with some companies of foot, under the leading of Edmonds, a
Scottishman, and others, made a rode into the countries of Lembourg and
Luxembourg, for that they brought not in their contribution orderly as they had
promised, whereas they made a great spoil upon them of Kelinsberch, and
others, taking many horses and great store of booty from them, and bringing
away many gentlemen prisoners, who were forced to answer for the said
contribution. Schenckern, near Iuilliers, whose bodies they caused to be cut
down, and honorably buried, and in their return they took certain horses
from the baron of Grobendonc, and after that they overthrew a troop of
soldiers, which were gathered together for some secret enterprise upon Breda.
This enterprise notwithstanding was attempted on the seventeenth of February,
by a soldier called la Roche, who had bin labored by Grobendonc, governor of
Boisleduc, and by Augustine Mexia, Castellaine of Antuerpe, to give entry to
the kings forces into Breda, promising him two thousand crowns, with other
preferments: but he discovered it to prince Maurice, who with Gouert Montons
and Monsieur Heraugier, governor of the town, devised how to entrap these
undertakers, la Roche discharged his part well. The seventeenth of February
the baron of Grobendonc and Augustine Mexia came secretly in the night with
four thousand foot and eleven cornets of horse, before Breda, whereas secretly
(and yet cunningly) the gate was set open for them, and all things well
observed both within and without: but in regard of the great care that is to be
taken in such cases; for that diverse of the bourgers, and some of Montons 1599
were in some doubt, and therefore they caused a bridge to be drawn up, and
so disappointed their design, only giving charge and commandment to
discharge the ordnance as the enemy approached, the which was done disorderly,
for the reason aforesaid, yet the Spaniards marching circumspectly, finding
themselves to be deceived, and being then so near the town, they would have
offered to have forced it, but it was in vain the bridge being drawn up, yet
their resolution kept them of the town from sallying out upon them: and it was
thought there were some hundred of them slain, and so they retired without any
more loss.

There was another enterprise attempted upon Nymeghen, by the earl of
Bothwell, William Libboth, and one Robert Lumsden, with promise of 3000 crowns
for a reward, to betray the town unto the Spaniards, having good means to
effect it, for that there lay four companies of Scottish men within the town.
There was also one M. Thou, whom they both knew well, and trusted, for that in
former times he had been of the Bothwels faction in Scotland, whom they
acquainted with this practice, expecting aid from him; but in the end he
discovered the whole plot, so as Libboth and Lumsden were apprehended, and
committed to prison: the said Lumsden having been most eager about this
practice, being condemned was executed at the Hage, much lamenting his treason.

About this time there happened a strange accident in Deuenter, committed by
one A preacher murdered at Deuenter.
Henrick Achteruelt, who traitorously murdered one M. Schorickmans a minister
in the said town: this Henrick Achteruelt being in the church, whereas the
said preacher had made a sermon, and was come down out of the pulpit, walking
behind the quire between two men, this Achteruelt followed him, and thrust him
into the neck with a knife which had two edges, clean through the throat, and
cut a piece of his tongue, wherewith the minister fell down, and died
presently. Having done this villainous act, he ran out of the Church, but
being followed by the officers of the town on horse back, he was taken and
rackt, where he confessed that he had done that deed willingly, in regard of
his doctrine, and for the zeal he bare to the catholic Romish religion, to
the which end he had caused the

This winter upon the eighteenth day of January, the garrisons of Lillo and
Liefkenshook-skonce lying upon the river of Scheld, set upon the skonce of Veyr
in Flanders, right against Antuerpe, who going behind the drowned land,
suddenly entered it, and slew all that made any resistance, taking all that was
within it, where they found good booty and jewels, which came out of the
castle of Antuerpe, by means of the mutiny of the garrison there; and among
other things they found a case of pearls, of great value, and took many
prisoners, which they put to ransom, and so returned back again to their
garrisons.

The division continued still at Emden, betwixt the earl of east Friseland,
and the town, by the practices of the Spaniards, and the king of Poland, so as
the contract made at Delfziel was broken, and a faction growing in the town of
Emden, for the advancing of the earls pretenses: this faction consisted of
merchants, owners of ships, and sailers trading into Spain, who as then
hoped, by means of the prohibition of trade into Spain, and the Spaniards
rigorous proceeding against the Netherlands (who secretly under other men's
names had great dealings in Spain) to draw the whole trade into their hands,
whereof the Netherlanders being debarred, they should also in all appearance
loose their trade in the east countries, and so all that traffic would also
fall into the hands of them of Emden. This faction being strong, by the
encouragement of the earl, and such as were affected to the Spaniard, unto the
contract and agreement made at the town of Delfziel, wherefore the united 1599
bourgers binding themselves unto the Estates for the payment thereof,
wherewith they levied some soldiers under certain captains and commanders,
remembering diverse p^sidents of the duchy of Cleues, Westphalia, the town of
Wezel, and others, wherefore it much behooued them to stand upon their guard:
yet they of the contrary faction sought to make themselves masters of the
town, so as in the month of April there was likely to have been a great
tumult within the town, whereas they had shut up the magistrate and about some
forty others in the town house, and in the mean time the contrary faction
resolved to send to treat with the earl; which they of the town fearing, they
made means unto the Estates to send them some soldiers with all speed: to
whom captain John vander Corput was sent, with certain companies, who being
near unto the town, and the earls messengers coming to Emden, met with them
of the town, unto whom captain Corput spoke, and took them away with him,
saying, there was no reason the town of Emden should agree with the earl,
unless the united provinces (according to the contract and agreement made at
the town of Delfziel) might have their voices and consent therein: by which
means the pretentions of the said factions for that time ceased. Not long
after Edsard earl of east Friseland died, leaving five sons by his wife, who
was daughter to the king of Sweathland, their names were cont Enno the eldest,
Gustanus, John, Christopher, and Charles; whereof, Enno until that time was
called baron of Esens by his marriage with the heir of Esens, who took the
rule and government of the country upon him: his brother Christopher went to
serve the archduke Albert in the Netherlands, who made him colonel of a
regiment of foot, the which he raised this year in Brabant, and elsewhere.

Enno earl of Emden coming to the government (by the mediation of John
Frederick bishop of Breme, son to Adolph duke of Holst, and of the duches
dowager of Holst, the said Enno having for his second wife married one of his
daughters) made an agreement with them of Emden, and with their adherents,
together with the united provinces, according unto the contract made at
Delfziel four years before. This accord was afterward proclaimed in Emden the
sixth day of October, in the year 1599, and cont Enno was installed in his
earldom.

As certain troops were levied this year in France by monsieur la Noue, for
the united Andrew of Austria governor of the Netherlands, sent the earl of
Bassigni, son to the lord of Boytel, to hinder the same, and to make
complaint unto the king, for that he had suffered such aid to go unto the
rebellious Netherlands, contrary to the contract and agreement of peace:
whereunto the king made a short answer, saying, that he understood that such as
went thither were Huguenots, who went to aid their brethren, for that the war
which he had been constrained to maintain with the leaguers (wherein they had
faithfully served him) had made him so bare as he could not reward their
services, whereby they might have means to live quietly at home in their
houses: and that if the cardinal had need of as many leaguers out of his
realm, that he was content to grant them to do him service: and if it
should be construed to be against the peace, he said

In the beginning of this year the old countess of Arembergh (a wise and
discreet lady) The death of the old countess of Aremberghe.
widow to the earl of Arembergh, who was slain in battle by Lodowicke earl
of Nassau, dicd at Seuenberghen, where she lived as in a neutrall place; so as
upon the 24 of February, they of Holland decreed that her lands and goods
(which were of great value in Holland, and by her death descended unto her two
sons, who as then served the king, being their enemies)

The princes electors of the Rhine, and of the inferior circle of Westphalia,
having their 1599
for the admirals disorders, by way of arms, seeing that the emperors letters
were of so small credit with him: to that end they did write to the princes and
estates of the circle of Franconia, and the lower Saxony, to move them to
join with them, and with their common forces, to chase the Spaniards out of
the limits of the empire, and that the said princes, to the number of five
circles, would to that end, send their deputies of Conflans, on the 11 of March
following, the which they did.

In the mean time the emperor did write again from Prague the 11 of
February, 1599, to cardinal Andrew of Austria, governor of the Netherlands
in the absence of the archduke Albert, reiterating his commandments, with
other letters to the like effect to the admiral; Maurice had before taken from
them, and delivered to the duke free.

The archduke Albert meaning to excuse himself of all these disorders, by his
letters written unto the emperor from Milan on the 29 of December, he seems
to lay the blame upon cardinal Andrew, that the imperial commandment for the
retreat of the Spaniards out of the territories of the empire, was not
executed: whether he did it fainedly or with a good intent, may well appear,
by the taking again of Emmeric.

The deputies being at Cologne, by letters of the 21 of January, made their
complaints unto the emperor, as well of the admiral and the Spaniards, as of
prince Maurice and the Estates Vander Lip, captain general of the lower
circle of Westphalia: which commissarie, before he would propound any thing in
the assembly of the deputies, required a copy of the reasons why the admiral
was sent for, with the names of all the deputies, and of the princes, lords,
and Estates their masters, saying, that if they thought those affairs should
be decided according to the constitutions of the empire, they were deceived,
but it was his intention that they should be ended according to the form of a
council Albert, and the cardinal Andrew, they would see his letters of
credit, and hear his propositions: the which being seen, the commissarie
would not say any thing until the next day.

In the mean time the deputies of the princes and Estates of the circles
being somewhat divided, the commissioner sent to the deputies of cont Vander
Lip, that they should send one to confer with him, which was only to have
a delay for the delivering of his propositions, the which he said he would at
large in writing on the sunday following. At which day, the said co^missioner
being in the assembly of the deputies, he presented a certain iustificatory
writing in the admirals name, promising as soon as might be to retire the
Spanish forces out The substance of the admirals letters to the deputies at
Cologne
were full of allegations, pretending an urgent necessity, which had moved the
king of Spain to come and lodge his army in those quarters, that he might
the better by that means subdue his enemies the Estates, laying before them
the great benefits which the empire had received from the king of Spain, and
the house of Burgoigne; wherefore it was reciprocally bound to serve and
accommodate him therein; saying, that he was not come thither with any bad
intent, to incorporate any man's lands, or country, or to wrong any man, but
through extreme and urgent necessity, and with sincere affection which he
bare unto the empire, and the preservation thereof, accusing as much as
possibly he could, and princes of Germany, nor yet the grace which the king
of Spain has done them to Albert; 1599
so as they have bin forced to take a very rigorous course. And seeing that the
king and the said archduke had made him General of their army, to employ it
as soon as might be, and to march into the kings country, which was held by
the enemies, they have thought they might well allow them so much, as to pass
by the frontiers of the empire, to take from the enemy those places they held,
and afterward restore them to their lords. In the mean time, by the long
expectation of the prince elector of Cologn, after the yielding of Rhinberck,
and the retreat of the enemies ships upon the Rhine, the said army by the
diligence of the archduke (pretending to ruin Schencks fort, situated upon one
of the corners of the Rhine) had staid still: but afterward being suspected
of delaie in the pursuit of this design, we Vanden Broeck, who for his
accustomed cruelty, and for the hatred he had formerly borne them, falling upon
them that went to forage, and putting them to the sword, remembering it, and
being incensed to revenge for former affronts, having neglected and contemned
our brotherly admonitions, desiring rather to practice arms Schencks skonce,
the which being strong both by art and nature, of hard access by reason of
the waters, ill to batter, and worse them to put in balance according to
equity, the benefits which they have received from 1599
may cause them suffer, in regard of that which his enemies had caused them to
endure, if this army of the kings had not restrained them. Finally, having
laid before them the assurance there was (were it by peace or war) that rest
and tranquillity would ensue: that it would please them to bear this common
fortune modestly betwixt them and the king, and contain their subjects for a
time with patience, and rather make the best interpretation of this action to
the emperor, and other princes of the empire, than by badde reports and
fruitless and false complaints, and badde conceptions, aggrauate the kings
sincere actions, bringing our innocence into danger, and it may be, under a
pretext of commiseration and succors required, kindle a fire which would
spread over the whole empire, the which may not be Charles Nutzel, his
Majesty's commissioner in these parts, to oppose there can be nothing expected
but fire and flame, and a total deuastation. Wherefore we 1599
good offices to his Majesty and the Estates of the empire, seeking nothing
more, than by the effects to attain unto a good peace, and to discharge the
frontiers of the empire of the said army, as soon as may be; wherein if
through the presumption, rashness, or bad practices of some I be hindered, we
protest openly, that the blame of all the mischief shall be laid upon the
authors and procurers of those hindrances, and not upon the king. And to the
end that the reasons here produced for his Majesty's justification and ours,
may be the better represented unto his imperial Majesty, and to your
excellencies, and the necessity which has forced us thereunto, we entreat
you, that in stopping your ears to all false reports (which else would
increase daily) you will now resolve to assist this war with all your means,
and to convert Francis of Mendoza, great Admiral of Arragon.

The same deputies of the admiral, on the seventh of February following,
presented a certain declaration in the assembly of the deputies of the princes
and Estates of the said five circles, in the said town of Cologne, in the name
of the king of Spain, the archduke Albert, the cardinal Andrew, and the said
admiral, in a sharp and Jesuitical style, in the which are related
particularly and at large, the iustifications, reproaches, instances, and
pursutes made unto the emperor and to the princes summarily set down in the
admirals letters: All which discourse seems rather to be made in contempt and
mockery, and the more to incense the Germans,

The fifteenth of December, the same year 1598, there died in the town of
Leiden in Holland, Aldegonde and Longolius die.
that worthy and learned personage, Philip of Marnix, seignior of S. Aldegonde,
who was (...)
day there died in the town of Arnhem, doctor Elbert Leonin, called Longolius,
chauncellor of Gueldres, sometimes professor, and a great lawyer in the
university of Louuaine, a man of great knowledge and experience in affairs of
estate, of a quick conceit, and sound judgment, having also done great
services to the said prince and States. He was above 80 years old when he
died. In two days together the united provinces of the Netherlands, lost these
two learned men.

Cardinal Andrew, governor of the Netherlands in the absence of the archduke
Albert, The elector of Mentz answer to cardinal Andrew,
did also send Fernando Lopes de Villa noua, governor of Carpen, to the
emperor, with the Fern. Lopes by the said prince elector, the 25 of February
1599.

The Estates of the united provinces sent in like manner their iustifications
in writing, of all 1599 Letters from the united provinces to the princes of
Germany.
was, That they had received their letters, containing the complaints of the
circles of Westphalia; for the wrongs and oppressions which the countries of
Cleues, Iuilliers, Cologne, and Westphalia, did suffer by the soldiers of
either party: By the which letters they were required to retire their
soldiers out of the confines of the empire, without any delay, restoring the
towns which they held, pulling down the forts which they had built, and
leaving the countries, towns, and estates of the empire in their ancient
peace, quiet, and tranquillity: Whereunto their answer and resolution was in
like sort requisite. In answer whereof the said Estates protested, That they
were very sorry to hear of any such complaints, and the more, for that they
were put in the same rank with the Spaniards and the admiral, who had not
forborne

Whereas for their parts (say the Estates) nothing has been done but by mere
constraint and necessity (which has no law) for the preservation,
maintenance, and assurance of their united o
electors, and namely the prince elector of Cologne, with whom they desired
nothing more, than to entertain all good alliance, amity, correspondencie,
and good neighborhood: maintaining themselves in that sort, without diminution
of their estate, until they might once see an end, whereunto they have always
aspired, unto that hour, and the which they have sufficiently made known by
their resolution, to restore the town of Rhineberck to the said prince elector
of Cologne, to hold that under the laws of neutralitie, if that had not been
prevented by the siege which the admiral laid before it, who thereby would
give color to his attempts unto those, who through impatiency would not look
unto the ground of the matter: to do as much for the town of Berck, with the
declaration of the true means to entertain 1599
contrary) did not hinder it: which their good and sincere intention has
been so much the more apparent, for that according to the order set down by
prince Maurice their general, to chase away the enemies garrisons out of the
town of Emmeric, they have done it, and being satisfied therewith, have
yielded the town unto his prince. Whereby your excellencies and other princes
may judge of the sincerity of their actions, without any doubt or distrust of
them: but that you would rather seek the means, by the which the Spaniards
and their adherents might be chased out of all Germany, and prevented of their
pretended monarchy, driving them even beyond the Alps, to the end that the
members and subjects of the empire may be delivered and freed from so great
troubles and dangers, wherein for these many years

During all these rescriptions and iustifications of either side, the Spaniards
had, like harbingers with chalk in their hands, run over and forraged the
frontiers of Germany in Westphalia, Cleueland, Marck, and Bergh, the which
neither writing nor threats could make them

Whereunto answer was made by the said confederat Estates, That they had hoped
and did Letters from the Estates to the deputies of the circles.
verily believe, that they had given contentment upon the like points unto his
imperial Majesty, and to the princes, by their precedent letters, whereof
they sent a copy unto the said deputies: for that nothing had been since
attempted by them upon the territories of the empire, held, and were of
necessity to hold for their safety upon the territories of the empire; that
as 1599
them, and give order for the excursions of their men of war. And whereas the
deputies required, That the Estates would abandon and ruin the fortof
Grauenweerd: they showed that the country and jurisdiction of the duchy of
Geldre, had always maintained, and did yet, that that place is of the
seigniorie and dependence of Geldre, and not of Cleues. And if the duke of
Cleues would not be therewith contented, that in that case they would be
mediators to the Estates of Geldres, and the county of Zutphen, which are of
their union, that they would consent to have this controversy decided by the
said deputies, according to the treaty past in the year 1544 betwixt the
emperor and the duke of Cleues, by the which the said difference has remained
unto this day undecided, so as they cannot now do otherwise. They

The said deputies of the circles being again assembled at Munster, writ their
letters unto the The deputies write again to the Estates.
general Estates of the united provinces, on the 15 of May, insisting chiefly
upon the restitution and abandoning of those places which the Estates held upon
the confines of the empire, especially for the fort Grauenweerd, the which does
the Spaniard more hurt than all the rest. The It is a mineral matter which
they use about copper. The Estates answer.
Montaigne of Calmine, in the country of Lembourg, to contribute, and that for
the execution thereof their men had burnt certain mils to beat copper.
Whereupon the Estates answered, That for the first point of restitution of
places, they thought they had given them contentment by their letters of the 12
of the said month, and by the copy annexed, written unto the emperor, and to
the princes of the empire: for that the places which they held were only for
their defense, manned with a moderat garrison, and well paid, the which did not
oppress the inhabitants, whereas if the Spaniards had held them (whereof they
would not have failed, if they had not bin prevented) they must have attended
nothing but ruin and desolation: assuring them again to have them, as soon
as the Spaniard

As for the contributions of the Calmine, that they should not take it in ill
part, to advance the Spaniard, for that if they get any contributions out of
the enemies country, the Spaniards draw much more out of theirs: that it is
according to the law of arms, wherein they have done no wrong unto the empire.
That they had no knowledge of the burning of any mils, if it be not by some
exploit of war, wherein it is very hard (although they should

Henry Iules duke of Brunswick and Lunebourg, postule of Halberstat, hearing
the many complaints of the barbarous cruelties committed by the Spaniards upon
the frontiers of Germany, 1599
had on the nineteenth of December the year past, by his proclamation,
exhorted his subjects and vassals, to be armed and ready upon all occurrents
to repulse the attempts of the Spaniards: wherein he was seconded by prince
Maurice, landtgraue of Hessen, who having levied good troops of men, with those
that the Estates of the circles, above named, joined unto them, made a goodly
body of an army, none but Germans, being about ten thousand foot and three
thousand horse, whereof noble Simon earl of Lip was general: Philip earl
of Hohenloo commanded the duke of Brunswicks troops, and George Euerard earl
of Solins, those of the landtgraue of Hessen, and Oliver of Timpel, seignior of
Cruybeke, was called from the service of the general Estates of the united
provinces, to be general of the artillery to the said army, without the
assistance of which Estates, to speak the truth, the said army had

This army being on foot, the Spaniards left their lodgings about the end of
April, in the quarters of Westphalia and Munster, the which they left
miserable and desolate, coming along the Rhine, to the towns of Emmeric and
Rees: then the army approached, and came and besieged the fort of Walsom, right
against Orsoy, on the rivers side, which the Germans took, after which the
army spent almost two months idly in those quarters, to the great
coffeehouse of the said princes of Brunswick and Hessen, and of their
lieutenants. In the end cont Vander Lip causing it to descend lower on the
same side of the Rhine, the admiral of Arragon retired his Spaniards out of
Emmeric the 7 of May, displacing the bridge which he had upon the Rhine, and
carrying it down before the town of Rees, and having well managed the

The German army having the town of Emmeric at their devotion, being
abandoned by the admiral, cont Vandr Lip besieged Rees, a little town, and
of small defense, being unworthy to stay such an army, in which camp
(besides the coffeehouse of the commanders and soldiers) there were many
wants from the beginning, and had been more, if the Estates had not relieved
them, whose army also was not far from them. This sudden and unexpected
descent of the Spaniards into the isle of Bomel, made them of the town to
waver, so as many of the inhabitants retired with what they could carry away.
Whereof prince Maurice Spronck commanded for the Estates, who after it had
been battered, having endured some assaults, he was forced to yield by
composition, he and his men departing with their full arms and baggage.

The Estates seeing the last year how the king of Spain drew unto them with
his army, Peter vander Does was admiral general; his ship was called Orange,
and carried an orange colored flag: William Diericsen Cloyer was captain of
the ship. The second was Ian Gheerbrandiz, carrying a white flag, and the third
Cornell is Ghyleynsem of Flessingue. Captain Sturme was lieutenant colonel,
with some companies of foot, and great store of mariners: so as there were
about 8000 soldiers and sailors, the which being well provided, stayed but for
a wind.

Prince Maurice being at Bomel, and resolved to set upon the admirals bridge,
which he had made upon the river of Meuse, he sent for most part of the said
mariners: whereof the admiral being advertised by two French men which were
fled unto him from the princes camp, this enterprise was not followed, and the
mariners were sent back.

The admiral after he had provided for the defense of his bridge upon the
Meuse, approaching Maurice made trenches without 1599
the town (to hinder his near approach) from one corner of the river unto the
other, the which he manned with good troops; yet the Spaniard left not to
approach near, and to bring his artillery to batter the town at random, as
he did, so as colonel Murrey, a Scottish man, being upon the rampar, and
viewing the countenance of the Spaniards camp, was slain with a canon. And as
the princes army was part of it in the town, part in the trenches, and the
rest on the other side of the river of Wahal, he was forced to make a bridge of
boats upon the said river, before the town, to pass from one quarter to
another. The Spaniard to annoy this bridge, planted certain pieces of ordnance
upon the river side, to batter it in flank, doing much harm unto passengers,
and in the town. In the mean time the besieged (who

The Spaniards being parted from their camp with four thousand foot, and a
good troup of horse, appearing plainly that it was for some exploit or
enterprise, which they supposed to be upon the town of Breda, prince Maurice
having some intelligence thereof, parted from Bomel, and past the Meuse to
enter into Brabant, near the town of Wandrichom, with sixteen

The sea army of the Estates did set sail the five and twentieth of May, to
go and brave the Spaniards at their own doors, so as upon the eleventh of
June, coming near unto the Groyne, they met with two Spanish boats, and
having taken a Spaniard out of one of them (they being also sent to discover
them) they understood, that they were advertised upon that coast of their
coming, and that they were in arms, that at the Groine there were four
thousand foot, and some horse. Whereupon the general having called his
captains aboard the admiral (within canon shot of the fort, which shot among
their ships) they found it not

Whilst that the earl Vander Lip was with his German army at the siege of
Rees, and the admiral in the island of Bomel, the deputies of the circles of
the empire, being now assembled Letters from the deputies of the circles to the
Estates.
in the town of Huxar, they writ unto the Estates the eighteenth of June,
tending to the same complaints of their troops lying in the suburbs of Embden.
Whereunto answer was made the tenth of July, being conformable to the others.
And soon after the deputies writ other

Afterward the said deputies sent a trumpet with letters on the three and
twentieth of June, demanding a safe conduct for a certain number of them, who
would come unto the Estates The German deputies send to the Estates for a
pasport.
to treat with them as well of the points and grieuances above mentioned, as of
other matters concerning the quiet of Germany, and the preservation of the
public good: which trumpet 1599
which are set down the insolences and oppressions of the Spaniards in the
countries of Westphalia, Cleues, Cologne, Marck and Mont: and that for their
own defense, the Estates had need to make use of the towns which they held as
it were by way of lone of the country of Cleues. But as the journey to come
into Holland, seemed too troublesome for the deputies, they desire by letters
of the fourteenth of July, that the Estates would send to them and to cont
Vander Lip general of the army of the circles, being camped before Rees,
certain commissioners, or their ambassadors, to treat of the above mentioned
points: Whereupon The estates send commissioners to the deputies.
the Estates sent Nicholas Bruninck counselor to prince Maurice, and Daniel
Vander Meulen; where being arrived in the camp before Rees, on the fifteenth
of August they had Vander Lip, Otto Van Starchedel, lieutenant of Cassel, for
the landtgraue of Hessen, Isaac Craft for them of Brandebourg, Christopher
Conincx Merck, for the duke of Brunswic, and doctor Amandus Rutterscheir
chancellor of the said army. At which audience of Bruninck and Vander Meulen
there were propounded four points: the first was, The restitution of
Grauenweerd: the second was, The reparation and restitution of damages, which
the Estates men had done upon the territories of the empire: the third,
Liberty of commerce, and cassation of licenses: and the fourth was, Caution,
that hereafter there should be no more oppressions, nor incursions made by
their soldiers. To all which points there was an ample and pertinent answer
made by the Estates deputies: Three of them were but faintly maintained by the
General and his assistants, yea, it seemed they were reasonable well satisfied
with the allegations of the Charles 5, nor of the town of Emden, neither yet
of the countess of Moeurs, which as yet seemed, served but for matter of
cauillation, whereof mention is so often made in the letters written by the said
imperial deputies to the united Estates.

The Estates had a day or two before the arrival of their deputies at the
imperial camp, delivered up unto the Germans the fort of Tolhus, the town of
Seuenter, and some other forts there abouts; as afterward the Spaniards (to
show some willingness of their parts) abandoned (but it may be, being forced
thereunto) knowing the preparations that were made for the town of Genep.

The Deputies of the Estates hearing that the German army was levied but for
three months, Counsel propounded to join both the armies against the
Spaniard.
win any honor, and to assure the credit and the Estates of their princes,
without the conjunction, Maurice, whereby they should 1599
have means to ruin the enemy, and to settle Germany at quiet: but there
was need of a speedy resolution, for that all hope of good success consisted
in celeritie, and that not making this conjunction in time, and to purpose,
they might loose both their charge and pains, making them soon subject to
reproaches and slanders: wherefore they should do well not to loose any time, but
to send speedily unto their princes, and to advertise them of the true estate
of the affairs, and of their danger, in case they suffered themselves to be
abused by any treaty with the enemy.

The said general and imperial commissioners, did importune the commanders of
the Spanish Letters from the imperial commissioners to the chief of the
Spaniards, like to them of the Estates.
army with complaints, no less than they had done the united Estates, upon
the same points of reparation of damages, restitution of places held by them,
liberty of commerce upon the Yenburch was sent by the Spaniards unto the
general and the imperial commissioners, on the 16 of August: at his arrival he
talked to every man of the reparation of damages, and the charge he had to
deliver up Rees: but the next day he denied all, saying, That he had no such
commission, entreating them, that they would give him three days time to
advertise his masters, every man knowing that the Spaniard sought nothing but
to win time: so as they were discontented with this kind of proceeding, yet
after they had disputed much against him and threatened him with the conjunction
of the Estates army, with that of the princes and circles of the empire, in
the end they granted him these three days, for there was no show that they
Freniz, marshall of the camp, in greater jealousy than any other, by reason
of which distrusts there was no respect among the commanders contending one
against another, by advancing nothing for the general: yea the Spaniards
sought to corrupt some in the camp, as it was discovered by letters of
captain Palants and others, who thought to draw away two or 300 horse at a
time: besides the free access of them of Rees unto the camp, did debauch many.
Whereupon the general was constrained to make a proclamation, That no man
should presume upon pain of death, to confer, eat nor drink with the
Spaniards, nor with them of the said town. Finally they held this body of the
German army, as a Poliphemus, who having lost Maurice did not approach with his
forces, and by his good conduct and direction, restore it both sight, blood,
and life. But their matter must be far sought, and if there had bin any good
disposition, yet the Germans durst not: notwithstanding money coming
afterward unto the camp from the princes, it revived the Germans, and began
to daunt the Spaniards. What the issue of this army was, we will presently
show: and now we will return into the island of Bomel, and see what the
admiral of Arragon and prince Maurice did, fronting one another.

The Estates having for a long time held a fort in a little island called
Voorn, which is in a manner of an ouall form upon the banks whereof are good
trenches, which they must win before strong fort was a great gall unto the
Spaniard, to which if he could he would have done some Borlotte, who was the
chief conductor of this enterprise 1599.
in the island of Bomel, saw there was no good to be done against the town,
for that they had come on so slowly: for we must confess the truth, that if at
their first entrance into the island, they had marched directly unto the town,
which lay then open by reason of their works, and before that prince Maurice
had leisure to assure it with great new trenches without, doubtless he had put
it in great danger: the which having neglected, they thought they had done
sufficiently in the beginning to have freed a passage into the said island. So
all the town being well assured by the princes coming, the supply of men, and
the finishing of their fortifications, The Spaniards retire from Bomel.
retiring on the 5 of June with all their losses, behind the said town, and
further into the island, they went and lodged at a village called Rossum, being
but a good canon shot from the fort of Voorn, where he remained almost a month
without any attempt, but the making Maurice knowing well that the Spaniards
design was upon the fort of Voorn, after that he had long attended to see if
he would pass the river, and to annoy him in his passage, in the end he past
himself in the night with 3000 men the third of July, and came to his enemies
quarter at Herwerden, having at his back the joining of the river of Meuse and
Wahal together, where, with an incredible celeritie, he intrencht himself
against his enemies in the form of a half moon, of the height of 2 men, with
ditches 12 foot broad and 6 deep, and of so great a circuit, as they easily
might have lodged six or 7000 men. The Spaniard discovering this work the next
day, being the 4 of July, made suddenly, thinking to hinder it, he came in the
afternoon with some troops of foot and horse, and presented himself before
this half Francis Veer, monsieur de la Noue, and colonel Edmonds, defending
themselves courageously, repulst them. The captain who had forced the
pallisado, lay slain upon the place, to retire whose body they made a second
charge, at the which they carried it away, but not without great loss of their
men. That which made the greatest spoil among the Spaniards, were eleven
pieces of ordnance, planted in three batteries upon the fort of Voorn, and
three pieces from the trenches Maurice lost the sergeant mayor of sir Fr. Veers
regiment, being general of the English, with some ten or twelve soldiers, and
some twenty hurt.

The 5 of that month a troup of Spanish horse, with 400 musketeers, thinking to
surprise the princes guard, were so entertained, as having lost a captain, and
left a Spanish earl behind them prisoner, they retired with loss and shame.
We will leave them for a while in the island of Bomel,

The 20 of June Peter vander Does, general of the Estates army, being
arrived with all his The success of the Estates army at the Canaries.
fleet before the town of Alegoena, he cast anchor under the great castle
which is on the Northwest part of the town, from whence the Spaniards began to
shoot at him and his whole fleet, so as causing those ships to approach nearest
which had the greatest ordnance, he began in like manner to batter the castle,
which was called Gratiosa, spending some time in this sort: during the which
the general had his maine mast pierst thorough, and his fore mast somewhat
perished, the viceadmirall, which was the great ship of Amsterdam, had six or
seven shot thorough her, which slew some soldiers before they could get into
their boats to go to land. the others to come about him, approaching near
unto land, they saluted one another with 1599
and that for want of water they could not get to land, he himself leapt first
into the water The army lands.
up to the girdle, and so did all the rest, marching resolutely to land,
notwithstanding all the resistance of the Spaniards, who defended the landing
place very valiantly; yet they got to land, not without some loss of their
men, by reason of the difficulty there was in landing, whereas the Spaniards
did also loose some forty men, before they would abandon the landing place;
among others the governor of the town being on horseback, had a leg shot off
with a great piece: the Estates general was hurt in the leg with a pike, and
had three thrusts upon the body, but they were light hurts, and if one of his
men had not slain the Spaniard which incountred him, he had been in danger of
his life. The soldiers of the army having The castle of G^atiosa yielded to
the generals mercy.
Maurice to be set up in the place.

Toward the evening this petie army was divided into three squadrons, whereof
the one was set at the foot of the rampar of the town, the second under the
mountains, and the third, being the reereward, along the sea shore, and so
they continued all night in arms. Vander Does being somewhat entrenched, and
having made his platform for his battery, he planted five pieces of
ordnance, the which he caused to be brought from the castle he had lately
taken, wherewith he shot but one volley that night: in the mean time the
besieged having planted some pieces against the Estates battery, did them much
harm. The night following they stood all again in battle: the islanders had
some field pieces also upon a mountain, wherewith they shot into the camp.

At the break of day, being the eight and twentieth of the month, the
general Vander Does caused his battery to begin, playing with four pieces
upon the castle, and the fifth against those which the islanders had upon the
mountain, the which continued about four hours. The besieged in the castle
had set upon their rampars and bulwarks, in manner of parapets and defenses,
certain packes of wool, and pipes full of stones: but the canon passing
thorough these pipes, the stones did them more harm than the canon it self,
the which slew many of their men, brake their defenses, and disordered their
artillery, then were there four companies sent toward the mountain, to
dislodge them that were with the artillery, and in the mean time the general
caused fire to be set to the town gate: the which they of the castle (whose
ordnance was dismounted and spoiled) and they of the mountain having
discovered, and The town and castle of Alegoen^ abandoned.
children as well as they could.

About noone the general caused two ladders to be fetched from a church without
the town, 1599
one man in front, up to the town walls, where they found no opposition; and
being entered in this sort, his men ran directly toward the castle. The
Spaniards at their retreat had left a mine, with a match, the which took fire
before the Estates men were entered in so far, so as this mine did them no
harm: being entered, and having taken down the king of Spaines ensign, they
set up that of prince Maurice, whereas they found five pieces of ordnance, with
all that belonged. The town and castle being thus won, the general put his men
again into battle, 15 in front, as if he would take a view of them, in a low
plain within the walls of the town. Some soldiers brought one unto him that
was borne in Flessingue, whom they had drawn out of prison: whereupon the
general went himself with some captains unto all the prisons,

The next day being the 29 of the month, some mariners got up into the
mountains, to seek The Estates men slain in the mountain^
some adventure, but the islanders being better acquainted with the passages
than they, crossed them, and slew some 20. Toward night the general sent some
300 men to a little castle, half a league from the town, but the garrison
seeing them come, abandoned it presently, and fled toward the mountains,
whereas the Estates soldiers found three pieces of ordnance, and having left a
squadron of men in guard there, the rest returned to the town. The last day of
June the general commanded, that the wine, oil, and all the goods which they
had gotten should be embarked. The Spaniards which had fled into the mountains
presented themselves diverse times to treat with the general, but having heard
their first demands, which he held impertinent, he sent them back, and would
no more hear them, commanding his men not to

The next day the general having put all his troops in battle, after that he
had blown up The army retires and burn^ Alegoen^.
the castle of the town with a mine, and burnt all the churches and cloisters,
both within and without it, in the end being ready to make his retreat, having
drawn forth all his men, he caused the town to be set on fire: then they came
to the first castle which they had won, called Gratiosa, distant half a league
from the town, whereas they all embarked in their shaloups and boats, and being
entered into the ships they kept the sea. They were no sooner embarked, but the
islanders came presently from the mountains, and ran to rescue the fire, the
which they quenched as well as they could. The general before his imbarking had
left a mine in the castle of Gratiosa, the which took fire presently after,
and blew it up in the air. The general being at sea, he called all the
captains both of land and sea to counsel, to consult what was to be taken in
the castle of Gratiosa, having received their ransom, he suffered them to
go, 1599
extend.

The eight day of the month the general having hoist sail with all his
fleet, carrying with him the rest of the Spanish prisoners which had not been
ransomed, they did for a while (by reason of a contrary wind) coast along the
island of the great Canarie, unto a corner thereof, where they were forced to
cast anchor, discovering the island of Tenariffe, which is one of the Canaries,
there they sent all their boats to land, for fresh water: The mariners before
they returned to their boats, burnt great store of wood laid upon heaps along
the sea shore, but yet they incountred not any one Spaniard in this watring.
Having set sail again with an inconstant and troublesome wind, on the 12 day
they were in sight of the island of Gomora, in the which there was a small
town, whereunto the admiral with the white flag, with his viceadmirall Vander
Does having gathered together all his fleet (which had been much dispersed by
reason of the foul weather) called a counsel, where they resolved to set upon
that island: the which was done, and four companies were sent to land in the
valley right against that corner where they were at anchor: which being done,
all the ships approached near unto the town, before the which they cast
anchor, and from thence they made certain great shot against the town, but
they answered them not, neither did they make any resistance, although there
were

The general Vander Does having made a general muster of his men, to see how
many he might have lost, commanded his men to imbarke the wines, three pieces
of ordnance, and the bells which he could find, with the rest of the spoil
which the islanders could not carry into the mountains; then on the 16 day he
shipped all his men, being resolved to send three or four hundred men on land
the next day, to seek them that were fled into the mountains: but they had so
cruel a storm that night, as it was put off, serving as an advertisement to
the Quicquid delirantreges plectuntur Achiui,
Seditione, dolis, scelere atque libidine and ira. 1599



For we may say of them, as well of other places, and especially of that which
the frontiers of Germany had suffered and endured of the Spaniards the winter
past, The poor people were not in fault, but oftentimes they pay which were
not the debtors.

This exploit being thus performed, not content to have skoured the seas, and
to have fronted the enemy of the Estates in his own country, but meaning to
attempt something else, and thinking for the small resistance which he had
found, that he had no need of so great a fleet, nor of so many mariners, and to
have them which he should keep with him the better furnished, he resolves upon
good counsel to send away half his ships; whereupon he calls all the
captains and officers aboard, where after he had thanked them courteously for
the good and faithful service which they had done unto the Estates of their
common weal, Maurice their captain general, and great admiral of the united
provinces, and prayed unto God to continue his favor and blessings to them
all; he appointed 35 ships to return home into the united provinces with one
admiral, which was captain Ian Gheerbrandtsen, and having taken his leave of
him and the other captains, and recommended them to the tuition of God, they
took their course eastward, and he with thirty six of the best ships, and
best appointed with men, and all other things necessary, for two or three
months bent his course westward. The fleet of Ian Gheerbrandtsen being often
scattered one from another, arrived in September safely in Holland.

The general Vander Does sailed westward with his fleet, toward the island of
S. Thome, The progress of the Estates army at sea.
Thome. But as the air of that climate is very violent, hot, and
intemperate, for men coming out of a country near unto the Northern region,
more accustomed to temperate cold, than to the extreme heat of the line;
(whereas the soldiers remaining in the town and island, had lien longer upon
the ground than was fit, or their natures could endure, and to refresh
themselves had filled their bellies with such waters as they found, the which
were more hurtful than profitable, and it may be had been corrupted and
spoiled by the islanders and inhabitants of the place) there fell a sickness
among them, in a manner contagious, whereof there died many in great torments:
Vander Does finding, having shipped all the spoil which he could find in the
town and island, and Francisco de Meneses governor thereof being taken
prisoner, he put to sea, and bent his course homeward: notwithstanding, being
infected with the venomous contagion of the air, there died a great number of
them, wherewith the general Vander Does was likewise touched, whereof he died,
and in a manner all the captains and officers: of the captains there returned
only Regnier Camp and Calwart, the rest, and above three parts of their men,
both soldiers and sailors were buried in the sea with their captains and
officers, so as they had scarce men enough to bring home their ships and
booty, who in the end returned one after another into Holland and Zeeland.

It is true this sea army had been very chargeable to the Estates, and they
lost many men, but they neither esteemed the loss, nor the profit of the
booty (the which I hear did in a manner counteruaile the charge) in regard of
the affront which they think they have done unto the king of Spain, whilst
that his Spaniards braued it in the island of Bomel, against whom it seemed
that their men and money might have been better employed.

Now let us return to the two armies in the island of Bomel, betwixt the
rivers of Wahal and Meuse, that of the Spaniards lying at Rossum, and prince
Maurice in the little island of Voorn, and thereabouts along the dikes, and in
his trenches. The Spaniard finding that (by reason of the Estates forces, and
the situation of their camp) he should prevail nothing, having attempted
twice or thrice (but in vain) to enter into the island of Thiel, hoping that
in that island of Bomel) and to put it into garrisons, meaning to keep a place
of arms and 1599


Whilst that the admirals army and prince Maurice were in field, and near
one another, cont Lodowicke of Nassau went forth of the camp on the eight of
August, with ten cornets of horse, passing over the river of Meuse, between
Batenbourg and Rauenstein, and marched toward Genep, where he found the ways
very bad; in Longstrate by the town of Grave, they were pursued by Ambrosio
Landriano, who with some twenty cornets of horse charged him in Longstrate,
but he got out and resisted them valiantly, forcing one of the cornets to fly,
but for that he could not discover Landriano's strength, he retired back
again to Genep: those which were led by Marcellus Bax, and Lieuin Seis,
lieutenant to John Bax, having received no great harm, saved themselves and
passed over the Meuse, having lost about

The admirals army lying for the most part in Brabant, prince Maurice sent his
cousin William earl of Nassau governor of Friseland, with 10 cornets of horse,
and 24 companies of foot, giving Deutecom taken by William of Nassau.
him commission to take 26 companies more out of other places, with ordnance
and munition, and to take the town of Deutecom from the enemy again, who
went before it on the 24 of August, making his trenches on the 25 day, and the
next day he planted two pieces of ordnance, and then an other, and so began to
batter it; which they within finding, they demand to parle at the first
summons, making their composition to depart: the which they did on the 27 day,
with four ensigns, Dom Iuigo de Ocaola being governor, who also

He therefore caused a mighty fort to be built in the village of Rossem, a
very commodious S. Andrews fort built by the Spaniard.
place, being the narrowest part of all the island of Bomel, bordering upon
the rivers of Wahal and Meuse, with five great bulwarks, whereof two to the
north and northwest, and two others to the south and south west were washed by
the Meuse, having without that counterscarps Maurices half moon at
Herwaerden, which covered his fort of Nassau in the island of Voorn. This fort
cardinal Andrew of Austria lieutenant general to the archduke Albert in his
absence, and his cousin german, caused to be called by his name, the fort of S.
Andrew, without doubt, an inexpugnable fortress, for the building whereof,
they cut down all the willoes and other trees in the island of Bomel, the
which was left naked of trees.

Which fort (commonly called the key, and by some the spectacle of Holland)
being finished, the Spanish army retired from thence, and was put into
garrisons, but soon after they Andrew, the admiral of Arragon, and other
commanders and counselors of the Spanish army, had duly observed and
considered that (notwithstanding the bridges of ice, which God had given them
upon the said rivers, the waters being so frozen as they might easily have past
both on foot and horse back) the forces which prince Maurice had left in those
quarters, would have hindren and annoyed them much, they thought it not fit to
attempt any thing, or at the least not to attempt to pass there, whether it
were for fear of being beaten, or having past, of a thaw, which would have
stayed them, like mice in a trap: besides, it may be they had not their
soldiers at commandment, by reason of the said mutinies, as soon after it
appeared very plainly.

The Germane army being disorderly broken up and dispersed, Genep was taken
from them on the fourth day of November by the admiral, who also threatened to
besiege Emmeric, the which was held yet by the Germans: monsieur de Rheyet
governor of the town doubting it, and seeing the Spaniards lie before Genep, he
sent unto prince Maurice for aid, all the rest of the Germans being gone, who
presently sent colonel Edmonds and Duuen^ord with Sidleniskie, who coming 1599
before the town on the sixteenth of November, and thinking to enter, they
found the townes-men and some of the soldiers in quarrel, contrary to the
governors mind, who durst not then adventure to let in those supplies, who
stood still, and knew not what to do. In the end colonel Edmonds went to the
Rhine gate, wherewith the bourgers fell into an uproar; in the mean time
certain Germans who were well affected to the Estates, being within the
town, brake open the gate, and so he got in with the loss of few men, and
then marched along to the stone gate, which they opened, drawing in the rest of
their troops: and so taking order for all things within the town, the
colonels with monsieur Sidlenisky, and the horsemen left the town, placing ten
companies there under monsieur de Rheyet, for

Thus Emmeric continued still under the government of monsieur de Rheyet, but
in the united provinces pay: his Germans which lay in the town (although
they were promised to be duly paid, to make them the more willing to serve)
were so jealous of the others, and so inconstant as they could not be stayed,
for that the duke of Brunswick (whose men they were, had forbidden them, and
called them home, making show as if he would employ them against the town of
Brunswick, with whom he was in quarrel at that time, and so upon the
eighteenth day of January, in the year 1600 they left the town: and so

Thus the great preparation made by the princes and Estates of Germany, which
continued the space of a whole year, vanished away like smoke, loosing
thereby much of their The end of the Germans enterprises against the Spaniards.
reputation, and discovering their own weakness and divisions, which defects
the wisest men did judge the Spaniards would afterward make use of, to their
advantage, whenever they should command absolutely over the Netherlands,
thereby to make some conquest upon the frontiers of the empire; for it appeared
plainly that the admiral sought to effect more by policy than by force,
spending more money than blood in all his enterprises: for when as the admiral
saw that prince Maurice had gotten Emmeric again, he had no will Maurice once
left it; to which end there were ambassadors sent from the princes of the
empire to treat thereof: at the same time also he left Genep.

The united provinces made offer unto the princes of Germany to take all the
towns lying upon the Rhine for their uses, and to free the river of Rhine and
the frontiers of the empire from the invasions of the Spaniard, with certain
troops of horse and foot, paying them for it, but they could not agree; for
many princes and towns were of opinion to levy and entertain four thousand
foot, and a thousand horse, for the defense of the frontiers in the winter
time; but those of the contrary faction crossed it, for that the Spaniards, that
winter, sent Charles earl of Egmont, and their counselor Heest, as
ambassadors unto diverse princes of the empire, giving them to understand, that
they would leave all the towns and places which they held, excusing whatsoever
had been done, and promising recompense for all wrongs which had been
committed by them.

The Estates of the united provinces (although they had made but a defensive
war this year) found themselves in great want of money, and the more for
that they had set forth a great fleet at sea, the which had cost above twelve
hundred thousand gulderns, whereof as then but few were returned. They also
grew bare by the leuying of so many new soldiers, 1599
the 29 of October they mustered their whole army, and found it to be 10600
foot strong, besides their horsemen. Moreover they had spent much money in
digging and making of skonces, and kept in pay many ships, boats, wagons,
horses to draw, carriages for artillery, with other extraordinary charges,
amounting to above twelve hundred thousand gulderns, besides the soldiers pay:
for which cause they appointed an assembly of the Estates to be held at
Gorchom, whereas the general Estates, the council of estate, prince Maurice,
and William earl of Nassau met together, to consult how they might abate the
charges of their army, seeing the disorders among the Spaniards, for want of
foresight and keeping of accounts, the which might serve them for a president.
They were also to take order in Zeeland, for the keeping of

Whereupon order was taken that a general reduction should be made of their
soldiers, and that they would hold no more in pay than the estate of the
country would affoard* and that they would discharge as many ships, wagons,
and other trains, as they might conveniently, and dig no more than they
should be forced unto, and yet they would have a new passage made through the
Weert, right over against S. Andrews fort, that they might pass freely up and
down the river of Wahal, without any let of the said fort. And moreover
touching the admiraltie, and sea causes, that all things might be ordered in
every province, after the best manner that might be, and for the keeping of the
mouth of the river of Scluce, which

Lastly, they resolved to do some exploit in the enemies country, meaning to
move certain high Duchess, when as then lay still at Seuenaer, to serve them
a while, but they could not effect any thing, for that those soldiers would
not serve the Estates; wherefore they resolved upon a reduction and discharge of
some of their soldiers, and the abating of their charge. In this assembly they
also devised how to raise some good sums of money against the next year.

Upon the 21 of November the earl of Busquoy, who had been taken prisoner
before Paul Emili^ Martinengue for 1000 gulderns ransom, according to the
quarter newely made and agreed upon for captains and colonels of horsemen.

Upon the 20 of November prince Maurice began to break up his camp, and
dismiss his troops, but yet he resolved once again to attempt some thing
against Creuecoeur skonce, Prince Mau^ice breaks up his army.
or else against Boisleduc, but being ready to march with certain troops,
and 60 wagons with all kind of furniture, there fell so great a storm of wind,
rain, and snow, as they could not possibly march; so as upon the 28 of
Noue^ber he brake up his army, leaving the Voorn, Hesel quarter, and all the
small skonces well appointed with men.

All this time there was an order taken by the general Estates, that execution
should be Maurice to go into Brabant; but having their commission, and being
all ready to march, the foul weather (before spoken of) kept them from
passing the water, neither could they get to Louaine as they had charge, so as
they could not do any thing; but on the 29 of November they fell upon a
company of poor pesants, who would have made head against them at Baller,
whereas they burnt certain houses. Captain du Bois would needs march further
into the country, but he was wounded, and his cornet slain; yet this road did
so terrify the pesants of the country thereabouts, as most of them brought in
their contribution to the Estates, as they had decreed.

Upon the sixth of December John earl of Nassau, son to old John earl of
Nassau and Dildenbourgh, and brother to William prince of Orange, who was
murdered in Delft, came to the Hage in Holland, and had audience in the
assembly of the general Estates, touching the arrerages of his fathers lands,
which was the pretense of his coming, yet many 1599
was kept secret, and nothing ensued, although the earl of Hohenlo were a
mediator betwixt them.

The admiral of Arragon having discharged his army, with great coffeehouse
of the The admiral breaks up his camp, and pays not his soldiers, who
mutine.
soldiers, for want of their pay, among whom there was a rumor spread abroad,
that the archduke Albertus would pay no arrerages to his soldiers, but from
the time of his installment, and that they must seek the rest at the king of
Spaines hands, the which was very unpleasing unto the soldiers; whereupon many
of them mutined. The Germans of Slegels regiment being in Herentales, with a
company of Albanois horsemen, under Nicholo Basti, took the small town of
Peer by scalado, whereas many of them were slain, but they put the bourgers
John Iacomo, earl of Belioioso, was sent to pay them with good words, but they
would not hear him speak, nor let them in. Henry earl of Berghes soldiers
took three hundred oxen before the gates of Cologne, being brought thither to
be sold, whereof part were ransomed. Many such like insolences were committed
in other places: such as were interessed by the soldiers, made their
complaints at Brussels, but had no answer; they had only a certificat given
them, that they had done their messages, and made their complaints.

About the last of December the Spaniards being 1200 strong of all nations,
horse and foot, took Weert and Kempen, and fell upon the town of Hamont,
making a general mutiny, the footmen did choose John Alonzo Maiolichino, an
Italian, for their Electo, and the horsemen Giouanni Martines; to whom Gaspar
Sapena, a colonel, was sent to pacify them, whom they refused to hear, and
chased him away.

In the end of the year, an ambassador sent from them of Westphalia, had
audience of the general Estates of the united Provinces, where he complained
of the great wrongs and oppressions done unto them by the Estates soldiers in
their territories, desiring to know, if it were done with their priuities and
consents. Whereunto the Estates made answer, That they were very sorry for it,
and would take order to prevent it, saying moreover, That they wondered why
those of Westphalia had made so small resistance against their enemies, having
made such great complaints unto the emperor, and drawn the princes and
Estates of Germany into arms; and when as their brethren and allies were in
the field, they drew their

The archduke and the Infanta having consummated their marriage in Spain, came
into Italy, and so arrived at Brussels in November 1599, but before they would
be installed, and enter into the government, they did what they could to
procure a general peace:

The ambassadors which were appointed to this charge, were Salentin earl of
Isenbourg, Harman earl of Manderscheyt, and Charles Nutzel van Sonderphiuls,
knight. Being come to Grensaw, they sent a trumpet unto the general Estates,
with a letter, to desire a pasport, to come freely and deliver what they had in
charge: whereunto the Estates made answer as follows.

Right honorable, we have received your letters, dated at Grensaw the eight of
October, The Estates letter to the emperors ambassadors concerning a peace.
also a time and place to be appointed to deliver your message and to receive
our answer: 1599
and the whole empire) but let your honors understand, that we hold our selves
much bound unto the high and mighty imperial Majesty, to the princes
electors, and others the Estates of the empire, that it has pleased him and
them to give your honors charge to bring this message unto us, which we
understand to consist of two points; first, to procure a treaty of peace
betwixt the high and mighty prince Albert archduke of Austria, with the noble
Infanta of Spain, and us: and secondly, for the restitution of places
belonging to the holy empire, and ceasing from incursions into the territories
thereof.

Touching the first point, may it please your lordships to remember what was
set down by us at large in our letters unto his imperial majesty, in the
year 1591, as also what answer anno 1594, unto the letters of the archduke
Ernestus of famous memory, and in the years 1595 and 1596 unto the high and
mighty imperial Majesty, the elector of Ments, the archbishop of Salsbourg,
the administrators of Saxony, Philip Lodowicke vander Nieubourgh, and the
estates of Cologne and Nurembergh, as also to the ambassadors of Poland and
Denmark, and lastly unto your honors and to Charles Nutzel van Sonderphiuls,
concerning this point, whereof the copies are hereunto annexed, whereby his
imperial Majesty, and the whole Estates of the empire may easily conjecture,
how this may be effected: and although it may be alleged that the estate of
the Netherlands since that time is much altered, by reason of the pretented
gift of the said countries unto the Infanta, besides the death of the old king
of Spain, with Albertus and the Infanta; yet it may be avouched that the
united provinces have now more weighty and more invincible reasons and
arguments to move them not to treat of any peace with the Spaniards, or with
the archduke and Infanta (as depending of the Spaniards) than ever they had, as
may appear by a proclamation set forth by us in April last, in the which we
have briefly set down certain chief points, whereby the king of Spain that
now is (under the government of the archduke) has showed himself more
rigorous against these countries, and the inhabitants thereof, and against the
members of the empire, concerning their rights and privileges, than the
deceased king his father did: and that under the archdukes command great
severity has been showed against the Christian religion, and not only the
united provinces, but also their neighbors, namely said pretended donation,
whereby the archduke, the Infanta, and their successors, have for ever 1599
not only in regard of the freedoms, rights, and privileges of these
countries, but also for the disposition of the succession of the Netherlands,
the protection and bringing up of their heirs by the Spaniards, and the power
and prerogative which the kings of Spain will have to dispose of them and
their childrens marriages, or to give in marriage to whom they please, to hold
the Netherlands of them in chief, and to restrain them from their free
navigations and trading by sea; and all and every of these points, upon
forfeiture of the same: adding hereunto, that they and their heirs shall be
bound to hold and maintain the catholic Romish religion, upon the like
penalty, as does plainly appear by the articles of the said donation
hereunto annexed: so as there is small reason for the emperors Majesty, the
empire,

Touching the second point, we hope not only by presentation, but actually,
to have made manifest our just and true intents unto the emperors majesty,
the princes electors, and the Estates of the empire, so as it seems strange
to us, we should be further molested and troubled, for that we seek to bring
our common enemy to reason, and to abate his pride.

By these and many other reasons, it may be thought unnecessary that (for the
preservation of the honor of the emperors majesty, and of the whole empire)
your lordships should come hither to treat of the said points, which we also
think not fit: wherefore we have not

This letter being delivered to the emperors ambassadors, they returned an
answer on

Right honorable, we have received your letters, and understand by the
contents thereof, The ambassadors answer to the Estat^ letter.
that you are informed (ex relatione aliorum) of our coming, and of the effect
of our embassage: we must confess, that touching the restitution of places
belonging unto the holy empire, and the damages received thereby, we have
especial charge to solicit both parties in all friendly manner; but
concerning the other point, it is not intended that we by the emperors
commandment should enter into any new treaty of peace with you, but only for
the furtherance of a treaty which was begun at Regsensborgh, in the year
1594, the which the princes electors, and the electors of the Estates of the
empire referred to some other convenient time. And concerning the other points
contained in your letters and copies, touching majesty, our gracious lord and
sovereign prince, to treat with either party; yet you may assure 1599
know how to remedy the wrongs done both by the Spaniards, for their parts and
by you of the united provinces; and not to free the empire, but also the
oppressed members thereof, from all vnneighbourly force and invasion: yet his
Majesty at the earnest request of the princes electors, and Estates of the
empire, has thought good to impose this commission upon us, as your honors at
our coming shall understand more at large. And although, according to these
our instructions graciously given us by the emperor, we may not (as it seems
by your letters) be heard at this time, nor allowed to show the^ unto the
general Estates, yet we doubt not but you will dutifully consider them, and not
upon any color or presence whatsoever, contrary to the commendable custom of
all nations, and to the blemishing of the emperors

The general Estates having received this letter from the ambassadors, they
made a reply,

Touching the restitution of certain places which was demanded, they answered
that they held them for their own safeties, and the emperors service, and not
only to free the united provinces,

Whilst the Estates were framing of this answer, the ambassadors came to
Brussels to deliver Charles Nutzel made the speech; the effect of his oration
was, that they did congratulate (in the emperor their brothers name) the
archdukes coming into the Netherlands, showing 1599
was bound by his office to defend the friends and allies of the empire from
all force and invasion: then he passed to the restitution which the archdukes
were to make of the town of Rhineberck to the elector of Cologne, and the
satisfying of them of Westphalia, and the countries of Cleues, Mark, and
others, for the wrongs and oppressions done unto them the year past. Whereunto
the archduke made answer in general terms, That he thanked the emperor for
his great love and kindness, promising to send him an answer in writing,
whereby the sincerity of his heart unto the holy empire might be the better
known (whereof he said he was no unprofitable member) and how much he desired
the peace and good of those countries, which as then were his, and that there
should not be any defect in him to enter into any honorable

After the archdukes coming into the Netherlands, he wrote a letter with his
own hand unto the Q. of England, aduertising her M. of their arrival in the
Netherlands, and what great desire he had to make a peace with his neighbors,
and to renew the old league and alliance which their house for many years held
with the K. of England, for the effecting whereof he said he Ieronimo and
Iaspar Coyemans, at the last there was a treaty of peace agreed upon, but it
took no effect.

Whilst that the archdukes did labor by all means to bring the Netherlands to
an uniform obedience under them, news came, that the duke of Lermas secretary
in Spain was committed to prison, for a discourse which he had written,
saying, That the last deceased K. of Spain had pretended to erect a Monarchy
in the Netherlands, and there to make his Sedem belli, being more commodious
for use that than Spain, in regard of the great rivers bordering on the
neighbor countries, and the commodity of the sea, together with the great
numbers of ships and sailers, the discovery whereof it may be was ill taken by
some, yet in February after he was set at liberty. This Winter the duke of
Arschot came to Cruyninghen in Zeeland, whither his lady the

The archduke Albertus being now 39 years old, for that he was borne on the
third of November 1560, and the Infanta Isabella 33 years old, being borne on
S. Clares day 1566, being The instalme^t of the archdukes.
come to Brussels, they sent for the Estates of their dominions, who by
commission from their generality, came thither to congratulate and salute
them, with whom they took advice about the order of the golden fleece (the
sovereignty whereof the king of Spain reserved to himself) 1599
earl of Arembergh, who also was made admiral, to Florents earl of
Barlaimont, Charles earl Knights of the golden fleece made.
of Egmont, Philip of Croy earl of Sores, and to the admiral of Arragon his
general, in recompense of his services, seeking to bind many others unto them,
by rewards and preferments.

Their court and train was magnificent and stately, having a stable of
seauentie or eighty great horses, eighty coach horses, and 150 mules, the
earl of Sores being master of their horse. There attended on them sixteen or
eighteen pages, all which were noble men's sons; besides a guard of halbardiers
and shot, with other officers, so as the charge of their court was esteemed
above two thousand gulderns a day, besides officers and servants wages: Done
Roderigo de Lasso was captain of the guard on horseback. They sent
ambassadors into all places, to entertain friendship and good correspondencie
with their neighbors, as into France they sent the prince of Orange, and
others elsewhere.

They moved the deputies of the provinces, which were come to Brussels to
congratulate their coming, to further their installment, and joyful entries,
wherein there did grow some difficulty, for the provinces in general, yet by
several petitions demanded the performance of certain articles, and the peace
which was promised them by the archduke, before his departure into Spain, and
then they said they would proceed to their installing, standing upon this
point, to have foreign soldiers sent out of their towns and forts, and to have
all places of importance kept and guarded by them that were borne in the
country; saying openly, that they

But concerning all these doubts, a messenger was sent into Spain, and secret
conference The archdukes install^ent at Lo^aine.
and installed in Louaine, whither the deputies of the smaller towns, and of
the 4 chief towns came as of Boisleduc, Antuerp, Brussels, and Louaine, which
made the third member of Brabant; for the second member there appeared the
barons of Bassigni, Gromberghen, and Weesemale, the earl of Arembergh, the
marquess of Berghen up Zoom, the prince of Orange, and the duke of Croy and
Arschot: and for the clergy, which was the third member, there appeared the
prelates of saint Gheertrude, Eueruode, Diligem, Tongerlo, Heylichstem,
Grumbergen, Villers, and Vlierbeque; all which presented themselves before the
Richardot, and the auditor, who read the joyful entries (signed and sealed by
the archdukes) openly both in Latin and Dutch: which the Infanta kneeling upon
her knees, did first swear upon the holy Euangils to observe, and after her
the archduke: 1599
estates and towns of Brabant and Ouermase, took their due oaths of
obedience, and then all the privileges of Brabant were confirmed and sworn
unto. From Louaine they returned to Brussels again upon the eight and
twentieth of November with great state, whereas the triumphant Arc, made at
their first entry, stood yet still undefaced, and there they were also
installed, they of the town giving them a present of plate, which was esteemed
to be worth 20000 gulderns.

From thence upon the fifth of December they entered into the castle of Antuerpe,
and so on The archdukes installing in Antuerpe.
the eight of December they made their joyful entry into the town, where they
were most honorably, sumptuously, and triumphantly received: first, there rode
before 56 officers or M. Henrick van Varigh, Schout and Margraue of the land of
Rhyne, and John Dammant, amptman of the town, both knights. The archduke made
four of the bourgomasters knights, with these ceremonies: they kneeling down
one after another before the archduke, the earl of Solre standing by I make
you knights in the name of God and S. George, truly to defend the Christian
faith, the church, justice, and all widows and orphans. On the 10 of December
the archduke and Infanta, after a mass said by the bishop of Antuerpe, went
unto the towne-house, where they were installed upon a scaffold, and sworn
with the accustomed ceremonies; the form of their oath was as follows.

We Albertus and Isabella Clara Eugenia, princes of Spain, by the grace of
God, archdukes The form of the archdukes oath in Antuerpe.
of Austria, dukes of Burgundy, Lorraine, Brabant, Lembourg, Luxembourg, and
Guelder, earls of Habsbourg, Flanders, Arthois, Tirol, Burgundy, Palatin,
Henault, Holland, Zeeland, Albertus archduke, as husband to the foresaid
Infanta, and I the Infanta as princess and heir of these countries and
provinces, do promise to fulfill and accomplish that which upon the 21 of
August ann^ 1598, was by us and in our names promised and sworn to all and
every one of the Estates of the Netherlands in particular (as then assembled at
Brussels in the great hall of the palace) and moreover do swear, that we will
uphold and maintain the rites of the Church, and of the Margraueship of the
holy empire, and in general all their statutes, privileges, charters,
freedoms, rights, liberties, and customs, both new and old, as also the
privileges of our joyful entries, which were given and granted by us and our
predecessors unto the Estates of Brabant,

Whereupon the magistrate in the behalf of the town (speaking unto the auditor
of the town in Dutch) holding up his fingers, took his oath as follows: We
bourgomasters, The oath of the magistrate of Antuerpe.
Schepenen, counsel, and inhabitants of the town of Antuerpe, all in
general, and every one in particular swear unto you, right high and mighty
princes, Albert and Isabella Clara Eugenia, and lawful princes, so God us help
and all his holy saints.

Moreover according to the ancient manner, there was an instrument or writing
drawn 1600
of this solemn oath taken on both parts, and at the request of the Margraue
was signed by both the princes, and their names set down as witnesses, that
were at that time present, in this manner. Given in our town of Antuerpe the
twelfth day of December, 1599, in the presence of the right worthy and
reverent father in God, the bishop of Tricaricensis, the popes Nuntio,
Balthazar de Suniga ambassador for the king of Spain, the duke of Aumale, the
earl of Mansfeldt, the duke of Arschot, the prince of Orange, the marquess of
Haurec, the earl of Arembergh, the earl Vanden Berghe, the marquess of
Berghen up Zoom, sir John Richardot knight, John Berlij president, Christopher
van Assonuille, monsieur van Alten knight, Nicholas Dammont knight, and
chancellor of Brabant, besides other officers and standers Albert and Isabella.
Underwritten, by commandment of their highness, and signed Vereycken.

This was done in every place with great solemnity and triumph, as upon the 28
of January at Gant, whereas the last of January they of Bruges and other
places took their oaths by their deputies, the 3 of February it was done at
Cortrick, the 6 at Dornick, the 9 at Douay, and so in other towns.

Whilst the archdukes were riding abroad to be installed, prince Maurice
undertook an Wachtendo^ck in Gueldres taken by prince Maurice.
enterprise against Wachtendonck, a very strong town, lying in the higher parts
of Gueldres, upon the river of Niers, the which was recovered from the united
provinces some twelve years before, by Charles earl of Mansfeldt, having
besieged it two months; to which end Lodowicke earl of Nassau, and colonel
Edmonds, who began to march thither-wards in the forenoone, with certain
wagons, and by night came to Nyekerke by Wachtendonck, where they rested a
while, and then they went forwards toward the town, some went over the ice,
and some through the ditches, and so got over the walls into the town,
whereas there were not above eighty soldiers neither in the town nor in the
castle, for that the horsemen which lay in it were gone forth to seek for
booty, and to spoil the fort of Wandersluyten, where they were encountered by
certain soldiers of the garrisons of Bonne and Buyler, and defeated: prince
Maurice his men were no sooner entered into the town, but the bourgers took an
alarm, yet they found small resistance, so as they becam masters of the town
without any difficulty: then van Gileyn governor of the castle was hurt in
the throat, and an officer, with one other slain. The governor having not
above thirty soldiers within the castle, sent with all speed to Ruremond, to
the earl Vanden Berghe for aid, who presently caused all the garrisons
thereabouts, to march thither, but it was too late; for cont Lodowicke of
Nassau was come with his horse and foot, whereas some of his horsemen left
their horses, and among the rest, the lieutenant of prince Maurice his
company, got over the ditches, and so upon the castle wall, whereas at last
he persuaded the soldiers to yield, upon promise of their lives: one of the
governors maids being of a stout courage, ran

By this means on the three and twentieth day of January they did win the
town of Wachtendonck, which town lying in the upper parts of Gueldres, in a
marish ground, among the towns which as yet are held by the Spaniards in that
province, was of great importance for them, to cross the admirals proceedings.

There lay certain companies of Spanish footmen thereabouts, who were in
great danger to be discovered and charged, for that neither the town of
Gueldre, nor any other place would receive them, by reason of their disorders,
and of the general mutiny. This enterprise thus happily performed by cont
Lodowicke and colonel Edmonds, was very beneficial Lewis vander Cathulle lord
of Rihoue for governor of the town, with all the footmen; and for that the town
was unfurnished of match, scoops, spades, and other furniture upon the 5 of
February colonel Edmonds went thither again, to 1600


As it was said before, certain of the archdukes soldiers were mutined: the
archduke by the advice of the admiral, had resolved to punish them, being a
necessary and fit medicine for such a disease, and to that end he caused three
pieces of ordnance to be drawn out of Mastricht, having two thousand
Bourguignons which were newly raised by the marquess of Varrabon, and two
thousand Wallons, to whom there was least due, which he meant to employ
against the mutinous soldiers, which would not be pacified without money: but
they found few of them willing to march, some of the leaders obiecting the
inconveniences which might grow, by suffering duetifull and quiet soldiers to
fight against desperate mutiners, putting him in mind of what had happened
between the Italians and Spaniards at Sichem, in the Borlotto had in hand, to
prevent all further mutineis; yet they mutined more, as at Creuecoeur, and in
S. Andrews fort: so as the archduke finding no other means to pacify them,
he granted the mutinous companies at Hamont, that they should go to Dyest, and
there stay until they were paid all their arrerages: whereupon they were
conducted thither by Tessada Master of the camp, being two thousand foot, and
one thousand horse, where they were to receive daily fourteen stiuers for a
footman, and twenty eight for a horseman, until their account and reckoning
were paid them. Yet notwithstanding, whether John Iacomo earl of Belioioso
(who was sent unto them) was able to dissuade them.

The garrison of the castle of Carpen, being but two and twenty soldiers, and
some horsemen, The soldiers of Carpen mutine.
mutined also, and received two hundred Spanish horsemen in to them, to whom
Fernando Lopes their governor was sent, but he could not pacify them, until
it was August following.

Part of the Spanish army lying about Boisleduc, betwixt Grave and Venlo, the
commanders Mutineisin the Spanish camp
thought it dangerous to lie near the mutiners, finding some of their men both
horse and foot to go unto them daily, especially Wallons and Italians, so as
they were grown to be three hundred horse, and five hundred foot, and went to
Hamont, from whence many of the Spaniards were gone to Dyest, who after the
manner of the mutiners, had chosen them an Electo, whose name was Brunoro
Grabieli di Augubio, and for the horsemen Pietrantonio Geneuef d'Alessandria,
and all their officers were Italians, as fittest for that vocation. Whereupon
Loys de Velasco, fearing that more of his men would run away, he past over the
Meuse to Arson, and so marched toward Berck, and lay in the villages of
Nidekerke and Oudekerke, not far from Venlo, but the same night three hundred
of his horsemen, and some of his footmen

It was said before what was done by the united provinces, in the winter time,
concerning the wars, now I will show what preparation they made for the
summer wars. In winter they sat in counsel, to procure a consent from the
provinces, for the leuying of certain money toward their wars: where they
found many difficulties, partly for that the admiraltie in every place was
bare of money, and much behind hand, for that their receipts grew short, by
reason of the restraint of licenses, whereby each party thought to weaken
other. The Indian ships were also of more charge than profit unto them, and
their traffic into all places was small: besides, the galleys being at Sluice,
bred no small fear in them of Holland and Zeeland; so

The beginning of the year 1600 being spent without any exployt, the
garrisons of the forts of S. Andrew and Creuecoeur, for want of pay (being
behind hand for many months) began to mutine, chasing away their commanders,
captains, and officers, having all the winter The garrison^ in S. Andrewe^
fo^t, and in that of Creuec^ur, mutine.
to whom (by reason of the princes soldiers) there was no free access,
without great 1600
conuoy, although they did protest sufficiently, that they would continue in
the service and obedience of the king of Spain, and of the archduke Albert of
Austria, his son in law, demanding no other thing but their pay, whereon the
archduke Albert, and the Infanta of Spain, duchess of Brabant, his wife,
seemed careless.

Prince Maurice, who was in like manner retired (being yet watchful upon all
occasions) with the rest of his forces, having very well manned the town of
Bomel, the fort of Nassau in the The fort of Creuecoeu^ besieged, and yielded
to the prince.
island of Voorn, and his other trenches, being desirous to embrace this
occasion, and to make his profit of these mutinies and alterations of the
enemies soldiers; winter being past, he appointed Andrews fort.

This fort of Creuecoeur being so easily gotten by the Estates and prince
Maurice, seeing this beginning to promise a good and a happy end of his
designs, he entered with his army into the island of Bomel, to try S.
Andrews fort by siege, to the which he approached the six and twentieth day of
the month, although the time and season were very vn^itas well by reason of
the continual rain, as for the cold, so as most part of the time his men were
forced to lie covered in the ships, dispersed here and there upon the rivers of
Meuse and Wahal.

The prince was no sooner come before the fort, but he built many forts to
assure his camp, The prince builds many forts.
in frontier places of Brabant, by the which the Spaniard might have access to
succor the said fort, and in like manner to importune him. Among others, he
built a fort in the village of Hesel, and in the compass of the territory of
the said village, seven small sconces, which were called the seven Planets, and
three in the village of Rossum, above the intrenchments of the one and the
other, opposite upon the North and the West to S. Andrews fort. And to the end
that the ships sailing upon the river of Wahal should not be in danger of the
canon of S. Andrew, the prince caused a channel to be made, which turned out of
the river, and fell into it again: which channel was called by the name of S.
Andrews Cross. On Brabant side, beyond the river of Meuse, the prince caused
seven other forts to be built in a great circuit of Andrew; with another upon
the Meuse, upon Brabant, called Knol S'chans, about 1600 paces distant from the
fort of Alem. And the better to hinder the approach of the Spanish forces, at
all these forts built upon Brabant side, betwixt Maren and Kessel, and at
Lit^enham, or at every end of a half moon which the prince had caused to be
built, were two were in the islands of Bomel and Tyel, and betwixt the two
rivers of Wahal and Meuse, 1600
He had also made another bridge upon the Meuse, right against the fort of
Kessel, joining to the which was another part of his ships of war, and other
barks with victuals and munition, as there was in like manner near unto the
bank, that was cut at Littogen, with so many intrenchments within the circuit
of Maren, Kessel, Hesel, Alem, Voorn, and Rossum, as it is impossible to
describe them perfectly by writing, nor make them to be conceived with seeing
of the purtraict, the which is very industriously cut in copper. By reason of
all which forts and trenches, prince Maurice was to stand to it, and to attend
the Spaniards strongest attempts, his whole camp being so well fortified, as
50000 men would have bin much troubled to have forced a quarter: for proof
whereof colonel Borlotte having sworn to raise the siege with 2000

The prince having thus intrencht and fortified his camp of a great circuit,
and taken from the Spaniard all hope to force him, especially by reason of the
waters, so as the besieged in S. Andrews fort were not free from the
inundations, being forced to lodge like conies in their rampars, in great
misery and poverty, suffering extremely, upon hope that they should be
relieved, reconciled, and paid, doing their best endeavors to reconcile
themselves with their canon: so as the prince could not well approach to batter
them in breach, by reason of the waters, but the whole month of April was
spent in shooting at random one at another: but on the first day of May, the
waters beginning to fall, the prince commanded, that in a dark night Vander
Aa, captain of the princes guards: at which conference the besieged seeing
small hope of succors, and the uncertainty of their reconciliation, and much
less of their pay, they demanded of the Estates, the arrerages of their
service which the king of Spain did owe them, and for the which they were
Andrews fort had without their counterscarpe, the said seignior Vander Aa, and
another captain had some conference with them: whereupon the besieged sent 8
deputies in a boat, the which were brought unto the princes trenches, the
prince sending back 4 of them, entered into the treaty with the rest, granting
unto them willingly and freely whatsoever they could in reason demand, being
loath to loose so fair an occasion, fearing (the which he did foresee, and it
fell so out soon after) another ouerflowing of the rivers, the which had
forced Andrew, and to retire his canon with great toil. The composition being
concluded and made, there was promised S. Andrewe^ fort yielded.
them 125000 florins, and to remain within the fort until that the money were
paid them: promising and swearing unto the said prince, That they would keep
and defend it faithfully for the Estates and the said prince, and to obey such
captains and officers as should be appointed 1600
or the archduke Albert. Moreover, these were the articles.

1 That the sick and wounded should be sent to some town of the united
provinces, The articles of the accord.
who should receive their parts as much as should rise due unto them, out of
the said sum of one hundred twenty five thousand florins: and that there
should be a gratuitie given unto widows out of the same sum. 2 All soldiers
which had heretofore served the estates or the said prince, should have their
pardon, and should be paid what was due unto them out of the said sum. 3 All
such as would retire, should be satisfied out of the said sum, to whom good
pasports and safeconducts should be given, and that the said soldiers should
be as well entreated 4 Those which were come from the fort of Creuecoeur,
should be also paid as the rest. 5 That to all soldiers having bin under the
princes service, requiring leave to depart, and a pasport, it shall not be
refused them, so they demand it not unseasonably. 6 Nothing shall be reproched
unto them, of that which is now done. 7 The soldiers may, with the princes
advice, choose 8 captains of the Wallons regiments of the baron of Hauchicourts
and of the Marquesses, and three of the Germans. 8 All Commissaries, Prouosts,
Brewers, Bakers, Victuallers, and all others that would retire, shall have good
and safeconduct. The chapleine may also retire freely with all his ornanaments,
church furniture and baggage, to whom safeconduct and conuoy shall be given as
unto 9 That all reformed sergeants and corporals, having had pensions in the K.
of Spaines service, shall have the like entertainment, remaining under the
prince and Estates. 10 All Commissaries, captains and officers, shall have a
surplusage and increase out of the said sum, proportionable to that which
every soldier shall receive. 11 That to morrow commissaries shall be sent into
the fort, to take an Inuentarie of the artillery, munition and victuals that
should be found therein. 12 Being gone out of the fort, the soldiers shall
take the same oath which others have done that serve under the prince and
Estates.
All these conditions being granted and accepted, the 8 of May in the evening,
Cont Ernest

Finally, on the 11 of the month, the soldiers as they went out of the fort,
were paid by the poll, by the Estates commissaries, being 1124 men past by
muster, the least of them receiving 106 florins. All which being departed, the
prince sent in four of his companies, and before that he himself entered, he
suffered all bourgers, citizens, merchants, and other inhabitants of the united
provinces, which through curiosity and zeal to their country, were come, and
desired to see, to enter in great numbers, and to view it both within and
without. Then he entered with all the chief of his army, and having well
viewed the place, he returned unto his

As for the article before mentioned, that nothing should be reproched unto
them which was past, that was in effect presently kept. For as on the tenth of
the month, after the accord was made, a French soldier would have entered in
despite of the soldiers of the garrison, being yet in guard (who being
repulsed by them, he began to iniure them, calling them traitors and merchants
of forts) he was laid hold on, and by the law of arms condemned to die, and
then delivered by the princes commandment to them of the fort, to be shot to
death, or to do with him as they pleased, who notwithstanding pardoned him,
and sent him back.

After that the soldiers of the fort had received their pay, being all gone
forth, they were a long time in his army, all choice men, and old experienced
soldiers, whereof they made 1600
or want of means of the archduke, although this place did so much import him,
as the Spaniards called it the Key whereby to enter into Holland, and the other
united provinces, whereon depended a great part of his honor, having lost so
many men, and spent so much money, before he could bring it to such perfection,
as when it was delivered to the Estates. If it were not through want of means,
nor by the archdukes negligence, but of his commanders in the war, captains,
commissaries, or treasorers, I know not how they could answer it, nor discharge
themselves before him: and yet it has not been heard, that any one has bin
called in question for it: for what could such valiant men have done more,
having 20 months pay due unto them, being half buried alive in the earth, like
mouls, environed round about with water, without any auoidance, half naked,
all tattered, starued with cold, and smoakt up like red herrings, John Petit.
the rules of war, it may be they will excuse them.

They found in this fort 96 barrels of powder, certain thousands of bullets,
18 pieces of ordnance, and other sorts of arms and munition in great number,
with a great quantity of wheat,

They of Groningue, and the country thereabouts were this year discontented,
for that being The Estates force them of Groningue to pay their contribution.
behind hand with their contribution, for the space of 3 years, and taking no
order for the payment thereof, being at the least 400000 gulderns, the Estates
of the other provinces, were forced against their wills, to use some forcible
execution (a bad and unfit president, especially in the time of their civil
wars) giving the charge thereof unto monsieur Temple, with 800 foot, and 200
horse, who with some other companies of Friseland, upon the sixteenth of March
entered into Groningue, partly against the bourgers wills, who the next day
forbad the bourgers to watch, and in the end dealt very severely with them;
and yet William earl of Nassau labored what he could to have them mildly
entreated, whereof some particular persons were the Gaspar van Eusum was made
governor thereof with 6 or 800 men.

They of Zeeland complained, that they were not able to levy the general
contribution They of Zeeland complain of their charge
which they were rated to pay, for the further maintenance of the wars both
by sea and land, laying open all their means, both contributions and other,
unto them of Holland, desiring they might be discharged of so great a tax, or
else to have some aid of men and money, with other necessaries for their
defense, the warrelying most upon them. They of Holland and Vtrecht seemed to
be well content, and promised to pay their rate as they had done the year
before, aduising them to provide for the defense of the country, with all the
means and speed they could.

They of Gueldres and Ouerissell seemed also to complain: yet all in general
thought it fit to take the advantage of the time, whilst their enemies
soldiers were in mutiny, and to make better resistance against the galleys at
sea, whereupon they resolved to devise all the means they could to raise money,
to make a good offensive war the next year.

Prince Henry, youngest son to William prince of Orange, having been with his
mother in 1600
acquaint him with the affairs of the country where he was borne, and to
that end (although Henry prince of Orange made one of the counsel of Estate in
the united provinces.
he were but seventeen years old) they made him one of their counsel of
Estate, that he might see and hear what was done concerning the affairs of
the country, so as upon the 17 of March was his first sitting.

The archduke Albertus and the Infanta, being installed in most of the
provinces under their obedience, they now found themselves much perplexed for
money, so as the Spaniards, Italians, and other nations, fell generally into
mutiny, and spoiled all the country, forcing the peasants to pay them
contribution, so as they feared a greater tumult, if it were not speedily
prevented: for which cause the general Estates under their command were
assembled, whereas Richardot and d' Assonville.

My lords, it is not unknown to every one of you, how much you have longed
after this assembly, in regard of the great zeal you bear unto the
advancement of your countries cause Propositions made by the archdukes, to the
provinces under their command.
which you think is too much neglected: the like desire their highnesses have
also had, since their first coming into these countries, the which had been
long since effected, if the time spent in their instalments in these their
countries, had not been some let, being necessary for them to begin with that
ceremony, not only to give the common people contentment thereby, but also to
accomplish that which was promised, before my lord the archdukes your princes
and instigation of some men) they have indiscreetly separated themselves, and
(which is 1600
of force to draw them to any reconciliation.

If this then be no more successful than the former, we must of force take
arms in hand and prepare to war, for the maintenance whereof we have a million
of advantages above our enemies: for besides, that God does commonly aid the
just cause, we our selves are without all comparison the stronger, yet we
will not deny but we have our means and chief maintenance from that great
monarch of Spain, whereas the unspeakable treasure of Peru and the Indies lie
open unto us, in regard that the young king loves the high and mighty Infanta,
his sister, so dearly, and shows more bounty unto her, than the deceased
king her father. But it is true, all must not come from thence, we must put to
our helping hands, that we

That which is allowed monthly by the king of Spain, amounts unto two
hundred and fifty thousand crowns, and what more is to be added thereunto,
must be raised in these countries: wherein you must resolve what course you
think fittest, to employ the money coming out of Spain, and that which shall
be levied here, thereby to keep better martial discipline, to suppress all
complaints and disorders, and to content the common people.

Moreover, you must have a care for the payment of your ordinary garrisons,
and the repayring of your frontier towns and forts, the which must necessarily
be done, for that they are in great danger. Besides all this, you know that
every man must live of his own, the which is

These propositions being made, and for that daily, besides the mutinies in
Dyest, Hamont, and Bilsen, the other garrisons also mutined, and forced al
Henault, and the champian country of Brabant to contribution, meaning to do
the like in Arthois, as they had done in the countries of Liege and Lembourg,
so as they were constrained to resist them by force: It was therefore mentioned
in this assembly (for the preventing of further inconveniences, and to appease
these mutinies) that the Estates should levy 50000 crowns presently, the
which was granted, upon condition, That it should be defalked out of the first
money that they should agree upon to pay The Estates de mand an exposition of
the propositions.
unto the archduke. And entering into further treaty, the general Estates
desired a particular exposition and Bilsen, should be satisfied and paid.

Whereunto, upon the 23 of May, the archduke made answer, That it was hard to
be done, 1600
letting them understand, that he would desire no more than should be needful
to maintain The archdukes demand
10000 foot of the natural borne subjects of the country, besides the
ordinary garrisons, and 5 companies of light horsemen, besides their ordinary
troops.

For the maintenance of the admiraltie, they thought it necessary to have 30
thousand gulderns a month.

For the repairing and fortification of frontier towns, 300000 gulderns a
year.

For the freeing of the demeanes and revenues, a prouisionall yearly sum of
200000 gulderns, to be made for the maintenance of their houses.

Touching the payment of the old debts, and the mutinous soldiers, they did
hope to have

After this, the Estates desired to know what assurance they should have out of
Spain, for The Estates desire to know what the sta^e of the wars would be.
the payment of the said 250000 ducats monthly, and how that money should be
employed, that the soldiers might be kept in good discipline, without any
charge to the common people, both for service money (which is their lodging)
carriages, and other things: for that having no good orders established, the
country might be wasted, and made unable to give their princes any aid: and
therefore they held it necessary to make an account and reckoning with the
soldiers, and to acquaint the king of Spain therewith, that by his bounty
they might

To these and the like points the archduke made answer the 12 of June, assuring
the 250000 crowns a month, declaring moreover their private meaning and intent
in 13 articles, the which for breuities sake I omit.

Whereupon the general Estates, on the 27 of June, made answer unto every
several article, and among the rest that touching the assurance of the 250
thousand crowns a month, which

In May past, Walborgh, countess of Nieuwenar, Horn, Moeurs, etc. died, who
had to The death of the countess o^ Moeurs.
her first husband Philip of Montmorencie, earl of Horn, who was beheaded by
the duke of Alua, and then she married with Adolp earl of Nieuwenar, Alphen,
etc. having no issue by Maurice, the earldom of Horn, with the town of
Weert, and all her mouables, unto Euerard earl of Solins, who had married with
Sabina countess of Egmont; the baronie of Bedborgh with the appurtenances,
she bequeathed unto the earl of Benthem, and made the Estates of the united
provinces her executors, who had assisted her much in the defense of her right:
but as soon as the duke of Cleues understood of her death, he sent certain
soldiers to seyze upon the town and castle of Moeurs, as depending upon the
duchy of Cleues; and not long after, when as monsieur Cloot went thither with
certain soldiers, to take possession thereof in prince Maurice his name, he
was repulst by them of Cleueland, but the next year Maurice, it was delivered
to monsieur Cloot, who was made governor thereof. There was a great sum of
money offered to prince Maurice for the said earldom of Moeurs, but he would
not in any wise sell it.

In the same month of May Harman earl of Manderschelt, and Charles Nutzel,
ambassadors 1600
which was, To command them to make restitution of such places as they held in
the territories Ambassadors sent from the empero^ to the Hage.
of the empire, with reparation for the wrongs and damages which they had done
upon the frontiers of the empire; saying, That the emperor wondered they had
not performed the contents of their letters of the 31 of January, by the which
they had promised to deliver up such places as they held in their possession,
belonging unto the empire, whereas the Spaniard had left Rees Emmeric, Lobith,
and other places, and they on the other side had taken more places, and held
Emmeric still, thereby giving the Spaniards cause of jealousy and distrust, it
being an open contempt against the emperor and empire.

And as touching the sconce of Grauenweerd, commonly called Schencks sconce,
which the estates did pretend to stand upon the territories of Gueldres, seeing
it still remained sublite pendente,

They also demanded restitution of the ransomes and other booties gotten by
them from the subjects of the empire, and assurance that no such excess should
be committed hereafter.

Moreover, they said, That they had express commission, to complain of the
wrongs done by their soldiers in the territories of Aix, whereas they made the
peasants to pay contribution even unto the gates of the town; as in like manner
in Westphalia, Iuilliers, and the territories of Cleues, as also of a sentence
given by them against those of Gelekerke. Besides, that the rents

Whereunto the Estates of the united provinces made answer, on the seventh of
June, saying, The Estates answer to the emperors ambassadors.
That they humbly thanked the emperor, and the princes of the empire, for the
great care they had of the Netherlands: and that for their parts they had
always sought to yield all due respect and honor unto the said princes, and to
the empire, according to their best means, with restitution and satisfaction,
according to the order set down at Renisbourgh etc. being much Maurice, had
taken it from them in the year 1598, and delivered it unto the duke of Cleues,
to whom it belonged, with condition, not to suffer any Spanish garrison to
enter any more into it, and that, when as in the year 1599 the Spaniards took
Genep, and Rees, and attempted to take it again, the bourgers of the town
desired them to send in certain soldiers for their defense, where they have
ever since continued.

Touching the castle of Lobith, they said, it was never in the Spaniards power,
but in the year Maurice and the earl of Solins quietly to enjoy the lands of
the countess of Nieuwenar and Moeurs, given unto them by her last will and
testament. They said, they had thrice since the year 1597 restored such places
to the empire, as the Spaniards had taken from it, and therefore they hoped
that now the fourth time they would not urge them to make restitution before
the Spaniards did the like.

As for their title to Grauenweerd sconce, they said, That whereas in the year
1586 the Spaniards had resolved to build a sconce in that place, thereby to have
an entry into Guelderland and into Cleueland, they were prevented by them, who
had built a sort there for their defense, without any complaint of them of
Cleueland, as being upon the territories of Gueldres: 1600
yet the sovereignty of Gueldres was not any thing prejudiced thereby.

The fort being made in the year 1590, the Estates of the united provinces
informed the emperor, what right they had thereunto, wherein as then there was
nothing done, so as they proceeded in the fortification of the place, and
therefore they hoped (that seeing it was built upon a void piece of ground,
adlegitimam defensionem) they might hold the possession thereof: and for that
it was a place which concerned their enemy much and that the duke at that time
made no complaint touching the same, they were of opinion therefore, that he
made no motion for the restitution thereof, but only by the practices and
persuasions of the Spaniards. And as for putting of the place into the hands of
some neutrall persons, and they to be

Touching restitution of damages, they said, That they thought the Spaniards
ought to do it, who wilfully had entered into the confines of the empire, to
make it their passage into Holland, so as they were unwillingly forced to
oppose themselves, and if thereby any incursions were made into the empire, it
was done against their wills, and contrary to their proclamations, and if they
had not suffered the Spaniards to enter into their territories, no such
inconveniences had happened.

Concerning them of Aix, they promised to take so good order therein, as they
should have no cause to complain, so as they would remain neutrall, and not
more partial to one party than to another. The like they answered for them of
Cologne, Iuilliers, and others, protesting

Touching the foresaid embassage determined on at Renisbourgh, tending to the
making of a peace, they said, That it appeared, that both the deceased king of
Spain, and the king that now lives, sought nothing else, but to bring the
countries of the Netherlands under the Spanish yoke, the which was especially
intended, by the donation of the said countries unto the Infanta, by the which
gift the Archduke and Infanta are bound by oath, to govern according to the
will and disposition of the king of Spain, contrary to the privileges and
laudable customs of the Netherlands, as also that the protectorship and
marriage of the princes in perpetuum, to the crown of Spain, the liberty of
navigations restrained, and at the king of Spaines disposition, being also
sworn, for ever to maintain the Romish Religion, and none else, and that all
those conditions should be so strictly observed, as for the least breach they
should forfeit the said countries.

Besides, that the donation of the Netherlands served them for a justification,
and to prove that there was no good meant thereby, as it appeared in the
beginning of their government, for that the king of Spain had violated fiden
publicam, by committing so many sailers and seafaring men of the Netherlands to
prison, whom his father suffered to come into Spain for his

Moreover, That the admiral of Arragon had entered in hostile manner into his
neighbors countries, forciblie taken their towns, used all cruelties toward
the inhabitants, proclaiming others that have nothing to do with him, rebels
etc. All which being duly considered by them, they had great reason to
think, that it could neither be honorable nor profitable for them to
acknowledge the archduke, nor yet to treat with him nor the king of Spain: And
therefore they humbly besought the emperor and the empire, to consider of all
these things with equity and reason.

After this, the emperors ambassadors persisted to have the^ grant liberty for
the ambassadors appointed by the estates of the empire, to come and make
relation of their embassage, who might have other reasons to allege, wishing
them to consider of all they had delivered. Whereunto the Estates replied on
the 12 of June, That they had sufficiently considered of the points concerning
1600
that the resolution taken at Rhineberck was not good nor profitable, neither
for the empire, nor for the Netherlands, desiring them to press the Spaniards
to repair the hurt which they had done in the country of Moeurs; and that for
their parts they would do their best endeavors to give the emperor contentment,
and take order to prevent all future incursions. There was also a motion made
by the ambassadors, to have the town of Wachtendonck made neutrall, thereby to
prevent all incursions, which the Estates held to be an unreasonable demand, it
being theirs by conquest, taken from their enemies in Guelderland.

In the end the emperors ambassadors dealt in such sort with the Estates of the
united provinces, Emmeric yielded by the Estates to the duke of Cleues
as they did willingly consent to deliver the town of Emmeric to the duke of
Cleues, upon promise, That the emperors Majesty and the empire, should procure
the archduke to weert, or piece of land, being in question to whom it should
belong, they pretended to hold it until the cause were decided. And so the
town of Emmeric was delivered up to the duke of Cleues, the lord thereof, in
June 1600, to the contentment of the said duke and ambassadors, who went from
the Hage to Antuerpe, and so to Brussels, to procure the restitution of
Rhineberck unto the elector of Cologne: but the archduke The archduke refuses
to deliver Rhineberck to the Elector of Cologne.
might be restored unto the elector of Cologne, as the united provinces had
already done upon their words; but they could not then obtain it, the matter
being referred to a conference, which by means of the ambassadors was
concluded, between the deputies of the united provinces, and the committees
for the Estates under the archdukes command, as Brabant, Flanders, etc.

About that time the seignior of Briaute, a young gentleman of good esteem in
France, captain Briaute fights a combat, and is slain treacherously.
of a company of horse in the Estates service, very valiant, and exceeding
jealous of his honor, was in garrison in Gheertruydenbergh: upon certain words
of disgrace, as well against his Lekerbitken, that is to say, a delicat morsel,
for his valor being made lieutenant of a horse company to Grobendonc, governor
of Boisleduc (Briaute, doing therein wrong to his reputation, to make question
to a base traitor, for words of so small moment, being usual among soldiers,
for he was one of them which had sold Gheertruydenbergh to the duke of Parma)
he sent him a challenge, to fight with him single, five to five, ten, or
twenty. This was accepted by Lekerbitken, of twenty to twenty on horseback,
and with such arms as they used in the wars. The day and place appointed,
prince Maurice sought to dissuade him, showing the sleightnesse of the
quarrel, and the disproportion to equal his person with a traitor and
renegado: but no persuasions could Briaute made choice of nineteen, almost all
French men, and went out of his garrison, giving the governor to understand,
that it was with the princes consent, and having given him (in case he were
slain in this combat) his best arms (the which were as fair, rich, and as
curiously wrought, as any prince could wear) he went out of the town to the
place appointed for the combat, midway betwixt Boisleduc and Gheertruydenbergh,
where finding not his enemy, courage and heat made him advance further than he
should have done, meeting him about half a league from Boisleduc. Upon their
approach they charged equally, Briaute and his company with two long pistols
only, and Lekerbitken with petronels, and long pistols (the two champions
having before given marks how to know one another, Briaute by a great white
plume, and the other by a red) Briaute having chosen his adversary
Lekerbitkens brother was likewise slain, and two or three more of his
company, so as it seemed that Briaute should remain victor: but they of
Boisleduc to revenge the death of their co^mander, charged more furiously than
before the which terrified some of the French, so as they fled, and left their
captain in danger, who Briaute and three 1600
of his company being led prisoners to Boisleduc, Grobendonc being before the
port, attending the return of his men, and to know with the first how the
combat went, seeing not his lieutenant, he demanded where he was? Answer
being made him, That both he and his brother were slain: He replied, And why
have you not slain these men? at which words his men fell upon Briaute and his
cousin, whom they murdered in cold blood. I leave it to others censure, whether
this fact of Briautes be to be imputed to magnanimity of courage, or to
vanity and presumption, and Grobendoncs commandment, to murder, or to an
action of war. But in my opinion he should not have done it, neither should
Briaute have been so vain, as to challenge a traitor to combat: and
Grobendonc should not have endured Briaute did him, having been challenged to
fight body to body, yea by his younger brother, being but eighteen years
old, the which he basely refused, not knowing how to excuse this fact before
the archduke, nor the captains and men of honor.

The islands of Zeeland, as Walchren, Schouwen, Zuytbeuelandt, Tolen, and
others, especially The Estates resolution to make war in the country of
Flanders.
that of Walchren, finding themselves oppressed by the six galleys which Ieronimo
Spinola, a merchant of Genes, had obtained of the king of Spain, the which
(notwithstanding the Estates ships of war, which were in guard at sea) he
had brought into the haven of Sluice, from thence to rob and spoil the united
provinces; besides the great spoils which they of Dunkerke made daily at sea,
as well upon them of Holland and Zeeland, which fish for herrings, Andrew and
Creuecoeur, and by the freeing the island and town of Bomel) to help to free
them from the said galleys and Dunkerkers, and by that means divert the wars
from Holland and Gueldres, into the country of Flanders, against the sea towns
of Dunkerk, Nieuport, and Sluice, making themselves masters of the sea, after
they had once wrested the said towns from the Spaniard, which did so much
mischief.

This attempt seemed weighty, and full of difficulties, yet the Estates
remembering the goodly victory which God had given them in the isle of Bomel,
that the old regiments of the archdukes Spaniards and Italians, were generally
in mutiny for their pay, the which by all presumptions was not easy to find,
nor for them to pacify them, by reason of the great arrerages

All which ships being come to the rendez vous in Zeeland, before the island of
Walchren, under the castle of Ramekins, staying for a wind to carry them to
Oostend, upon the coast of Flanders under the Estates obedience, there to land,
having had none but a Northerly wind, all the time they lay at anchor, with the
which they could hardly land at the town, the prince doubted that their long
stay might give the archduke leisure to gather his army together, before that
he should be entered into Flanders with his army: wherefore, leaving Zeeland,
he embarked the 19 of June in his pinace. The deputies of the general Estates
of the united provinces were likewise at Flessingue, the which were the
seigniors of Keuenburch, Oldenbarneuelt The deputies of the ^es go to assist
the prince.
Fernand^ Alleman for Zeeland, Renesse Vander Aa for Vtrecht, the seignior
Franckena for the lordship of Friseland, and the seigniour Alberda for
Groningue, the Ommelands, and the rest, to assist the prince with counsel, and
to attend the will and pleasure of God, having some few days before commanded
a fast and public prayers, that it would please God to bless their 1600
the wind constant in that corner of the north, with the which it was not
possible for them to land at Oostend, he took another resolution, with the
deputies of the Estates, to advance their design by land, although it were at
the first appointed by sea (the which had been the shorter, and the more
commodious) and the same day waighing anchor about noone, they set sail with
about 1500 vessels, leaving the rest (whereof they had no great need) before
the castle of Ramekins, there to attend a good wind to carry them to Oostend.
The same night the prince arrived with his army before the town of Bierulyet,
which is a little island upon the coast and jurisdiction of Flanders, not far
from the Sas (which is the sluse of Gant going to the sea) from whence he sent
the earl Ernest of Nassau his cousin, with such ships and The fort of
Philippine in Flander^ ye elded to the prince.
daggers, the which was done the same night, and the next morning early the
prince landed, where having taken a view of his army, with the deputies of the
Estates, leaving the forts of Patience and Ysendicke which were near and held
by the Spaniards; on the 23 of June they parted from Philippine and marched
toward Asnede, where the castle being summoned, yielded, without attending the
canon, the soldiers departing with their arms and baggage, the sconse that
was there, and the barricadoes of the church being abandoned.

The prince and his army being entered into Flanders, in the midst of their
enemies country (whereas the Spaniards had so often desired to see them) the
ships which had transported them being discharged of their victuals and
munition, were dismissed, and returned home. The 24 day the prince parting from
Asnede, came to lodge at Eckloo with his whole army, from whence he parted the
next day. After his departure the pesants used some cruelty against some of
the Estates soldiers, hanging them up booted and spurd: in revenge whereof
(yet without any knowledge or commandment from the prince) some soldiers
(which could not be afterward known) returned, and burnt the whole borough.
This was wont to be one of the greatest and goodliest boroughs in Flanders for
traffic and handiworks. The same day the prince parted from Eckloo, he
arrived at the village of Male, a league from

The same day the wind being come fair to sail to Oostend, some forty
barks of the fleet, which carried baggage being left (as we have said) under
Ramekins set sail, being guarded by three ships of war; but (as it happens
in such cases, that some are always more forward than others) the galleys of
Scluse fell upon them that were most scattered, and could not advance by reason
of the calm, so as they took eighteen or twenty of them, and the ships of
war could not help them, nor pursue the galleys to rescue the booty. And
when as the Spaniards had taken all that was in them, with the masters,
mariners, and passengers prisoners, not able to carry away all the said ships,
they burnt four and let the rest go. At this encounter captain Blanckart
captain of one of those ships of war (not able to be seconded Ernest of
Nassau, and the baron of Sidleniskie, sergeant mayor of the princes army, that
of sir Robert Sidney governor of Flessingue, of captain Wernhard du Bois, of
doctor Strabanus the princes 1600
Blanckart died in Flessingue, where he was honorably interred with a military
pomp.

In the mean time prince Maurice marching with his army in battle, passing
through the country of Flanders, he came the 26 of June to Iabeque, passing
almost by the ditches of Bruges, at whom they made some shot, but did him no
harm. In the mean time the prince and the Estates wrote letters both to Gant
and Bruges, and to the villages of their jurisdictions, and to other neighbors
(who could not believe that the Estates design, nor their army had been so
great, but that it was a road only, made by some aduenturing troops) that their
intent was not to spoil the country; but that their design and desire tended
to the general freedom of their country, and the expulsion of the Spaniards
and their adherents: requiring Albert upon the downs, within canon shot of the
town, toward Nieuport, and two other forts more within the country, called
Isabella and Grotendorst: that having that of Albert, he might have free and
easy passage betwixt Oostend and Nieuport, which town he had resolved to
besiege.

The same 29 day of June Ian of Duyvenuoord knight, seignior of Warmont,
admiral of Holland, having a good wind to get out of the road of Ramekins,
with 10 ships of war, and some 150 ordinary barks laden with victuals and
munition of war, being come before Alberts fort before Oostend besieged, and
yielded to the Estates.
Oostend to give order for the siege of Alberts fort, and to resolve upon that
of Nieuport with the Estates deputies, the which being done, he returned the
next day to his camp: that morning they began to batter the fort of Albert with
four canons, the which did so terrify the besiged, as about ten of the clock
before dinner they yielded, to depart with arms and baggage, leaving four
pieces of ordnance in the place. The prince at his dislodging from Oudenbourg,
left John Piron colonel of a regiment of Zeelanders, with seven companies of
foot Wageman and Lambert, and one company in the fort of Snaskerke, to keep
those places, and to stay the Spaniard for a time, if he would advance, and
with all to serve to give aduertisements upon all occasions, what course the
enemy took.

The prince being upon the way with the body of his army, he past above the
forts of Isabella and Grottendorst, at a bridge lying betwixt them and the
town of Nieuport, and went 1600
the French which had taken Alberts fort to approach presently; the Wallons and
the Nieuport besieged.
Suitsers arrived the same day, about three of the clock in the after noone:
so as the first day of Iulie, the prince having past the haven of Nieuport,
with a good part of his troops, and won the fort of Dam, half a league from
thence, the Spaniard having abandoned two other forts that were not to be held,
the one upon the downs, the other upon the dike joining to Nieuport, where
there is a tower serving for a lantern to seafaring men, he went to besiege
the town, camping on that side which looks toward Dunkerke; cont Ernest of
Nassau his cousin remaining with his regiment, and the Scottish men camped on
Oostend side, and so to besiege it on both sides the haven, the which he meant
to do with all speed, before that the Albert had intelligence that the prince
was entered into Flanders with his army, coniecturing quickly what his design
might be, quite contrary to that which the commons had imagined, he dispacht
post upon post to the Spaniards, and other soldiers that were mutined, he
prays, entreats, protests, threatens, promises wonders, exhorts, charge
them with their faith and loyalty, accuses them, that Maurice or the Estates
did imagine) he frames an army of twelve thousand foot, and about three
thousand horse, with the which he makes have (promising unto himself an
assured victory) to come and encounter the Estates army, were it in field, or
in their camp and trenches.

The prince and Estates were ill advertised of this sudden preparation, for
that their spies were on all sides taken, so as not any one returned. Finally,
hearing for certain that the Spanish army marched and approached near unto
them, whereof they were advertised by captain Wageman, whom colonel Piron had
sent expressly from Oudenbourg, aduertising them that the archduke came to
charge the^ in person, and to understand his pleasure what he should do in
extremity. Piron had been advertised of the archdukes coming, by the rout of
some horsemen of Oudenbourg, whom he had sent to the war to discover some
thing.

The deputies of the Estates being advertised hereof by Wageman in the fort of
Albert, they presently dispacht a post unto the prince, who was in his camp on
the other side of the haven at Nieuport, to whom there was no access to
confer, but at a low water, for the which they must always attend. But the
deputies having taken a resolution, that it was necessary to go and meet with
the enemy, and not to suffer himself to be coopt up betwixt Dunkerke and
Nieuport, where there was no retreat for the army, they advertised the prince
Ernest of Nassau in the mean time, to go with the regiment of Scottish men,
and that of the Zeelanders to encounter the Spaniards at the bridge, which they
had first past, joining unto their enemies forts, to stop the archdukes
passage, if it were possible: the prince assuring himself that he would come
that way, having no other the which it was said that colonel Piron and all his
men being in the fort of Oudenbourg, 1600
Piron seeing the mutined Spaniards stand ready with a countenance, as if they
meant to cut them in pieces, having protested that it was against the accord
(which they meant to do unto them) he retired back again, and there stayed,
declaring that he would not come forth, but would die all fighting, if they
might not be assured to have the accord kept, as it was made; the which Dom
Louis de Velasco general of the archdukes artillery, did especially mediate,
yet were they spoiled of some of their baggage and horses, and their ensigns
violently pulled from them, contrary to the composition. But those of
Snaskerke comprehended in the same accord, where captain Busignt commanded,
escaped not so easily, for both he and his lieutenant, with captain Eindoren
of cont Ernest of Nassaus regiment, were at their coming

Colonel Piron being come to Oostend with such men as could escape the enemies
fury, having acquainted the deputies of the Estates of the accord that was
made with him, signed with the archduke Alberts own hand, and underneath, By
commandment from his Highness, Vasseur, they did then believe, that the
archduke was in person in the army, the which Maurice could imagine. Whereupon
the prince was presently advertised, that the archduke was there in person with
all his forces, and that Oudenbourg and Snaskerke were recovered again by the
Spaniard, aduising him to be ready in good order, and resolute to encounter
the enemy. Whereupon the said colonel was sent by the prince to join with
Cont Ernestus and the Scottishmen, and to stop the Spaniards passage at the
bridge, or at the least to stay him a while, until that the prince should
repasse the haue^ with his army, and cause the ships to retire as he did,
bringing with him six pieces of ordnance in the head of his foreward. Cont
Ernestus being upon the way, and marching toward the bridge with two pieces,
he found, that part of the enemies army was already past, against the which
he must needs fight, to stay them a while. But as the Spaniard advanced his
passage, and his Cont Ernest and Scottish men defeated.
to give back, after that he had lost his two pieces, and about 800 men, most
part Scottish men, and among the^ captains, Arthur Stuart, Robert Barckley,
Andrew Murray, John Kilpatrich, John Michel, John Stoachem and Hugh Nyesbeth,
Scottish captains of sir William Edmonds regiment: whereof Murray and Barckley
being prisoners, having received their faith that held them, were afterward
most inhumanely murdered in cold blood, even in their arms that had taken
them. After the same barbarous manner were slain the captains Turquean, la
Grappe, and Walrauen, of the regiment of colonel vander Noot of Zeeland, and
captain Ghistels a Zeelander also, of colonel Pirons regiment: most of the
soldiers that were not slain in the Ernest, colonel Edmonds, and some other
captains were pursued unto Alberts fort, whereas they saved themselves yet
some of their men were slain, even at the palisado of the said fort.

The victorious Spaniard puffed up with this good success in the beginning, and
to pursue his victory, holding the Estates army (in his opinion) already
vanquished, and prince Maurice, and prince Henry, with their hands and feet
bound, having resolved not to leave one living in the whole army, but those
two princes, to serve him as trophies, which design was solemoly sworn by the
captains and their officers, as since it has been voluntarily confessed by the
mouth of many of them that were prisoners in Holland, and I my self have heard
it John Petit.
auerred in Vtrecht, and that they had horror to take such an oath.

The archduke having past the bridge with his whole army, began to march with
a stately countenance toward his enemy, upon the sands of the sea, carrying
with him eight, pieces of ordnance, with 9 cornets of lances, 5 companies of
harguebuziers on horseback, (...) of cuirasses, and 600 Spanish and Italian
horse, of the mutiners of Dyest, three regiments of 1600
of the regiment of cont Frederick vanden Berghe, all bending directly toward
Nieuport, The archdukes army.
with an intent to charge the prince, and the Estates army in their camp and
trenches, assuring themselves of victory, by their mornings good success: but
the archduke found himself deceived in the opinion which he had conceived of
the prince, finding that he had repast the haven, and that he attended him in
good order, and with a resolute countenance to fight with him. Then the
archduke and the admiral of Arragon began to think otherwise of their
affairs, abating some part of their first heat, so as making no such have as
before, they began to dispose of their battailons and squadrons, and to come
and charge the prince along the seashore, the tide being far spent, so as
there was a great distance betwixt the water

Cont Lewis of Nassau, lieutenant of the Estates horse, brother to cont
Ernestus, and cousin to the prince, had the leading of the foreward, with his
company of horse, that of cuirasses The order of the princes army.
of the prince, commanded by the seignior of Gant, son to the seignior of
Oyen, a Gueldrois, the company of Cont Henry Frederic, the princes brother,
led by captain Bernard, and that of Goddart of Bertenborch, in the first
squadron of the right wing. Upon the left, Macellus Bax, with his cornet, and
that of the seignior Paul Bax, governor of Berghen up Zoom his brother, that of
captain la Salle and of Peter Pauier, having in the midst of the said
squadrons, and in the head of the first battailon, the princes company of
gards, commanded by the seignior vander Aa, captain thereof, and the company
of the earl of Hohenlo, led by the seignior of Strydhorst, with Sir Francis
Veers regiment of Englishmen (being general of all the English nation, that
were under the Estates service) himself marching in the head of his colonel
company, with that of captain Hamond Yaxlee, his sergeant mayor, of Denis, of
Daniel Veer, of Hamont, of Ogle, of Tirrel, of S. Calisthenes Brook, of
Foster, of Fairfax, of Grant, and of Holcroft. In the second battailon was
colonel Horatio Veer, brother to the general sir Francis Veer, marching also
in the head of his regiment, Sutton his lieutenant colonel, of sir Th. Knowles,
commanded by captain Petfyn, of Cecil, of Purton, of Morgan, of Meetkerk, of
Scot, of Vauesor, of Caius Hartewiston, and of Dexbery. In the third battailon
commanded the seignior Tacco Hottinga, with his company, that of the baron of
Sidlenisky, sergeant mayor of the army, led by his lieutena^t, of Gasper
Euwsum, by his lieutenant, of Michael Hago, of Frederic Gronsteyn, of Iean
Kyef, of Hans van Osthem, of Hans Vryes, of Hans Zagreman, of Quirin Blanw, of
Edsard Groenesteyn, of Egbert Honing, of Holsteyn, of Assuerus, of Gerrit Schau
the younger, of Arnsma, and of Ripperda, which was the regiment of Friseland,
under cont William Lewis of Nassau their colonel, governor of the said country
of Friseland, of Groaning, and of the Ommelands, cousin to the prince, and
brother to the earls Ernest, and Lodowick of Nassau. These 3 battailons of
foot making 41 companies, having George Euerard of Solins led the battle, with
his cornet of horse, that of Ioos Wyernch Clout, and of John Bax: the said 4
companies were led by cont Frederick in the first squadron on the right wing,
and upon the left, captain Goddard van Balen, led by his cornet, that of fir
Fr. Veer commanded by his lieutenant, and the cornet of sir Edw. Cecil: and in
the midst of the said 2 squadro^s, there marched first the regiment of prince
Henry Frederic of Nassau led by Daniel of Hartin, seignior of Marquette, his
lieutenant colonel, with the companies of Iean du Boult, Antony of Sancy, of
Francis Marli, Francis Mareshal, Philip de la Lou, Iean Nemmery, Ionac Durant,
and Gabriel of Nouuelles, whom they called the New Gueux, the which was wont to
be the regiment of the baron of Hachicourt, in the archdukes service, and were
come out of S. Andrews sort, as we have said. la Noue, the which were put into
2 battailons, the first was commanded by the seignior of Domeruille, lieutenant
colonel, and the second by captain du Sault, both of la Noues regiment, of
Semendiere, of Mareschot, of Hamelet, of Cornteres, by his lieutenant (for he
had bin slain two days before at Alberts fort) of Formentiere, of Verneuil,
of Pont Aubert, and of 1600
made the battle: In the midst whereof was prince Maurice, to have an e^e
both before and behind him, being accompanied by prince Henry Frederi^k his
brother, a young prince of 16 or 17 years old, whom the prince would gladly
have had retired, to the end (said he) that if he himself died in the fight,
yet the Estates of the united Provinces, should have another general to
command over then a^mie, to repair it if it should be put to rout, but it was
not possible to persuade him to re^ier, entreating and protesting that he would
live and die with his brother, and that he would not choose any other fortune;
which doubtless was sign of a great courage in so tender an age. The rereward
was led by Oliver Vanden Timpel knight, seigniour of Corb^ke etc. with the
cornets of horse of Wernhard du Bois, of Hamelton, of George Couteler, under
the conduct of du Bois. In the which there was also three battalions of foot,
the first was the regiment of cont Ernest of Nassau, with his colonel company,
led by his lieutenant, of captain Huseman his lieutenant colonel, of Strael
seriant mayor of Massau, of Imbise, of Clotwits, of Balthazar Eawsum, of
Pithon, of the old company of cont Ernest by a lieutenant, of Andrew Breeder,
of Crimits, of Lucas Wenser and of George Verkele. In the second battailon was
the regiment of the Lord of Ghistelles, with his colonel company, that of cont
Euerard of Solins led by his lieutenant, of Eneas Treslon, of La Mouillerie, of
Langeuelt, of Raysse, and of Floris van Wyngaerden. In the third battailon was
the regiment of colonel Huchtenbrouik, with his colonel company led by his
lieutenant, of Marlin sergeant mayor of the regiment of north Holland, of that
of the seignior of Timpel, by Belin his lieutenant, Dericke de loughe, of
Ruyssenburch, and of Calwaert, being in all 27 companies of foot, and three
cornets of horse, which made the rereward. Such was the disposition of the
army of prince Maurice, and the Estates of the united provinces.

The earl of Hohenloo was left behind in Guelderland, with 24 companies of
foot, and 6 cornets of horse: fearing that if all the Estates forces had been
in Flanders, the enemy might in the mean time have attempted some thing in
those parts, or in the ^sle of Bomel, who would gladly have bin there, and so
did the Prince and the Estates wish it, when as they saw the Spaniard so near
them with all his forces. But the wind did never serve to come to Oostend
neither before nor after the battle: where there were also some companies of
foot and horse left for the guard of the town.

The deputies of the Estates being at Oostend, having news of the defeat of
cont Ernests troops, and seeing the archdukes army march with all speed
toward Nieuport: they thought it then their best course, to continue within
the town, to have their refuge unto God, and to implore his aid, as they did
in their council chamber by M. John Vuytten bogoerd their minister at the very
instant when as both the armies were ready to fight.

On the other side the Spaniards, especially two or three of the old
commanders, who were best experienced in such actions, observing the resolute
countenance of the prince, and the disposition of his army, which seemed ready
rather to come and charge them, than to attend the shock, they see they should
not find that which they had conceived in their imaginations, their enemy
being in better order, and more resolute than they expected: for they did
confidently

The prince having put his army in battle, as we have said, and viewed the
Spaniards countenance 1600
the sands, betwixt the downs and the sea, in the head of the foreward; then
entering into counsel with his commanders and colonels, what was fittest to be
done, whether to suffer the enemy to approach nearer, to get some advantage,
or else to go and begin the charge first: all being well debated, they
resolve to advance, and to charge the enemy, and thereupon being informed
(according to his demand) by captain Mortier and Fernel, gentlemen of the
artillery, commanding at those six pieces, that the enemy was near enough
to be endammaged with their cannon; he thereupon gave them charge to shoot,
as they did: all the commanders being retired, every one to his battailon, the
prince having encouraged his soldiers, recommends unto them their honors,
lives, and the fruit of the victory, telling

About two of the clock in the after noone, the princes army marched with
great courage The charge begins.
and resolution against the Spaniards, and having let pass some volleys of
great shot, which did no great harm, but only one piece past through a
squadron of English footmen, he began to charge along the sands, his cannon
having endammaged the Spanish horsemen, who finding themselves galled on that
side, and withal the vice admiral of the Estates houering up and down the
road, did annoy them; leaving the sands they entered into the downs,

The battle continued so long, as the tide came up to the foot of the downs, so
as there were some among the Estates Frisons, who seeing some of their horsemen
turn their backs (the which fell out often on either side) thinking that all
was lost, and flying into the sea to get to their ships, were drowned; yet the
body of the Frisons returning to charge on the one side, general Veer, and
colonel Horatio his brother with the English on another side, the seignior
Domeruille with the French, and the other colonels in other places, being
encouraged by the prince, did so gall and tire the Spaniards and Italians that
were mutined (who were more obstinate in the fight than all the rest, and
behaved themselves as valiantly as any soldiers could do) besides cont
Lodowicke of Nassau, the earl of Solins, the captains Gant and Balen, charged

The archduke seeing this disorder, having no means to recover that which he
had but The archduke flies, and the prince had his arms and his horse of
combat.
newly lost, he leaves his arms, and turns head with the first toward
Bruges, where he saues himself, but loses all his household, artillery, and
baggage, and abandons all to the victors great, as they that fled and were
overtaken, were slain like beasts, and some were murdered 1600
their lives. The victory continued until night, chasing, taking, and killing.
The blood of men slain dyed the fields, and the slaughtered carcasses lay
dispersed over the country, upon the lands, downs, and meadows, so as the
number of them that were slain on the archdukes part exceeded 6000, and about
800 prisoners, who were in great danger of their lives, even the admiral The
loss on the archdukes side.
of Arragon (being taken prisoner and led to Oostend) if he had not been in the
princes company.

The prince and the Estates as well at the first encounter in the morning, as
at this battle The l^sse on the princes side. The dead men.
lost above 2000 men, among others Bernard, Couteler and Hamelton, captains of
horse, and some 20 captains of foot, but noe man of mark. On the archdukes
side were slain, the earl Saume, the earl of la Fere, the Seneshall of
Montelimar, the baron of Pimereul, Chassey Ottigny son to the president
Richardot, Dom Gaspar de Sapena, colonel, who died at Oostend, Dom Diego de
Torres, Dom Gaspar de Loyaza, Dom Gonzalo d'Espinola, Dom Joan de Pardo, Dom
Garciade Toledo, Dom Lopes de Capata, Dom Alonzo Carcamo, Dom Louis Faccardo,
Sebastien Velasco, Sebastien Doteloa, Christoual Verdugues, Mettheo
d'Otteuille, Ioannetin de Casa nueua, the pay master Alines, and many others
which are yet unknown to us, and cannot recover their names. Among the
prisoners, besides Dom Francisco de Mendoza admiral of Arragon, lieutenant
general of the archdukes army, there were Dom Baptista de Villanoua, who was
conveyed The prisoners
to Horn in Holland, Dom Alonzo Ricquel to Delft, Dom Gonzalo Hernandes de
Spinosa to Vtrecht, Dom Pedro de Montenegro to the Hage, Dom Pedro de Velasco
to Berghen up Zoom, Dom Pedro de Leusina to Enchuisen, Dom Antonio de Mendoza
to Berghen also, with Dom Fra^cisco de Torres. Among them of the archdukes
household, there was the cont Carlo Rezi, Dom Diego de Gusman, and Mortier, all
three pages, and Dom Pedro de Monte-maior, a gentleman taster, his physician,
barber, harbinger, rider, cook, porter, the grooms of his chamber, some of
the archers and halbardiers of his guard, and in a manner all his household: 3
priests or monks, 40 ancients, 37 pencioners, which are ancients and sergeants
reformed, as they term them. They lost six pieces of ordnance, and those two
of cont Ernestus were recovered: there were The booty.
136 ensigns of foot taken and 5 cornets of horse, comprehending the mutiners
standard, and the colors that were lost the same day were recovered.

Prince Maurice being victorious, did camp that night upon the place of
battle, and the next

Such as discourse of war at their pleasures, and consider not the variable
events which do often happen unlooked for, would have wished that the prince
should have pursued his victory after another manner, and that the deputies of
the Estates being in Oostend, should have sent forth both the horse and foot
that were in the town, to cut off the passage at the That you must make a
bridge of gold to a flying enemy. And although the prince, besides those
troops that were in Oostend, had horse and foot enough, that were fresh and
fit enough to pursue them; yet contenting

Others demanded, why the prince (seeing his enemy was defeated, and the
country of 1600
besieged not the forts about Oostend, the which (it may be) would have yielded
presently, whereby he should have assured the town better, and made the whole
country contribute? To whom I must answer, That the town of Nieuport was not
to be taken suddenly, nor yet the forts, which are almost inaccessible by
reason of the waters (as it has been well known since) were not to yield so
easily, as such conquerours have imagined: into the which colonel Barlotte (a
resolute soldier, and not to be terrified with small matters) was retired.
Moreover the prince assured himself that the archduke would seek to repair
his army with all speed; and therefore he would willingly attend the earl of
Hohenloo his brother in law, with his troops to fortify his camp. Besides
there were many things to be ordered: so as he

The fifth day after the defeat, the prince being gone to set down again
before Nieuport, The prince returns again to besiege Nieuport.
having again past the haven, called back his ships, landed his canon,
intrencht his camp, and made his platformes for his battery; the same night
there entered three regiments of foot into the town (the which they could not
hinder, for that the place was not fully besieged) besides the five companies
that were in garrison in the town before: so as the besieged about the twelfth
of the month made a gallant sallie with about a thousand men, betwixt

All which, the prince having well considered, and the multitude of men that
were within the town, that it would not be easy to take by assault, without
greater forces than he had, and without a long siege; the which would greatly
have weakened his army, and it may be have wasted the tenth part of his
soldiers, the which at that time, and according to the place were few enough,
which he had no need to wast prodigally, for such a paltrie Isabella, Clara,
and Grottendorst: to the end also that he should be no more in danger to be
shut up, as the enemy had thought to have done, knowing well that the Spanish
commanders prepared for a new army, to have their revenge if they might.
Moreover in besieging the said forts, if he were willing to attend them, and
to fight with them with such forces as might have come unto Isabella, lodging
in the meadows toward the sea, near unto the downs; on which side, by the
means of Clara and Grottendorst, the said fort might have bin relieved at
need: wherefore he caused 2 pieces of ordnance to be planted on the downs,
looking toward the approaches, and 4 others upon Oostend side, near unto the
fort of Albert, to batter that of Isabella, and the 19 of the month he planted
6 cannons more, and somewhat nearer, with which 10 pieces he began to batter
the next day, 2 or 3 hours only; whereby they did conceive that he must use
greater force, or else he should prevail little. Notwithstanding, though al
things were ready Clara without any let, for that neither it nor the fort of
Grottendorst were in any sort besieged; from whence the comma^ders of the army
sent to refresh all those forts, both with men and munition; to the which they
had free access, by reason of the cutting of the ditches in the meadows, the
which are necessary 1600
attempted the fort of Grottendorst, which was not very well fortified, by
means whereof that of Clara had bin separated from the fort of Isabella,
betwixt which two it is built.

And as these 2 armies of the Spaniards and Estates were in front one of
another, but could not annoy one another, but by light skirmishes, by reason of
the forts and the situation of the country; the Spaniard having all the firm
land at his commandment, and the Estates having that only haven of the sea,
Oostend, to furnish them with all their commodities, whither they could not at
all times go aboard nor get out: seeing therefore that he should profit little
in battering of the said fort, where although he had made a desired breach, yet
could he hardly have given an assault, for that he must have incountred with
two enemies at once, one in Albert, and the first two which they had planted in
the princes quarter before Isabella fort.

Whilst this was doing, on the 25 day, colonel Barlotte being in the first
trenches of the counterscarpe of Isabella fort, or within the fort it self,
having showed himself too much, he was shot into the head with a musket,
whereof he died instantly, being much lamented by the archduke but nothing by
the Spaniards, Italians, nor any other commanders; for that his

Prince Maurice and the deputies of the Estates, having caused the fort of
Albert to be ruined and beaten down, as much as they thought good, he imbarkt
his cannon and retired his garrisons out of all the forts which he had won
from the enemy. And the last day Albert in a short time, and leaving them all,
as they continued unto the siege and yielding up of Oostend; which moved the
Estates also to retire their horsemen, and 27 companies of foot, the rest
remaining there in garrison.

At that time the seignior of Wackene, vice admiral to the archduke, remaining
most commonly The cruelty of the viceadmirall of Dunkerke.
at Dunkerke, to be revenged for the death of the Spaniards, and others which
had been slain at the battle of Nieuport, went in person to sea with seven
or eight ships of war, and fell upon a poor company of fishermen of
Holland and Zeeland, which were fishing for herrings; who although they had
certain ships of conuoy dispersed here and there (as they make their fishing
in a great compass of the sea) the foremost being too far keeles of the
ships, so as they sunk by degrees, and yet those poor miserable wretches that
1600
being drowned like mice in a trap: A cruel act, and most lamentable to see,
and hear the cries and sighs of those that were so miserably drowned. Of this
cruel and inhumane act, the Seignior of Wackene went himself to carry news
to the court of Spain: for the which at the beginning he was commended,
honored, and recompensed by the king: but all good men, which loved their
honors on either party, did hate and detest him. He died afterward very
miserably in that court.

The Estates being assembled at Brussels, they acquainted the archdukes, by
what means they might attain unto a peace with the united Provinces.

First, they gave them to understand, That the reasons why they of Holland and
Zeeland The Estates show the archdukes means how to make a peace with the
united
their letters and speeches) were, that (notwithstanding their highness
presence, and the privileges of the country, sworn and confirmed by them)
they saw the Spaniards and strange soldiers had still the guard and government
of the chief towns and forts of the country: as the castles of Antuerpe and
Gant etc. the towns of Grave and Liere, the forts of Flanders and Denremonde,
the Sas of Gant, the town and castle of Sluice, Nieuport, Dunkerke, the town
and castle of Cambray, with diverse others.

This (said the Estates) might be easily redressed, by removing of those
strange garrisons out of the said towns and castles, assuring themselves, that
their highness authority might be confirmed as well by other means,
considering the loyalty and constancy (whereof there has

The second objection made by the Estates, was, That a peace could not be
concluded, so long as the Spaniards held the chiefest governments (the which
was contrary to the privileges of the country) as in the town of Lembourg
Veert, the country of Cambresis, Bruges, Antuerpe, Gant, Dixmuyden, Liere,
Nieuport, Dunkerke etc. which difficulty said they might easily be removed,
for that there was store of noblemen and gentlemen borne within

The third point was, the liberty and freedom of religion, wherein they
excused them of Holland and Zeeland, for that their highness had sworn by the
donation made unto them, never to yield thereunto; which point said they, ought
to be referred to divines to dispute, and

The fourth reason which the Hollanders did object, that the provinces under
their highness command, by virtue of the said grant, seemed to be held in
fee of the king of Spain; whereupon they said, that as it had pleased their
highness to signify often unto the Estates of Brabant, that they had no
meaning the Netherlands should be held in fee of Spain, so now they would be
pleased to entreat the king of Spain to vouchsafe to write his letters of
certificate to the contrary, and to let them understand that he has no such
intent, although there be some likelihood, considering the contents of the
grant.

The fifth objection was, that they held it not convenient that the
Netherlanders should be restrained from their traffic to the Indies, which
they said was as much as to strive against

In the sixth and last point they showed the distrust which they of Holland and
Zeeland had, that if a peace should be made with their highness, how it
should be observed from point to point, and what assurance they should have for
the same: for the freeing of which doubt, 1600
and Zeeland, to come and be admitted to sit in the assembly of the general
Estates, and there to entreat of a peace, or of a truce and cessation from
arms, wherein they thought themselves best assured, having authority from
their highness, always with this exception, that in regard of the provinces
under their Highness command, there should be nothing altered touching their
religion, nor their Highness authority, but they should treat only about
restitution of lands, goods, and privileges; and the conclusion of the peace
should be made upon these conditions, That if it should so fall out, that all
things concluded with them of Holland and Zeeland, were not fully and directly
observed and kept from point to point, that the general Estates should bind
themselves to see them observed and kept, and to that end should

Herein it seemed the general Estates of the provinces under the archdukes
command, failed somewhat of the maine point which the united provinces aimed
at, who said, they would never be subjected unto the Spanish government, for if
their sheafe of arrows were once divided and broken, they would be as strongly
united again. Thus much was treated of at Brussels, and what ensued, you shall
hereafter hear.

The general Estates had a galley, called the black galley of Dordrecht, for
that it was built Wipeul, who had for his lieutenant that gallyslaue Turk,
which had escaped by swimming from one of the galleys of Sluice. This galley was
sent to Flessingue in Zeeland, to draw Spinolaes galleys thither. During the
time it lay there at anchor, the captain had discovered, that three of those
galleyes of Sluice had taken a merchants ship of Zeeland. Whereupon he pursued
them, and at the first charged one of them so furiously, as being well beaten,
he forced it to retire into their hole. Then the captain rowed unto the two
other galleys, who had seized upon the ship, the which he took from them in
despite of them, forcing them to retire, with no small

On the 29 of November the said captain with his galley, and four long boats
well manned, went and set upon the admiral ship of Antuerpe, in the midst of
the river, before the A gallant exploit done by the black galley.
town, the which was one of the goodliest ships that was under the archdukes
service, in the which there were 16 brass pieces, 10 of iron, 6 to shoot
stones, and many harguebuses acrocke, the which he boorded suddenly in a dark
night, cut some in pieces, and some leaping over board were drowned: then he
took the ordinary merchants ships of Brussels and Macklin, in every one of
the which there were 4 brass pieces, besides others, and five other ships,
which they call Heus, serving to convey victuals and munition which went to
Sluice, and to other forts which the Spaniards held upon the sea coast, and upon
the river, appointed as the merchant

The archduke having (to his charge) after the battle of Nieuport, gathered
together some new troops of soldiers, after prince Maurice his return into
Zeeland, he sent most of them into Brabant, under the command of Dom Louis de
Velasco, lodging the greatest part of them Maurice his horsemen, who did
greatly spoil the country round about. The mutinous soldiers of Hamont held
the town and castle of Weert still for their security, having 14 stiuers a
day delivered them for every soldiers pay, and yet they made great spoil in
the country. The archduke also reformed his old soldiers, both horse and foot,
especially the Spaniards and Italians, 1600


We have showed before how the emperors ambassadors moved the archdukes for the
delivery A treaty betwixt the provinces under the archduke and the united
provinces.
of Rhineberck unto the elector of Cologne, but they referred it to a treaty
of peace which was then in hand, saying, That they daily expected a pasport
from the united provinces, for the deputies of the Estates under their
command, as Brabant, Flanders, etc. who were at that time in Antuerpe,
attending the said pasport; the which being sent by them of the united
provinces, the deputies appointed for the Estates of Brabant, Lembourg,
Luxembourg, Gueldres, Flanders, Arthois, Henault, Valenciennes, Namur, Ryssel,
Douay, Orchies, Dornic, Tornesis, and Macklin, being assembled at Brussels,
went to Antuerpe, and from thence to Berghen up Zoom. Their names were, Gerard
of Horn, earl of Bassignie, son to the lord Philip van Bentinghe, lord of
Bight and Paffenhowen, colonel and steward of Montfort, M. Henric Coet,
pentioner of Ypre, and others; who upon the 19 of July, came to Berghen being
brought in by mon^eur Bax, governor of the town, who met them some quarter of
a mile off. There they found some eight or ten deputies for the Estates of the
united provinces, whereof monsieur van Oldenbarneuelt, aduocat for Holland, was
one, where they were all feasted by monsieur Bax.

The next day being met together, the letters sent from the Estates assembled
at Brussels, unto The contents of the Estates o^ Brussels letters to the united
Estates.
the Estates of the united provinces, were there read, the co^tents whereof was,
To show how desirous they were to enter into a treaty of peace, with the
Estates of the united provinces, showing how good and necessary a peace would
be, and what miseries and calamities follow

Which ended, the deputies of the united provinces rose up, and went into a
corner of the Barneuelts answer to the general Estates.
hall, where having conferred together, they sat down again, monsieur
Barneuelt speaking for them all, said, That they rejoiced much, to hear the
general Estates assembled at Brussels, so well affected to a general peace
and union of the whole Netherlands, as they had sent natural borne subjects
and members (wishing well unto the Estates) unto them, whereof some were their
kinsmen, and had livings among them: for which their great good will and
affection, they gave them hearty thanks, taking God, the world, and their own
consciences to witness, that they desired nothing more, than a godly, just,
and assured peace: but in regard of

Whereunto the deputies for the Estates in Brussels made answer, That it was
very credible, The answer of the deputies of Brussels.
that by the retreat of strangers, and the committing of towns and castles
into the hands of such as were borne in the country, all doubts and distrusts
would be removed, and matters reduced to the ancient order: But looking
precisely into this action, they were of opinion, That as long as the united
provinces continued in arms, and made war, it was not fit nor convenient for
the Estates in Brussels to reject the king of Spains aid, therewith to defend
themselves against such as made war against him.

Whereupon either party conferred together, and then sitting down again,
monsieur Barneuelts reply.
Barneuelt said, That they held the donation made by the king of Spain to the
Infanta, to be false, and of no force, for that it was therein expressly set
down, That if the archduke died without Netherlands should not trade unto the
Indies, and that upon forfeiture of the said countries: 1600
for that in consideration the archdukes had bound themselves so strictly unto
Spain, and that the general Estates of those provinces had likewise sworn to
be true and faithful unto them, as to their natural lords, that of force that
yoke must needs ensue. He also said, That touching the points of communication
specified in their letter, with their instructions and verbal propositions,
the deputies of the united Provinces, having duly considered thereon, they
found, that the whole transport made by the K. of Spain to the Infanta his
daughter, tended merely to the prejudice of the Netherlands, in regard that the
archdukes, and the Estates also with them, were so strictly bound unto the king
of Spain, as in their opinions they could not safely deal concerning a peace,
neither with Spain, the archdukes, nor with the Estates, as their sworn
vassals;

Whereunto the deputies of the Estates of Brussels made answer, That they had a
prince, The Estates of Brussels answer
without whom they desired not to do any thing, being in good hope that all
matters by the help of good mediators might be so well reconciled, as their
highnesses in the end would agree

And touching the assurance which they demanded, they said, They must not set
the cart before the horse: for if the treaty of peace were once begun, the
deputies of the general estates should have ample commission to treat with
them, and whenever they came to the maine points, they would secure them in
such sort, as they should rest satisfied, concluding, that they would not
forsake their princes, nor attempt any thing but with their likings and
consents; so as the conclusion of a peace must proceed from the archdukes, and
not from the Estates.

Whereupon the deputies of the united provinces gave them to understand, that
they were bound by contract to diverse princes and states, not to make any peace
with the Spaniards, nor the archdukes, without them, to which end they had
caused diverse decrees to be published,

And thus the conference between them ended, the deputies of the united
provinces giving The conference breaks up at Berghen.
letters sealed up unto the other deputies, bearing date the 22 of July,
containing a discourse of all their conference, and recommending the peace unto
them, wherewith the deputies departed from Berghen, and returned to Brussels,
making report of all that had been done.

Upon their return, the Estates being assembled at Brussels, finding by the
report of their 32000 pounds ^ing.
had received news of the archdukes overthrow, they delivered their fourth
declaration unto the archdukes committees, containing many several points.

First, That the mutinous soldiers should be paid, and all other soldiers
kept in good martial

That the Spanish Tribunals, called de la Hazienda, and de la Visita, that is,
Treasorers and Overseers of the Spanish treasure, being 250 thousand ducats a
month allowed by the king of Spain, might be reformed, and that they should
have no further dealing with the accounts of the natural borne subjects of the
country, unless it were with such as were indebted unto 1600


That the Estates were content to undertake the discharge of the admiraltie,
the payment of the garrisons, and the repairing of the forts, according unto
the list propounded unto them.

They also undertook to furnish 250 wagons for an army, and to entertain ten
thousand footmen, and the ordinary horsemen of the country, for a year; upon
condition, That they should be freed from the five cornets of light horsemen:
Whereunto they all agreed, desiring that the archduke might be advertised
thereof.

These articles were delivered: whereunto the archduke made answer the
sixteenth of Iulie, whereby he seemed to yield unto the chief points. And the
same day the marquess of of Haurec gave the Estates to understand, That the
archdukes desire was, they should resolve

Touching the freeing of the demeanes, the Estates desired they might not be
charged therewith, until a peace were made, and as for their yearly revenues
and entertainment, they yielded to 250 thousand gulderns yearly, as it was
propounded, the which should be borne by the whole provinces in general; and
that upon condition their highnesses should reform their households, discharge
all superfluous servants, and reduce it to the ancient orders of the dukes of
Bourgoigne.

After this the Estates began to consult, how they might raise these sums of
money; the prelates and gentlemen concluding to impose a tax upon victuals, and
upon all apparel, and also A tax imposed upon victuals.
the two estates agreed, with the good liking of the third estate, to raise
these sums upon corn, wine, butter, flesh, etc. viz.

Upon a measure of Brabant, called a sester of wheat, four stiuers.

Upon the same measure of Rye or Meslin, 3 stiuers.

Upon every aume of French, Renish, or Spanish wine, 8 stiuers.

Upon a barrel of beer, valued from 2 to 4 gulderns, 6 stiuers.

Upon a barrel of beer valued from 4 to 6 gulderns, 12 stiuers.

Upon a hogshead, and upon all foreine beer, 24 stiuers.

Upon every ox or steer of 3 years old and upwards, 30 stiuers.

Upon every cow or heifer, 20 stiuers.

Upon every wether or calfe, 5 stiuers.

Upon every ewe or ram, 4 stiuers.

Upon every lamb, goat, or pig, 2 stiuers.

Upon every hog, 8 stiuers.

Upon every milch cow both winter and summer, a stiuer every month.

Upon every ox or cow that is put to pasture to be made fat, 2 stiuers.

But the deputies of the other provinces seemed to make some difficulty
hereat, desiring rather, that a division should be made, and that every
province should have his portion set down, with a fit moderation, as they were
able to raise it, and that the prelates and nobility

They of Antuerpe made diverse difficulties, concerning the taxes imposed upon
victuals, saying, That they had paid part of their debts out of the excises
raised upon victuals, and that the said excises were partly farmed unto
merchants, who had disbursed 150 thousand gulderns for the archdukes use,
before his going into Spain, and that they had been contributarie for the
payment of the mutined soldiers in the castle of Antuerpe; desiring that
consideration might be had thereon.

Upon the ninth of August they consulted again, touching the conference which
had as then they could not proceed: But in regard of the former conference, and
for that the enemy 1600
wherefore they concluded, that their princes were in the mean time to be
aided, yet not to forget the treaty of peace, which could not be suddenly
effected, and therefore they must take order for the war. To which end the
general Estates at Brussels set down the archdukes demands, with a note of
the several sums, what they would amount unto, whereby they The whole charge
of the archdukes demands.
found that the entertainment of the ordinary garrisons a^ that time for 8450
men amounted monthly unto 81120 gulderns.

Ten thousand foot divided into five regiments, all natural borne subjects,
amounted unto the sum of 128700 gulderns a month.

Fifteen companies of bands of ordnance, which should serve six months with
full pay,

The archdukes household charges monthly, came unto one and twenty thousand
gulderns, and 16667 gulderns the month, for two hundred and fifty wagons for
the army: so as all these charges together amounted unto 308237 gulderns the
month: where to they added the charges of collectors, and muster-masters, which
came to some twelve thousand gulderns a month: so as the whole sum was 320
thousand gulderns a month.

For the raising of this sum monthly, the provinces were of diverse opinions:
for in the division and quotation of the general collected sums out of all
the provinces, according unto the old taxation in the grant made by the said
provinces, unto the emperor Charles the 5,

They of Brabant desired, That the two companies of light horsemen under Adolph
earl vanden Berghe, and monsieur Grobendonc (as being very necessary for the
defense of all the country Demands and complaints made by them of Brabant.
of Brabant, and especially of their frontier town of Hertogenbosch, or
Boisleduc) might be comprehended in the list of the garrisons appointed to be
paid out of the collection of 320000 gulderns a month; as also that the winter
army might be divided, and that their highnesses would be served therewith
according to the Joyful entries. That the government of Lembourg, and of the
towns over Meuse, might be put into the hands of natural borne subjects of
Brabant, as also the rest of the towns, castles and forts in Brabant; and that
the town of Antuerpe (contrary to the contract made for the building of the
castle) might be no more

The like complaints were made by the general Estates unto the archduke the
fourteenth of 1600
all manner of contributions might cease, as of money gathered for lodging,
forage, fortification, The general Esta^es complain unto the archdukes.
wagons, pioners, passages, setting forth of soldiers, etc. and all other
charges which had been brought in without the consent of the Estates, and that
the country might be only charged with the sum of 320000 gulderns a month.
They also desired to be freed from all the mutined soldiers; especially from
them of Dyest and Weert: and that all sums of money collected in every
province, might be received by the rent-master appointed by the Estates of
every province, and that the garrisons of the towns and forts in the said
provinces, should be first paid therewith, especially those which lay upon the
frontiers, who were daily forced to do some service for the country; and that
the surplusage of the money might be put into a common

Unto these articles the archdukes made answer by the earl of Solre, upon the
last of October, The archdukes answer to the general estates
complaining, That they protracted the time so long before they gave up their
full resolutions, whereby many good occasions against the enemy were lost, and
that many of the articles

They answered some of their articles according to their d^sires, and to others
they made a larger discourse. Touching the tenth article, That the money raised
monthly, should be employed for the payment of the natural borne subjects of
the country, they said, That if it were so granted, they feared some question
and alteration would grow by that division of pays, if it should not be
general: and therefore they desired the Estates, to refer that unto their
highnesses, who would not pay any thing but it should be for the good of the
country, and the necessary employment for the wars; saying, That the
natural borne subjects

They also granted that women should be exempted from that taxation, for that
time only, without making it a president; yet they persuaded themselves, that
it was not the Estates meaning, to include the four orders of the begging
friars, nor yet the Jesuits, or Capuchins, who had more need to be relieved
and succored, than to be burdened with any paiments.

The like answer was made to them of Brabant, favorable enough, both being
signed, Albertus and Isabella, and underneath, Vereyken.

This tax being concluded, the provinces did presently take upon them to raise
certain soldiers, An order for the execution of the taxation
cornet of horse, and 500 foot, Guelderland and Rissel each as many, Douay and
Orchies 2 cornets of horse, and 1000 foot, Arthois and Henault each 3 cornets
of horse, and 1000 foot, and the other small provinces after the rate, besides
Flanders, which yielded to pay 80000 gulderns a month.

But to prevent all further questions and disputes, which might grow among the
said provinces, about the raising of the said 320000 gulderns a month, which
was agreed upon, for that some provinces would raise it upon victuals, and some
by other means; the archdukes made an indifferent division betwixt them, after
the rate set down in the 9 years tax, raised upon A rate set down by the
archdukes.
those countries in the time of Charles the emperor, for his wars in France, and
also according to viz.

Brabant every month 70 thousand gulderns.
Lembourg six thousand gulderns.
Luxembourg ten thousand gulderns.
Gueldres ten thousand gulderns.
Flanders 95 thousand gulderns. 1600

Arthois 30 thousand gulderns.
Henault 30 thousand gulderns.
Ryssel ten thousand gulderns.
Douay five thousand gulderns.
Orchies ten thousand gulderns.
Valenciennes five thousand gulderns.
Namur seven thousand gulderns.
Dornic three thousand five hundred gulderns.
Tournesis five thousand gulderns.
Macklin three thousand five hundred gulderns.
These contributing provinces, according to the archdukes division, making in
all three hundred thousand gulderns a month, granted it at the first but for a
year, having been eight months before they could agree upon this rate.

This taxation was not well looked into at the first: for being granted but for
a year, it was afterward made perpetual. And whereas the Estates thought it
good to have two armies, one of strangers, the other of natural borne subjects
of the country, thereby the one to keep the other in awe, the Spanish
counsel thought it not convenient, doubting that the natural borne subjects
might upon any discontent join with the united provinces, and drive all the
strangers out of the country. The archdukes ordered the matter in such sort,
as the money was

About this time Dom Henriques Goesman was sent from the king of Spain into the
Netherlands, Letters of com fort and money sent out of Spain to the archdukes.
with certain letters of comfort, both unto the archdukes, and the Estates,
touching the battle lost at Nieuport, the superscription of their letters
being To our Estates.
A nos Estados, which caused a great murmuring among the Estates and the
people, being ignorant to whom they belonged, Goesman brought certain sums
of money with him, and the superscription was excused by the president
Richardot, as being mistaken by the Secretary who writ it.

This Dom Henriques de Goesman had commission to complain of the merchants of
Antuerp, Goesman desired that certain merchants counting houses in Antuerpe,
with their books of accounts and letters, might be seized on, and perused, to
find out those deceits, thinking by that means to take all trade of
merchandise from their enemies, the which could not be easily effected. In the
end, after great cruelty used toward the Netherland merchants and sailors,
they compounded with the admiral, that for all former faults committed, they
1601


Dom Francisco de Mendoza, admiral of Arragon, taken prisoner (as we have
said) at the battle of Nieuport, tired with his imprisonment in the castle of
Woerden in Holland, which seemed unto him a very melancholic place, he
entreated the Estates, that they would appoint him some place of better air:
whereupon he was brought unto the castle of Persin, half a league from the
Hage, where under color of bestowing his charitable alms upon the poor,
giving to each of them at the first a stiuer, the next day there came two or
three hundred, to whom he gave two stiuers a piece; so as this bait did make
the number of beggars to increase daily. The Estates fearing that under this
pretense of alms, the number of beggars, and others under that habit, would
grow so great, as they might take away the said admiral, and imbarke Albert,
as for his deliverance he had full liberty promised for all the prisoners of
the united pouinces, or that had been Lodowike, general of the Estates horse,
and one thousand to four caualiers, which had taken him at the battle,
whereof one was a natural Spaniard, the admiral The admiral set at liberty.
was enlarged and set at liberty, in the beginning of the year 1601,
returning to Antuerpe.

The spoils done by the archdukes great army, under the conduct of Francisco
de Mendoza, admiral of Arragon, the years past, had much incommodated the
united provinces, in the desolations of Cleues, Westphalia, and the neighbor
countries, but especially in the taking of Rhineberck, a town of importance,
by reason of the passage, and of the customs which they take: besides, it
served the archduke as a key for the countries of Ouerissel and Friseland: and
besides the contributions of great sums of money, which the garrison did draw
monthly from many of the Estates subjects, it was a wonderful prejudice to
the merchants of Holland, Zeeland, and others, in their negotiations of
Germany: wherefore the Estates entreat prince Maurice, that he will take this
moat out of their eye, chase away those forragers of Berck, and assure the
navigations of the Rhine, to the good of the united provinces.

In the latter end of the year 1600 there was little done in the Netherlands,
concerning the wars, being winter; but many secret enterprises were attempted
and discovered, whereof one was upon the town of Geertruydenbergh. There was a
gentleman in Brussels, called Francis de Prouence, who was persuaded by his
brother Adolph, in the behalf of monsieur Grobendone, governor of Boisleduc,
to employ himself in the Estates service, that he might find means to betray
Geertruydenbergh to the archduke: whereunto in the end he yielded, not (as he
said) for any desire of money, but to do good service to God and his prince;
and with that resolution he went to Brussels, where he received further
instructions from monsieur Mariensant, and had two hundred Philip dollers given
him, with promise of a more honorable reward. Before he departed from
Brussels, he confessed, and received the sacrament, at the hands if he should
chance to be committed or executed for that cause. And with this resolution
Nels cornet of horse. Being 1601
there, he discovered a place where he might bring Grobendoncs men in, which
was behind a house, called the Heart, where they should climb up with ten
ladders: but before it should be put in practice, he with others were to ride
out, and by a secret compact should go toward Boisleduc, where they should
meet with 20 horsemen, who should willingly suffer themselves to be taken
prisoners by him and his company: which done, he should put them into the
prouosts hands, to keep them in prison, and the same night, that the enemy
should come to scale the walls, he should find means to let them out of prison,
who killing the watch, should keep the walls that none should approach, until
that Grobendoncs soldiers had gotten into the town.

This enterprise being discovered, and the said Francis committed to prison,
he confessed the fact; for the which upon the 5 of January he was condemned
to die, and not long after was beheaded, and his body quartered. Before his
death he became very penitent for the treason by him intended: He wrote a
letter to his brother, lamenting his sin, certifying him, That during his
imprisonment he had been instructed in the holy Scriptures, and learned to
know what belonged to his salvation: desiring his brother and friends, to read
the new Testament with all diligence, that they might attain to the knowledge
of their sins, with the right, true, and lively justifying faith. He had
before made his will, and given a legacy toward the repairing of the broken
Sacrament house, but he revoked it again, willing his friends not to do it;
saying, That Christ dwelt in heaven, willing them to give that money to the
poor, which would

THE XVI. BOOK.
The Argument.
THe castle of Crapoll surprised by the Estates. Incursions made by them of
Rhineberke into Cleues and Iuilliers. The governor of Stralen overthrown and
taken. The castle of Cracowe taken for prince Maurice. The force of the united
provinces at sea. An enterprise upon Flessingue. The duke of Neuers title to
the duchy of Brabant. Mutinies among the archdukes soldiers. A practice to
sack Antuerpe. The Estates prepare to go to field. Rhineberck besieged. The
archduke resolves to besiege Oostend. The description of Oostend. He inuests
it. The prince sends to Oostend. Rhineberck yielded to prince Maurice. He takes
Moeurs. Dom Catris, general of the Spanish army, slain before Oostend.
Chastillon slain with a canon. Vander Noot, governor of Oostend, leaves the
town. A fire in the archdukes fort. Aduertisements out of the camp. The
archdukes loss before Oostend. The Estates resolve to besiege Boisleduc. The
archduke prepares to relieve Boisleduc. The Estates raise their siege from
thence. Mastricht refuses to receive soldiers. Oostend in danger to be taken.
They of Oostend parle with the archduke. The treaty broken off. The archduke
gives a general assault at Oostend. His loss at it. Sir Francis Veer retires
from Oostend. The sea ouerflowes Oostend. Mutiny in the archdukes camp. The
Estates prepare to go to field. Prince Maurice offers battle to the admiral
of Arragon. The prince besieges Grave. The admiral camps by him. Grave
yielded to prince Maurice. The mutiners of the admirals army seize upon
Hoochstraten. The admiral discharged of his generals place. The mutiners of
Hoochstraten banished. Their answer to the proscription. The popes Nuntio sent
unto them. Eight cornets of the archdukes horses defeated. Frederic Spinola
brings six galleys into the Netherlands. They are defeated by the
Netherlandships. The Estates make an incursion into Luxembourg. Frederic
Spinola slain in the galleys. The archduke besieges the mutiners in
Hoochstraten. Prince Maurice rayseth the siege. He brings his army before
Boisleduc. The archdukes army follows him. Marquess Spinola reformes the
army. Prince Maurice retires from Boisleduc. The governor of Oostend slain.
The Estates land with an army in Flandes; they take diverse forts near to
Sluice, besiege Isendike, and take it by composition. Sluice besieged by the
prince. A general assault at Oostend. The mutiners reconciled to the archduke.
The marquess Spinola comes to relieve Sluice, he is repulst, and the town
yielded to the prince. Oostend yielded to the archduke. A treaty of peace
betwixt England and Spain. A discourse touching the peace in the Netherlands.
The earl of Hertfords embassage to the archduke. An enterprise made by the
prince upon the Scheld, and the taking of Wowe. Spinola takes Linghen. An
enterprise upon Berghen. Spinola goes into Spain. Grol taken by composition.
Rhineberck yielded to Spinola. An enterprise upon Sluice. A tumult in Antuerpe.
Groningue castle rased. The earl of Bronk murdered by the Spaniards. A fight
in the straits of Gibraltar, betwixt the Spaniards and the Hollanders ships.

ABout the fifteenth of January 80 horse, and some footmen of the Estates men,
surprised the castle of Crapoll in Lembourg, forcing open the port 1601
with a petard, where they found a good booty of money, jewels, and The castle
of Crapoll surprised.
plate, which had been brought by such as had fled thither for safety. There
they took Harman Sohuyl the drossart, brother to the rent-master, carrying the
best of the goods away with them; and so left the castle, being presently
pursued by four or five hundred horse, as far as

The Spanish garrisons lying in Rhineberck, and in Gueldre all this winter,
made incursions into the countries of Iuilliers and Cleues, the which they
spoiled, taking certain wagons, belonging unto the duke of Cleues; the which
they carried to Rhineberck, and made good prize thereof: for which cause the
duke commanded certain ships of Berck to be staid at Duysseldorp. 1601
of Weert had been delivered for their security) did wonderfully oppress
them of Iuilliers, forcing them, upon some pretenses, to pay forty thousand
gulderns: for which cause the garrisons under prince Maurice demanded the like
sum, in regard they gave so much unto the Spaniards their enemies, and did
not remain neuters, as they had promised: so as the country was miserably
oppressed and spoiled; whereupon many towns and seigniories levied men for
their defense, seeking by all the means they could to free the Rhine, and
offering a good sum of money for the same; sometimes getting pasports from
them of Rhineberck, to pass up to Cologne with ships laden with herring,
butter and cheese, etc.

The house and castle of Cracowe, with the lordship thereof, being given (as we
have said) Maurice, it belonging unto the earldom of Moeurs, was before in
the year 1586 given by the duke of Parma unto Salentin earl of Isenbourgh,
upon some pretense, which the said earl had ever since holden in his
possession: and now there lay one captain Longehuyuen in it, with 15 or 16
men, it being a strong fort, seated in a marsh. Prince Maurice understanding,
that this winter the ice in the ditches was not broken nor kept open, he caused
captain Cloet to attempt to surprise it with 300 horse out of Nimeghen, and
some foot out of Wachtendonc; and to that end Cloet went with his horsemen to
Nieukerke, on the 8 of February: Whereof Dulcken governor of Stralen, being
advertised, he followed him with 400 horse, and 4 or 500 foot, and in the
morning before sunrising, he suddenly charged Cloets companies in the village;
so as there were 40 of his horsemen wounded and taken, Stralen followed them
not, retiring with his troops by a deep way, which was of great advantage to
defend his footmen against Cloets horsemen, having taken 30 of his men
prisoners, most being of prince Maurice his company, the which were soon
taken from them again: for Cloet being much disco^tented with this loss,
fetched a compass about by another way, where he met with them entering upon a
heath, charging them both before and behind, he slew many both horse and foot,
upon the place, the rest fled into a certain place, where he presently
besieged them, and forced them to yield upon composition, paying their ransoms,
he suffered 370 of the common soldiers to depart, only retaining Dulcken,
governor of Stralen, captain Golstein, and 7 Cloet having lost 6 or 7 men, and
diverse of them and their horses hurt. Presently after, the soldiers which were
appointed to join with Cloet, came from Wachtendonc, and then they went to
Cracowe: on the 9 of February in the night they came before it, whereas the
horsemen alighting, got over the ice, and entered into the base court, whereat
they within began to shoot: but Cloet forced them to retire with his shot, and
then he caused his men to pass over the ditches, and to let down the draw
bridge; which done, he set a petard to the port, and forced it open: whereupon
they within yielded both themselves and the place, even as day began to break;
where he left 40 foot, and 20 horse, with his lieutenant, The castle of Cr^cowe
taken for prince Maurice.
until he heard further from prince Maurice: and so he retired to his garrison.

The garrison of Spaniards in the Grave, in regard of the slacknesse of their
pay, were ready

This year there was an enterprise to be made for the archdukes upon
Flessingue, being colored An enterprise upon Flessingue
with a pretense to build a fort at Nieuhaue^ in Flanders, for the besieging of
Oostend, certain men being hired to set fire on the town, and they in the
mean time should pass over with 1601
conspirators apprehended, and committed to prison, whereof one (being a stool
maker) killed himself in prison, and yet his body was cut in quarters: and
afterward the s^teholder was beheaded on the 19 of June for the same treason.

In the beginning of this year there were certain commissioners appointed to
meet for Commission^rs be^wixt the French (...) and the archduke.
the French king and the archdukes, upon certain causes, concerning the peace
and quietness of their countries: which commissioners met at Maubenge,
Veruins, and other places, disputing about the sovereignty of certain
seigniories and lordships, as the earldome of S. Pol, and the earldom of
Outreual between the Scheld and Scharpe, whereof Bouchain is the chief town,
lying between Douay and Valenciennes; the which in times past had been
morgaged,

There was a question also, touching trade of merchandise upon the frontiers,
as at Calice, and thereabouts; the French men desiring, that all the
Netherlanders which had put themselves under the protection of France, should
be held as French men, both in the Netherlands and in Spain.

To end these controversies there met at Maubenge, the duke of Bouillon, the
earl of S. Pol, the earl of Dampmartin, and others, for the French king: and
for the archdukes came the duke of Arschot, the earl of Arembergh, the earl
of Lignie, the earl of Solre, with others. There was also some speech
concerning the lands of the prince of Espinoy, Anthonich, etc. being of the
house of Melun, who died in France, where he had been married, and had left
certain Iolanda, with Charles Alexander of Croy, earl of Fontenay, son to
the marquess of Haurec, a prince of the empire, descending by his mothers side
from the houses of Lorraine, Dampmartin, Vander Marck and Cleue; the said
Iolanda issuing from the houses of Melun, Lalaine, and Wassenare. The prince of
Espinoyes children were much commended and countenanced in France, by
Maximilian of Bethune, duke of Rhosny, peer Ianin was sent unto the archduke,
as he lay before Oostend, where, at the last, the cause was ended.

In all these assemblies there was little done that came to the knowledge of
the world; which bred some suspicion that the French king would enter into
arms again, for that some French men were so presumptuous, as to give it out,
That the duchy of Brabant belonged unto the duke of Neuers, as heir unto
Elizabeth of Valoys, who was daughter unto John earl of Neuers, Rethet, and
Estampes, who ought to have succeeded his uncle John, the last duke of Brabant,
who married the lady Iacoba, heir of Hollaud, Henault, etc. and after his uncle
Philip; Philip duke of Bourgoigne, surnamed the Good (as they said) usurped by
force from the said house of Neuers, by means of the lord of Wesemale, who
persuaded the Estates of Brabant to install duke Philip of Bourgoigne in the
duchy of Brabant.

With the soldiers that came from the earl of Fuentes out of Italy, there
came little money, Mutinies among the archduke^ soldiers.
so as the archdukes were wonderfully distressed, and the old garrisons were
unpaid; which caused many of them to mutine, as the Italians and Spaniards in
Herentals and Weert; and the Wallons which lay in Flanders, in the sconces of
Isabella and Grottendorst, where they slew monsieur Verlain, lieutenant colonel
to monsieur de Fresin, and wounded diverse captains; whereupon they of Zeeland
and of Oostend, sent letters unto them, and offered them good Reynas they
continued constant, and burned the letters: Whereupon the archduke sent them
powder, and all things necessary, and they were pacified, so as after that
they received a guldern a day for every man, until that all were paid: But
for that it was dangerous for the country, to let men of their disposition to
stay there in garrison, they were drawn out, and persuaded to lie in
Wynoxberghen, and 1601
that they meant to besiege them, and the rather, for that in April the sea
being forced in by a strong North-west wind, it overthrew, and carried away one
of the ports of Oostend, by reason that they had cut off a sand hill, which
stood in the downs, and was some hinderance to their fortifications; but the
archdukes army was not ready, so as they of Oostend soon after repaired it
again.

Dom Rodrigo de Lasso came this winter out of Spain, with a confirmation from
the king, of great sums of money to be yearly paid unto the archduke, to aid
him in his wars; but it came very late; besides there were bills of exchange
for great sums of money taken up in the Netherlands, and to be paid in
Spain, returned back again and protested. And the mutinous soldiers of
Weert had an hundred and sixite thousand crowns yet to receive,

In March there was a conspiracy discovered, between the mutinous soldiers
of Weert, An enterprise to sack Antuerpe.
and the garrison within the castle of Antuerpe, with whom the garrison of
Hulst in Flanders, and some others, were confederat, intending to enter by the
castle with 2000 foot, and 1000 horse and to sack the town of Antuerpe: but
their enterprise was discovered, and on the 14 of March certain of the
garrison of the castle were apprehended in the night, whereof some were
executed. To conclude, through want of money there was great poverty, misery,
and fear throughout all the provinces under the archdukes command, not only
in regard of the

About the tenth of April there lay five or six cornets of prince Maurice his
horse, not far Adolph earl of Bergh taken prisoner, and his troops de^ated.
from Boisleduc, for that monsieur Grobendonc, governor thereof, was to come
from Antuerp with money; but being advertised thereof by his spies, he went
another way, and by that means Adolph earl of Bergh fell into their hands
with his cornet of horse (lying in Boisleduc) betwixt Lommel and Postel, where
he was defeated and taken prisoner, few or none of his men escaping: he
himself was carried to Breda, and was afterward released, paying

The winter being spent without any great exploits done of either side, the
prince and his counsel resolved what they should attempt. In April and May
they took a view of their garrisons, and made choice of their troops for the
war. There was diverse bruits spread abroad touching the Estates design. The
archduke had a watchful eye which way their army should band, to march after
them: but his great forces of the years 1598, and 1599, being much wasted,
being unable to make any offensive war, he was forced to have patience, and
to attend the succors which were to come out of Italy, and in the mean time
to stand upon his defense. Prince Maurice was not ignorant of the archdukes
affairs; who having his army ready in the end of May, makes a show as if he
would attempt something in Flanders, or Brabant, upon some

There is within the river of Rhine, right against Berck (as we have showed in
the former sieges) Rhi^berck ^siged.
a little island, thrice as long as it is broad, the which was at that time
guarded by some of the archdukes soldiers, who being saluted with the
ordnance, as well from the Estates ships of war, which lay both above and
beneath the island, as by certain pieces which were planted upon the banks,
they made no long resistance: so as on the 18 day of June prince M^rice was
master of the island, who having no intent to abandon it so easily unto the
Spaniards, he

The prince having summoned the besieged to yield the place, they refused it,
having a 1601
environed it with a large and spacious trench, from one side of the Rhine unto
the other, like a semy circle, fortified with five great bastions which did
flank one another; the which with the island and the ships closed up the
town round about. There was also an other bastion made somewhat nearer the
town, and two bridges made upon the Rhine above and beneath, by the which they
went from one quarter to the other, and into the island: the prince houlding
the besieged shut up, and not able greatly to annoy his camp, he made a greater
fort, and cast up an other half moon, far more spacious then the first:
having in a fit distance made a deep and broad trench a league long, one of the
ends coming close to the Rhine above the town and the other beneath, in
which trenche almost in equal distance were built 17 square Redoutes. Betwixt
these two trenches were the troops of horse, and some companies of foot
lodged, with good commodity and means to go in and out, both near and far
off from the town, and could not easily be charged by any ennemy without great
danger.

These trenches and half moons being finished with great expedition, for
that the soldiers, paid for this work like pioners, performed it with
wonderful and almost incredible speed, reviving the commendable obedience of
the ancient Roman legions. In the beginning the besieged (whilst the
soldiers labored in their forts and trenches) would show their resolution and
valor: they had reason, for they made fetters to manacle their hands, and to
restrain their feet from going forth any more to the pickorie, and to spoil
the country:

The archduke sought by all means to prevent the apparent loss of this town,
he attended supplies from the earl of Fuentes; who caused eight thousand men,
that is, six thousand Theodore Triuulcio, and two thousand Spaniards under Dom
John de Bracamonte, to march out of the duchy of Milan, as well of foot as
horse, the which by reason of the great store of rain which had fallen in
June, could not advance so speedily as the archduke desired: so as being come
unto him in the end of the month, having now no means to raise the siege from
before Berke (whereas the prince attended his enemy to fight with him with
advantage) they took counsel how they might divert this siege. Then was
nothing The archduke resolves to besiege Oostend.
found more easy, more expedient, nor more profitable, than to set upon
Oostend, the which the Flemmings did press with great instance, making
promises of aid and subuentions, as well of money, victuals, poulder, as other
munition; which the archdukes counsel assured themselves to take in few days,
as they had done Calais and Ardres, but (as the proverb

Among other sea towns of the county of Flanders, is that of Oostend situated
among the downs, three leagues from Nieuport, and four hours passage from
Bruges, upon the The description of Oostend
river of Yperle; the which as well by other channels, as by the west sluice in
old times falling into the sea, made the haven good and commodious. But this
passage was afterward stopped 1601
on the sides of Polder fort, to defend their ditches. This town contains half
an hours journey in circuit, it was reasonably well built, the inhabitants
lived of fishing, and before these wars there were rich seafaring men, and
above three thousand fishermen; who for the most part have retired themselves
since to Camp-veer, there remaining in the beginning siege not above 250
households, besides the ordinary garrison. The sea ebbes and flows up to the
town, as in all the ports of Flanders, the haven being at every low water in
a manner dry, so as they could not enter with any great barks, but at a high
water. Of late years toward the east part of the town, the sea has made a
great entrance (which they call the goullet) a hundred foot broad, and at the
least two pikes deep: but at the mouth toward the sea, it is

The town has bin walled in, since these wars, in the beginning whereof,
which was in the year 1572, it was shut up only with bridges and palisados,
to resist the sudden incursions Oostend walled and fortified
of the soldiers. But in the year 1578 it was walled in and fortified at the
charge of the general Estates of all the united provinces of the Netherlands.
The which alone among all the towns of the county of Flanders, has continued
always constant unto the said Estates, until the yielding up thereof, after
it had endured great extremity, as we will hereafter show.

We have observed heretofore, that the duke of Parma after the taking of
Dunkerke, and de la Motte, governor of Graueling, in the year 1585, having
surprised the old town toward the sea (the which was not at that time
fortified with a rauelin and a palisado) was valiantly repulst, with the loss
of above forty men of command, and of all his munition for war. Then they
began to fortify it more strongly, especially taking away the downs upon the
east side, the which for that they were high and near unto the town, did
command over it; by which means the sea has entered into the country round
about, and flows commonly from the east unto the south above 1200 paces, and
at a spring tide, on the west side it runs above a league into the country,
the which it does indammage on all sides, except it be the west downs: without

How much this town did import the united provinces, the Hollanders,
Zeelanders, and Flemmings know full well, and the English are not ignorant.

During the time the two armies were busied in the isle of Bomel, and that
prince Maurice stayed there to defend the town, the Flemmings being
wonderfully annoyed by this paltrie fisher town, they caused many forts to be
built about it; so as in the beginning of this siege, near and far off from
the town, there were 17 forts: whereof the chief were called Albertus,
Isabella, Clara, Grottendorst, saint Catherine, etc. well appointed with men
and artillery, lying near the town. These forts, with the rest, cost the
Flemmings 100000 florins every month; and they offered unto the archduke
300000 florins a month, during the siege, and ninety thousand florins every
month for the space of three years, after it should be taken. Maurice his
troops, and afterward would easily have prevailed over the town of Oostend,
1601
to mind the battle of Nieuport, he inclined to a milder course, persuading
himself that the prince would presently abandon his forts and trenches before
Bercke, to fly (though it were too late) to the relief of Oostend; and so
with one stone he should give many strokes, freeing Bercke, dispersing his
enemy, gleaning the Flemmings purses, and satisfying the mutined soldiers in
Isabella fort, who for want of pay had been ready to sell it unto them of
Oostend.

So the archduke marching toward Oudenbourg, on the fifth day of July, he sent
cont Frederick vanden Bergh marshall of his camp, with about five regiments
of foot, to inuest Oostend on the east side: he was saluted by the ordnance
from the town, which slew many Vander Noot, a gentleman of Brabant, was
governor of the town. They sent the women and children presently into Zeeland.

News came unto the prince being in his camp before Bercke, that Oostend was
besieged, the which he would not believe, making light account that cont
Frederick was come thither, saying; That they were but shows: but when he
understood that Augustine de Mexia Chastellain of Antuerp was also arrived with
five other regiments, and artillery, and that they were making of their camp,
he was very glad, saying; In good time, let us leave him there knocking at the
gate for a long time, this piece here (meaning Rhinebercke) shall not escape
me. This Chastellain went and lodged with his troops betwixt the forts of
Albert and Isabella; but

The mutines in Isabella fort were partly pacified with promises, and in the
end went forth to Wynoxberghe to receive money, being about five hundred men.
The body of the Spanish army was some fourteen thousand fighting men, who
were lodged toward the west downs; and there were a thousand, or a thousand
and two hundred left upon the east downs, under the command of the seignior of
Glaison, who began to build a new fort there, in the which he lodged his men.
Then they made their approaches, and upon the west downs they planted twelve
pieces of ordnance: and moreover there was a battery made toward the sea

Prince Maurice was now well assured, that the archdukes camp was planted
before Oostend: he therefore would not abandon Bercke, being resolved to hold
it out, until he were Sir Francis Veer sent to Oostend.
master thereof. And to assure the said town of Oostend, he sent Sir Francis
Veer, genenerall of the Engllsh under the Estates service, with twelve
companies of his nation, and colonel Westembroucke with seven ensigns of
Wallons, with other companies, making in all four and thirty ensigns: all
which arrived happily the fifteenth of July: and soon after came fifteen
hundred Englishmen more. Then began the archduke to discover the vanity
Maurice far off, laboring before Bercke, whereas the besieged began to
scratch their heads, seeing their hoped succors turned another way, yet they
continued their sallies, but with loss rather than gain.

Sir Francis Veer being safely arrived at Oostend, he presently went and
lodged abroad, near unto the town, and ten days after he entrenched
himself in a place, called the Red house, with an intent to stop the boats
which brought victuals to the camp: but the Spaniards prevented it, not
without loss of their men. All the rest of this month of July was spent in
sallies and skirmishes, in the which they spared neither powder nor shot. The
archduke lost above four thousand men, besides them that were hurt, and the
besieged

But the prince having provided well for Oostend, and so fortified himself
before Bercke, 1601
the rampar, blown up some mines, with loss to the besieged, and having other
ready to The estate of Berck.
work their effects; the besieged finding that they were undone if they
continued obstinate, having lost two third parts of their soldiers, and the
rest being tired with continual toil; in the end they demanded a
composition, the which the prince willingly yielded unto, in the beginning of
August, giving them leave to depart with their arms and baggage, their colors
flying, matches burning, and two field pieces, with fifty bullets, and two
barrels of Berck yielded upon honorable cearmes.
poulder, with diverse other articles to the benefit of the besieged. They could
not desire a more honorable composition. But the prince respected not the
conditions, so as he might take it, having continued his siege 7 weeks.

The day after the composition, there went out of the town forty five
horsemen, sixteen companies of foot, being one thousand two hundred forty
and seven men, whole and sound, 370 hurt and sick, and 78 sailers, with a
great number of women and children, which went to Gueldre.

The archduke had sent the earl of Bergh with two thousand horsemen, and five
thousand foot to relieve the town, and with him the earl of Boucquoy, and
Nicholas Basta, expecting other soldiers which came out of Italy; but prince
Maurice his camp was so well fortified with strong trenches and good forts
(wherein he is one of the most expert men this day living) as they durst not
adventure to offer to force it: and they within had want of many necessaries,
especially of apothecarie drugges, for the recovering and curing of their sick

The Estates having gotten this town, resolved to defend it well; not only
for the service of the Netherlands, but also in the behalf of their
neighbors, upon the confines of the empire, it lying so commodiously for the
freeing of the river of Rhine, the government whereof was given to colonel
Ghistelles, prince Manrice his lieutenant, and Gabriel Four-manoir was made
sergeant mayor.

The Estates of Oueryssell finding their country to be well fortified now by
the taking of Rhineberck, and the river of Rhine to be free; upon the 28 of
July they made a proclamation to forbid all contribution to be given unto the
enemy, inioyning all their villages to keep good watch, upon pain of great
punishments, and upon every alarm, or sound of the bell, to

Harman earl of Vanden Bergh fearing prince Maurice his army, and that he
might attempt some other place after his conquest of Bercke, sought by all
means possible to draw more men into Venloo; but the bourgers would not
receive any more in than their ordinary garrison.

Monsieur Vander Weerpe governor of Mastricht, with others, were busied to
have pacified the mutined horsemen in Weert, but they were deaf, and had no
ears to hearken to any words, without money. There was but a small garriso^ in
Mastricht, nor yet in the Grave; in the which there lay not above 1000 men,
under Antonio Gonsales a Spaniard; so as these towns were forced to stand upon
their guards.

There lay a garrison in Moeurs, belonging to the duke of Cleues: but prince
Maurice challenging the same by gift from the countess of Moeurs, upon the
sixth of August he sent monsieur Cloet, and colonel Edmonds thither, with twelve
cornets of horse, but they would not leave it: whereupon prince Maurice went
thither himself the next day with 25 cornets of horse, and 35 companies of
foot, and four demie cannons; whereupon they yielded up the where he was
forced to keep a thousand men at work; so as those two places were made 1601
dry. But let us return to Oostend, whereas we left the archduke incampt; the
which, for that it is one of the most memorable sieges that has been in our
age, both for the exploits of either party, and the long continuance of the
siege, I have thought it very necessary and good to set it down somewhat
particularly and at large, for the benefit of ensuing ages.

There came unto the archdukes camp about the end of July, ten companies of
new Italians. Oostend.
Cont Frederick vanden Berghe intrencht himself with a regiment of Germans
about the fort of Clara; and by the fifth of August he had extended his trench
unto the other forts on the west part. The besieged for their part did open the
fort of Polder on the northwest Dom Catris a Spanish colonel, commanding at
the west downs, had a great desire to assail the rauelin of the Porc-espic,
along the tonnel-dike, and by that means (the tide being spent) to get into
the old town; for the effecting whereof, he approached the sixth of August
within sixty fadomes of the place. Against his approach and to prevent his
design, sir Francis Veer, and the governor Vander Noot made a trench the same
day, from the Sand-hill unto the north haven, able to lodge five or six
hundred

On the foureteenth of August there was a little dike or bank on the East side
of the town cut through, with the counterscarpe and rauelyn, to lodge their
ships in safety (the which vnladed behind the counterscarpe) and to cover them
from the enemies cannon. Two days after being a Spring tide, and a great
Westerly wind, it drowned all the trenches, and carried away all the Spaniards
gabions, even unto the sea side; and the next day the like tide and wind

On the 23 of August there came out of Zeeland fifty ships with eight companies
of French, four of Wallons, four Scottish, four Frisons, and two companies
of cont Ernest of Nassau. The next day there was a fally made, but without any
memorable exploit. All this month the archduke shot many fiery bullets into
the town to burn their houses, but through the care and diligence of the
besieged, they took small effect. From the beginning of the siege, unto the end
of this month of August, they had shot out of the camp against Oostend, above
^0000 cannon shot, most of their fiery bullets weighing 45 pounds, wherewith
some soldiers and towns men were slain: the bulwarks were not much in
dammaged, but only their defenses Iserberg, that is, a hill of iron. They of
the town made almost twenty thousand great shot in six weeks, 1601
to defend, being wonderful great.

One the eight of September a gentleman fled out of the camp into the town,
who gave Dom Catris general of the Spanish army slain.
them to understand that Dom Catris general of the Spanish army, had been
shot in the head and slain; that the army consisted of three thousand horse,
and eleven thousand foot. Two days after, monsieur Chastillon nephew to the
princess of Orange, reading a letter on the rampar, being set upon the
carriage of a cannon, had half his head shot off. And on the 23 day of the
same month, colonel Vchtenbrooke was also slain with the cannon; his body was
carried to Vtrecht (of whence he was) where he was buried with a military
pomp, according to his degree and merit. On the last day of the month there
was a great ouerflowing of water,

In the beginning of October there were some sallies made, but to small effect.
The Spaniards made a new battery near unto the mouth of the haven, to shoot
into the old town, or at the least to break the palisados, to make a breach
in the fortifications, to hinder their works, and to play upon the boats which
past in and out. They made also a great fort at the point of the downs toward
the town, and laid a great heap of bauins betwixt the downs and the town
(which they did call saucices) that they might pass and repasse freely without
discovery, from one place unto another, to withstand the cannon, and to resist
the violence of the sea, upon every westerly wind: whereupon the besieged made
the bulwark of Schottenbourg

The night following the Spaniards returned again with greater numbers,
thinking to do some great exploit, but they were deceived, not finding any
one; whereupon they went unto the bridge that was near unto it, to burn it,
the which they attempted twice or thrice; but it was in vain, being forced to
retire, by reason of the musket and cannon shot which played against them from
all parts, especially from the bulwarks of Spain and of Peckell, as also from
the near rauelin, being prepared to entertain them; so as they lost twenty
of their men.

On the twentieth day at night, the Spaniards planted on the east side, right
against the port

The 26 of October about noone, the tempest being very great, and the wind
west and northwest, so as that tide was much higher than of custom; the cannon
from the camp in the mean time made a great breach in the bulwark of the
Porc-espic, whereof a part of the parapet (on the which captain Roules colors
were planted) fell with the said colors into the ditch: and in the same
tempest some of the Spaniards gabions were carried away. The next 1601
at their gabions, nor approach near unto them, some soldiers and mariners of
the town, bethought themselves to go with hooks and hatchets, and to make a
breach in the said gabions, and cut the cables which bound them together. They
went and did their best endeauours, but the wind was so big, and the sea so
high, as they prevailed little; but brought away some sand bags which were in
the gabions. But the harm which was done by them, and by the violence of the
sea, was soon repaired by the Spaniards. They murmured in the town, why they
had so long stayed to put it in execution, for (said they) if it had been
attempted in time, the first tempest had carried all away. The same day at
eleven of the clock, the besieged made a sally at a low water, on the east
side, to discover if the Spaniards labored

The fourth of November the besieged made another sallie to the same end,
whereupon the Spaniards showed themselves in diverse places, both horse and
foot, but by reason of their continual shooting from the bulwarks of Spain
and Peckell, they durst not approach too near; and in like manner, the
besieged durst not advance too far from the town, lest the enemy

On the ninth of November, there came happily into the road 52 vessels with
victuals and all other munition, to enter into the haven upon the first
commodity; all which entered by little and little, although it were not without
some hurt done by the cannon from the camp: I say this fleet came happily, for
that of long time there had not any come, so as they wanted many necessaries,
as well for the soldiers, as for their fortifications; for there was not any
thing to be sold: as for their victuals, they were feign to have recourse unto
their storehouse, where there was yet store of wheat, ric, meal, herrings,
butter, dried fish, and other victuals. There was no beer in the town but
such as they brued there, which was very small and somewhat brackish; there was
wine enough: so as the sound and whole were in good case, but the The estate of
the besiged.
were not fit: besides, they were ill lodged, some lying upon the ground, being
ill clothed and half naked, having scarce any thing to lie on, and nothing to
cover them: and to fill up the measure of their miseries, they had not any
fiering to warm them withal, so as many of them died of poverty and the
extremity of cold; and yet they endured all these miseries patiently.

The thirteenth of November, the seignior Vander Noot, colonel and governor of
Oostend, leaving all the charge of the government to sir Francis Veer, general
of the English, went from Oostend with captain Grenn, and Broucksaulx, and two
ministers (which were come to ease the ordinary minister) to go and inform
prince Maurice of the estate of the Vander Noot, and sir Francis Veer.

The same day they began to cut the causey of the old town, joining to the sea
(which served as a rampar against the waves, and against the enemy, besides
the rauelin on the northeast side, and that which they call Moses tables, by
reason of the form) to the end they might make a passage that way to the new
haven for the boats which came from the sea, and not be forced to pass any
more by the goullet, for that the haven extended it self so far, where it
was very broad and deep, being wont to stay the water there by a sluice, when it
was a full sea, to cleanse the haven, when the tide past away, by that sluice:
and by that means the boats might be sooner in safety, and pass in and out
with less danger than by the goullet, being by the goullet: yet many held
this course to be dangerous, and had apparent reasons to 1601
Sir Francis Veer and the magistrate of the town: their opinion was, That in a
great tempest there might enter such abundance of water, as it might greatly
endamage the fortifications of the new town, coming to beat full upon
Vlamenbourg, which is a high caualier or platform, commanding over the
Spanish camp: but the inconvenience was, that it was not deep enough, unless
it were at a high tide, and therefore they would not make such use thereof as
they desired: so as many were more desirous to pass by the goullet, than to
stay for a full sea.

On that day, being the thirteenth of November, fire fell into the archdukes
fort, where there was as much burt and consumed as was esteemed to be worth
five hundred thousand

On the seventeenth day of November there came into Oostend a Spanish ensign
from the archdukes camp, who made report unto the general, that the Spaniards
were discontented Aduertisem^: out of the Spanish camp.
with the tediousness of this siege, and especially that the archduke had
dismissed many of the old experienced captains, and other men of command, who
had persuaded him to besiege the said town, advancing in their places young
men, which had no experience in the wars: That there were a great number of
sick and hurt men in the Spanish camp, yea above two thousand: That the town
cannon slew many, and that there had Dom Joan de Brachamonte, which was
accustomed to be two thousand five hundred men, was now reduced to nine
hundred: That such as had any charge, did speak very irreverently and
immodestly of the archduke; concluding (after all their railing) That he was
good for nothing, but to bring a number of honorable and valiant soldiers
(who were grown gray in the kings service) to the slaughter: That there wanted
money; that they had received but five and twenty stiuers a man, for a long
time, and had no subject to hope for better: That they were tormented with
hunger: That they were full of diseases, and were starued with cold: That the
receiuors of the victuals and munitions, did diminish or falsify them,
especially the beer of Bruges, so as the barell being not half full, they
filled it up with water: That of late there

At the same time there reigned a disease in Oostend, whereof many dyed in
less than 24 hours.

Whilst the archduke was thus busied before Oostend, the Estates consulted,
what was best to be attempted, to draw the archduke from Oostend: many things
were propounded, Maurice went with seven and thirty companies of foot, and
three and thirty corners of horse (a small number for so great an enterprise)
first meaning to charge the mutinous soldiers in Weert, but they stood so upon
their guard, as they could not get any advantage of them: then coming back,
he brought his army before Boisleduc, upon the last of October, stopping up
all the passages that came unto the town. William earl of Nassau was
quartered before Hintermer port, with six and twenty companies of foot, and
fourteen cornets of horse. Prince Boisleduc besieged by the prince.
Maurice with the rest lay before the Vughte gate, with the earl of Solins;
who presently began cornet of horse belonging to Adolph earl of Bergh, with
some fifty horse of monsieur Gobendones company, who was governor of the
town: the bourgers entreated them 1601
with fair words to behave themselves valiantly, promising them that they
should be relieved by the archduke, and that their sick and hurt men should be
carefully looked unto and provided for.

The prince being busy in his work, having not yet fully enclosed the town,
on the sixth of November at night there entered two hundred and sixty men (which
came from the Grave) into the town, by a low way which was not overflowed with
water, for that the river was stopped; who got into the town, and were not
discovered by the princes men, but only by some straglers: and upon the
foureteenth day of the same month there were some nine hundred men which
entered into the town also by the same way, being led by Blyleuen lieutenant
to colonel Hachicourt, and Michael vander Sternen; wherein some of prince
Maurice his men were very negligent, having been advertised thereof in time,
yet made no have to prevent them, whereat prince Maurice was much offended; but
being most past, they were charged in the rere and defeated, and some
seauentie of them taken prisoners: so as the town having now a thousand and
six hundred men in her, it behooved prince Maurice to stand upon his guard.

Prince Maurice continued his works still, and was in good hope within twelve
or fourteen days to lodge upon the rampars, having brought his trenches both
to the Vughter gate and Hinter gate; but the frost grew so violent, as all the
waters and rivers began to be frozen up, so as the army could not get any more
victuals by water: and news being brought Prats, to advertise the archduke,
of what importance the loss of the town would be for the whole country of
Brabant, whereby Grave, Venloo, Herentals, and other places would be in
danger. Whereupon the archduke resolved to go thither in person, sending
presently before him from the camp, Frederick earl of Berghes, Nicholas
Basta, and John Iacomo an earl of Italy, to gather soldiers together about
Dyest; whereas a thousand of the mutinous soldiers of Weert joined with them:
with which troops they did hope to relieve Hertogenbosche, either by setting
upon prince Maurice his camp, or by the besieging of Breda, or else making

The united Estates, and prince Maurice with his council of war, being
fully advertised The estates raise their siege from Boisleduc.
of this preparation, although their camp were so well intrencht as they
feared no enemy, yet they could not stop their entry into the town over
the ye, nor yet their passage to Bomelerweert, whereby they might enter into
Holland: whereupon they resolved to yield unto the season of the year, and the
extremity of the frost; first sending away much of their baggage: and so upon
the seven and twentieth day of November they raised their siege, to Maurice,
who was resolved to stay, if so be the weather had broken up.

Thus this siege proved unfortunate, both for that so many men entered into the
town in the beginning thereof, and for that the weather grew so extreme: the
princes ships were all frozen in at Creuecoeur and Hemert, so as after six and
twenty days siege, he carried his ordnance and munition to Hensden, but many
other necessary implements, as sparres, palisadoes, scoopes, and spades, which
for want of wagons they could not carry away, were burnt; his trenches and
other fortifications he let stand, for a terror to his enemies, and a show of
his knowledge, diligence, and means: and so he retired, having made a terrible
spoil in that part of Brabant, of their churches, houses, and trees, which are
planted in all their

After the princes departure they of Boisleduc made great joy, the bishop
singing Te Deum both within and without the town, casting holy water upon
those houses which had been broken or hurt by the enemy. There remained 500
men of Hachicourts regiment in garrison in the town, and the rest went forth.
Those men which were levied to relieve the town, and 1601
Oostend; and so did the archduke, who was at that time come to Brussels: and
the mutinous horsemen of Weert went to Louuaine. Upon the princes retreat from
Boisleduc, there were certain Latin verses made on either side.

Non ducis obsessae seruauit moenia Siluae,
Albertigladius, frigida sedglacies. It Was not your archdukes sword, but the
keen frost,
That saved Boisleduc, it had else bin lost.


They were thus inuerted by the contrary party.

Tam ducis obsessae seruauit moenia Siluae,
Alberti gladius, frigidaquam glacies. Our archdukes sword, as well as the
keen frost,
Defended Boisleduc; it was your pains were lost.


Cont John Iacomo of Belioyoso past through Brabant in October, and went to
Rosendale with a thousand horse, and six hundred foot, where he burnt certain
ships laden with fire wood, which should have been sent to Oostend, and did
great spoil unto the country thereabouts.

The bourgers of Mastricht, hearing that the archduke pretended to send some of
the mutinous soldiers of Weert into their town, upon the seventeenth day of
September, they contracted with their garrison (being some eight companies of
Italians) not to receive any Weerp governor of the town, to defend it with
that garrison against the enemy, under the archdukes obedience, as they of
Venloo and Ruremond did, the bourgers being the stronger; but after that, the
Spaniards practiced to draw some soldiers secretly into Mastricht, the which
being discovered, some of them were punished.

The horsemen of the united provinces, to the number of four hundred, with
some foot, past the Rhine on the 24 of September, and went to Duyts near unto
Cologne; where for the space of two or three days they put the country to
contribution, for certain money which was unpaid, the which the deceased
countess of Moeurs pretended to be due unto

In the beginning of December the Spaniards before Oostend came and gave a
furious Oostend.
charge on the English quarter, where they were entertained with resolution,
and in the end The Spaniards charge the English trenches.
valiantly repulst, leaving fifty pikes in the place, and much blood spilt,
having carried away their dead men: of the English there were but three slain.

On the fourth day two ships coming in with English beer, at the same
instant there was a house set on fire near unto the east gate, with the which
the two next houses adjoining were burnt: which the Spaniards peceiuing, they
began to shoot much at that place, assuring

On the 16 day at night, the Spaniard brought three small boats full of sand and
stones near to the mouth of the goullet or entire, to sink them there, and to
stop the passage from the haven unto the town; the which they could not
effect, for that the tide was too much spent, but were abandoned by them that
conducted them, near unto the platformes of the town, right against
Flamenbourg: the which the besieged could not discover until the break of
day, when as many ran down to see them, being some what amazed: but when as
the tide was until night to finish that which they had begun: some Spanish
horse presented themselves 1601


On the 21 of December, about three of the clock after midnight, there came
four hundred men, which camped on the west part to this trauerse, which was
made of timber and bauins, betwixt Sand hill and the Caualier, to set fire of
it, the which they effected cunningly. This trauerse did serve as a defense for
Sand-hill, and other near parts, against the enemies cannon, which otherwise
might do much harm, as well to the palisadoes, as to the wall, and to the
works which did defend them from the breaches of the sea; the which was quite
consumed, with the palisado joining unto it. This being done, they discovered
all the old town, next unto the sea, seeking to enter, as they did at a
certain place, where they had made a breach to pass their boats into the new
haven: coming near a corpse deguarde, they slew Marshals The town in danger
to be taken.
company, being of colonel Marquets regiment, who (although he were not of
the guard) came running thither from the new town. Without doubt if those
undertakers had been well seconded at that time with greater forces, they
might have taken the town, for that the guard was not great, having not half
the garrison, and that some captains were absent in their lodgings: and
besides the garrison was then very small, having received no supplies in three
months, and the companies that were in the town being much decreased, many
having bin slain, and many dead, through poverty and want; besides that, many
soldiers (being unwilling to suffer those miseries any longer) fled daily to
the archdukes camp, especially Vander Noot. Moreover, the old town lay very
open toward the sea. Finally, they wanted many necessaries, so as if the
enemy had come strong enough, he might have forced them: but being charged
sooner than they expected, the besieged pursued them in their retreat; and
among others, took one of some command, who being brought before general
Veer, discovered the cause of their enterprise, and what the archduke pretended
to do; which was to assault the town very shortly in many places at once, for
that he was sufficiently advertised of the weakness of the town, and of
their small garrisons, and that they were ill furnished of victuals, and of all
other necessaries;

On the two and twentieth day of December, at night, there returned a fleet of
two and Supply of victuals comes to Oostend.


The three and twentieth day at night, the weather being rainie and exceeding
dark, the wind high, and the tide very low, all that were in the town,
soldiers, bourgers, mariners, victuallers, and others, put themselves into
arms, for that they feared the archduke would give a general assault that
night, having two days before taken view of all the old town next unto the
sea, and found it to lie sufficiently open; and by that which the general had
understood Lewis Cousture, to will some one of the archdukes commanders, that
might be in guard right against Sand-hill, to advertise the archduke, or him
that had the charge under him, that if it pleased him to send certain hostages
into the town, to see if they might come to any good composition, 1601
soon after, and the same night, the archduke sent captain Rybas, governor
of Sclu^, and Sir Francis Veer makes an over to parl^.
the sergeant mayor of the Spaniards; and for sir Francis Veer, there went two
English captains in hostage: which caused amazement, coffeehouse, and great
alteration in the town, for because it had been done in a manner without the
priuitie of all the colonels, and captains, and of the magistrate of the
town, being also allowed but by few of them: wherewith the general being
much discontented, he commanded the archdukes hostages should be sent back,
the which was presently done, being past over in a boat unto the other side of
the goullet, although they had entered on the west side. Sir Francis Veer would
willingly, that a Wallon and a Flemmish captain had been also hostages with
his English

On the four and twentieth day early in the morning, the archduke sent a
letter by a trumpet unto the general; whereupon, in the end it was thought
fit, and concluded by all the colonels, captains, and magistrates, to call
back the archdukes hostages, that all might be done by accord, and that no
alteration might happen; as also to have their English hostages again. So the
said Rybas and sergeant mayor being returned, there was a ces^ation from arms
and from all acts of hostility.

On the 25 day at night* there came five ships of war of Zeeland, and five
companies Succors of men come to Oostend.
discovered by them of the town at the break of day, it did much rejoice
them, those succors coming very happily unto them after a long expectation.
And the same day about one of the clock in the after noone, being a very
calm day, and the sun shining clee^e, and the sea being calm, at a full
tide, the said five companies, with the mariners landed, notwithstanding all
their shot from the camp, which slew three mariners, and hurt some. Whereupon
the archdukes hostages being in the town, were amazed, until it was told
them that the truce continued still.

The same day, and presently after, it was resolved within the town, not to
treat with the archduke, but to defend the town, to send back the hostages,
and to call home theirs* the Veer did w^te, excusing himself that their
treaty had broken off, upon the arrival of their supplies, the which he could
not send back, no^ with his honor treat any further, seeing he wanted not any
thing. Wherewith the archduke being much discontented, he was out of hope
ever to get the town at so easy a rate. Whereupon his cannon began to play
furiously, being answered in the same manner from the town; whereat they all
rejoiced, even wives, maids, and children, for every one had been very
melancholy at this parle: although the wint^r were very sharp, and many had
been slain and dead for poverty and want, besides the wars which the
storms of the sea made against them, yet no man was desirous to have the town
yielded, but every one was sad and heavy for the treaty, especially the
Wallons, Andrew and Creuecoeur unto the Estates, and they had behaved
themselves very valiantly at the battle of Nieuport.

After that the enemy had sent to view the weakest parts of the old town, and
burnt the trauerse near unto Sand-hill, they had labored day and night to
repair that which was ruined, as well by the cannon from the camp, as by the
sea, the which they could not repair for want of stuff, which they might have
done during the parle, but it was neglected: and then they labored with all
diligence, and nothing was spared to hinder the enemies approach.

On the sixth day of January, 1602, the archduke battered Sand-hill, and other
near places with his cannon, even until night, as if he meant to make a
breach, and to give an assault (as two prisoners, the one a Spaniard, the other
an Italian had told them) which made the be^eged to stand carefully upon their
guard, and to rampar up and fortify all ruined places, especially the old
town* so as when the Spaniard began this furious battery, the town was much
1602


The seventh of the month the archduke, before he would give a general
assault, as he had proiected, he battered every part of the town with
exceeding great fury; and the more to amaze the besieged, he battered the
houses in ruin, and shot fiery bullets. This battery did much harm to the
sand hill, to the false brayes, to the por^-espic, to Helmont, and to a great
part of the old town, and to all places where they had any aim; the which
began early in the morning, and continued until night: for they could not
come to give an assault, until it were a low water. The weather was cloudie,
but the moon shining thorough the clouds, gave a little light. The besieged in
the mean time labored to repair that which the canon had spoiled, without
any spare of any thing, so as they took the timber from the houses* to

The same day, about five of the clock in the evening, the tide being well
spent, to pass the The archduke gives a general assault to Oost^nd.
old haven, whereby the enemy might approach unto Sandhill, and other places,
whereas the canon had made any breach, the archduke caused his men to march in
order of battle, carrying ladders, pick^xes, and all other sorts of
instruments, going to assault those places which seemed weakest unto them. They
made a brave attempt, but they were more bravely resisted, for the besieged
wanted neither arms, powder, nor courage; so as the fight continued betwixt
them above two hours, with great obstinacy: but the Spaniard could stay no
longer without his utter ruin, for that the ^ide was come in, and the sluices
were pulled up; so as the water The archduke^ los^e at thi^ assault.
were carried into the sea, with the ebb, the which were never found: besides,
they left behind them their ladders, instruments, and great store of arms, the
which we^e found upon the sands. Yet the archduke won by this assault the false
bray of Sandhill, not by force, but for that the general made his men to quit
it, being not guardable but with a great number of men, the which he could
better employ elsewhere: And in like manner it was abandoned by the Spaniniards
at their retreat, so as they made no use thereof. Those that were upon the East
side, to second them of the West, in this general assault, passing the goullet
to fall upon the old town; A wonderf^ll s^oyle of the Spaniard^.
them all, the canon having carried away the rest. And they were no sooner
retired, but they

The next day they gave thanks unto God for this victory, both at the French
and Dutch sermons.

On the tenth day of January there came into the road before the town, twelve
ships, with so many companies, to relieve them that had endured much, and were
greatly decreased in Veer being also commanded by the Estates to return into
Holland, there arrived colonel Dorp, who succeeded him in the government of
the town, and colonel Edmonds, a S^ottish man, after whose coming, they
labored more in the fortifications, than before.

On the 19, at night, three companies going out of the haven toward Zeeland,
the enemies 1602
canon sunk one of them, and another, having her mast and maine yard broken,
was driven on ground on the camp side, whereas all the soldiers and mariners,
with the commissarie Manriques (who had brought money) were taken prisoners, and
afterward delivered upon ransom: others run the like fortune, and were taken
by the enemy.

All this month, and some following, the archduke fortified his camp, being
resolved to continue his siege: and the shot which he made at random, in time
ruined the buildings, and the bullets did much harm, running up and down the
streets: Whereupon they resolved to take up the pauement, and to make trenches
cross the streets, where the bullets should presently stop, being one very
near unto another: And in the mean time the besieged defended

On the seventh of February at night, there were certain notes shot into the
town, persuading the soldiers to run from their garrison to the camp,
assuring them of good entertainment, or else they should have pasports given
them, to go whither they pleased, if they would not serve the archduke. And
that they did abuse them, which said, they should be ill entreated, or sent to
the galleys, as some which had fled into the town had falsely reported. All
these were practices to draw them away, and so to weaken the garrison.

On the 14 of February the seignior of Marquette, colonel of the new Gueux,
arrived, bringing 14 companies with him, to refresh the rest.

On the 23 and 24 of the month, there blew such a terrible North-west wind, as
it made the tide rise much higher than it had been accustomed, the which did
very much harm unto the rampars, bulwarks, and banks, the tide coming far
into the town; so as if this tempest had continued but two tides longer, the
besieged had been forced to fly into their garrets for safety, and all the
rampars and bulwarks had been in danger to have been carried away into the
sea, or else to have had such a breach made, as the Spaniards might have come
on horseback to the assault. Finally, the sea did more annoy them, than the
archduke, against the which they had more cause to rampar themselves, than
against all his force: but God in an instant did cause this tempest to cease,
the wind turning to the North-east, and very calm; which made the besieged to
repair all these ruins as well as they could, although they wanted bauins,

On the second of March the Spaniards came in the night, and anchored certain
pipes tied together with cables, in the mouth of the goullet, to stop the
entrance, as they had often attempted it: but they prevailed no more now than
before, all this equipage being taken by the besieged, and brought into town,
except one anchor, and the pipes, which they brake.

As the toil and poverty which the archdukes soldiers endured, began to tire
them, they The archdukes soldiers ^utine.
fell at that time into mutiny, both to have their pay, and to be better
used: whereupon the archduke caused ten or twelve of the chief authors of this
mutiny, to be hanged; the which bred a strange alteration among the soldiers,
so as from that time he was feign to stand upon his guard, for fear of his
own soldiers: yet upon his fair promises, and the hope they had

The Estates of the united provinces having taken good order for the defense of
Oostend, they intended to attempt something this summer, and having conferred
with prince Maurice, their lieutenant general, about the end of March they
began to gather an army together, the which was greater, and better ordered
than ever, so as in April and May they had the goodliest army ready that
could be seen, not for number of men, but for martial discipline, the princes
camp being like unto a town furnished with all necessaries for the life of
man, so well fortified in the night lying in field, and marching in the day
time in such good order, as it was all, in regard of the baggage, the which was
wonderfully well ordered.

All being ready, the general Estates of the united provinces published a
declaration at the 1602
Hage in Holland, by the which they gave a reason of their action, and invited
the Brabansons, Flemings, and others, to join with them, and to help them to
expel the Spaniards and their adherents, out of the country; whose
insolences they described briefly, with protestation to continue in their
just enterprise, to maintain the liberties, privileges, and freedoms of the
country. Which declaration being put in print, was sent unto all the
provinces: but the people that were subject to the Spaniard, durst not move nor
speak a word, attending an end of the siege of Oostend, and what the army of
either side should do. The archduke hearing that the prince marched in so good
order, and that he entered into the country of Liege, (being now at S. Trudon,
and at Maseek, where he made his provisions,

Prince Maurice seeing how hard it would be to draw the Spaniard to fight,
having marched Grave, besieged by prince Maurice.
far into the enemies country without any encounter, and taken from him the
towns of Eindouen and Helmont, with the castle, he took another resolution,
and turning head, marched toward the strong town of Grave; the which
(notwithstanding it had a strong garrison) he besieged, and intrencht himself
after his accustomed manner, as well against the besieged, as against

Grave is the chief town of the land of Cuyck, lying upon the Meuse: in times
past it was The descrscpt^on of Grave.
under the duchy of Gueldres, but afterward brought under Brabant, and was
pawned to Maximilian, earl of Egmont and Buren, the which William prince of
Orange, who married his daughter and heir, bought, and inioyed it long. After
the pacification of Gant, certain Dutch soldiers holding it for the Spaniard,
were by the princes soldiers, with the help of the bourgers, thrust out, and
forty of them slain. In the year 1586 it was besieged by the duke of Parma,
and soon yielded by monsieur Hemert, who was governor: since which time
(being strong by situation) it was fortified with many bulwarks, rauelins, and
counterscarps, and is at this day one of the strongest towns in all the
Netherlands. The governor at that time Antonio Gonzales, a Spaniard: the
garrison consisted most of Italians and Spaniards; and some companies of Dutch,
under Pangus Gallays of Tyrol, lieutenant to colonel Tislingh, put themselves
into it, being in all fifteen hundred men, besides the bourgers, who, by
reason of the soldiers insolences, were not above 3 or 400. The town wanted
neither ordnance, munition, nor victuals.

Upon the eight of August they made a sallie upon cont William of Nassaus
quarter, where the fight continued an hour, with the loss of fifteen of
their men: the earl had thirty slain and wounded.

The admiral of Arragon, with Frederic earl of Bergh, and other commanders of
the archdukes army, marched toward the land of Cuyck, and lay there certain
days, whilst that the

They of the town discovering his approach, made great signs of joy, in
shooting off their ordnance, which the admiral answered. And on the 13 day,
early in the morning, they made a sally out of the town upon cont Williams
quarter: and at the same time the admiral approached near unto the princes
camp, both with horse and foot; but lying too open to the princes ordnance, he
retired to his lodging.

Upon the fifteenth of August, they within the town made another sallie with
three hundred Keys Hertoghen, who was a Dane borne, yet serving among them,
with some sixteen or seventeen soldiers slaines and of the town there were
fifty slain and hurt. And on the seventeenth day they made another sally with
seven hundred 1602
with some loss of either side.

The admirals men skirmished sometimes with the princes guard, and he brought
his ordnance so near, as he shot into the princes camp, and slew many
soldiers; so as they were constrained to fortify their trenches against him.
Among others, Andreas de Roy, an expert enginer, and much esteemed by prince
Maurice, for his industry and knowledge, was shot looking over the rampars,
and so were diverse captains. And on the two and twentieth of August sir
Francis Veer, general of the English, was shot in the neck and cheek; so as
being forced to Sir Francis Veer shot before Grave.
retire himself from the camp, by reason of his wound, Henry Frederic of
Nassau, prince Maurice his brother, had the charge given him of the English
quarter.

The admiral began then to be scanted of victuals in his army, for that
Brabant had bin quite spoiled and wasted; the which, together with their bad
pay, made the soldiers murmr: so as finding that want would force him to
retire from the place where he was intrencht, on the one and twentieth of
August, in the night, he resolved to make an attempt upon the camp, betwixt
the princes and cont Williams quarters: but while they were bringing their
ladders, shouels, pickaxes, baskets, and other instruments, they were
discovered, so as all the princes army stood ready in arms, to entertain
them: whereupon he retired hastily, making all the speed he could, leaving
all those implements behind him: and on the three and twentieth day he brake up
his camp, having sent away his carriages before early in the morning.

Monsieur Grobendonc, governor of Boisleduc, entreated the admiral to march
with his army to Rauestein, where he might have more store of victuals, and
stop the ships which came with provision out of Holland unto prince Maurice his
camp: the which, for some other considerations, he neglected, and went to
Venloo with his army. Whereupon prince Maurice followed him with his horsemen;
and fearing he should attempt Berck or Moeurs, he sent Ernest, earl of
Nassau, thither with certain men: but the admiral sought to get into Venloo,
in the which there was but a weak garrison: but they would not suffer him to
enter: and so he went to Mastricht, for that the whole army began to mutine,
by reason of want, especially the new Italians, who could not shift without
money: whereupon diverse of them went and offered their service unto prince
Maurice.

They within Grave were in some doubt of the admirals retreat, yet did their
uttermost endeavors to defend themselves: many of them notwithstanding got out
of the town in the night, and yielded themselves to prince Maurice; letting
him understand, That they wanted not any thing, but men, and that the fear of
relief made many of them to faint. Prince Maurice gave pasports to all them
that fled from the enemy, and a gulderne a piece, and so they went into
Cleueland, or into Zeeland, and returned home into their country through
France.

After many sallies and incounters, the besieged having forsaken al their
works without the town, and the princes men being come, on the fourteenth of
September, to the rampar of one of the bulwarks of the town, lying upon the
Meuse, with some loss of men, they within gave Sydlenisky was sent, by whose
means they of the town sent their deputies to prince Maurice, and received
hostages for them: and so upon the nineteenth of September, a composition was
made for the yielding up of the town, the which the prince did the more
willingly agree unto, for that the river of Meuse began to swell, whereby his
trenches and galleries might have been much indamaged. And so, after two
months siege, it Grave yielded by composition.
was delivered.

The conditions were, That the governor and soldiers should depart with their
they would, go by ship to Mastricht. That all victuals, ordnance, and
munition, should be 1602
should depart the town the next day, or else suffer two hundred men to enter
into the castle and the bulwarks. And that the governor should procure the
archduke to pay the magistrates and the bourgers of the town, all such sums
of money as they had lent to him and his soldiers.

The next day they left the Grave: and the bourgers entreated prince Maurice,
as their lord, to receive them into grace, to forgive what was past, to protect
and defend them, and to confirm their privileges. Concerning religion, it was
agreed, That every one should live according to his conscience, without any
molestation; yet there should be no exercise of religion, but as it was
observed in the united provinces. There were six months time granted

This composition thus made, upon the twentieth of September the Spanish
garrison went forth, being eight hundred men strong, and two hundred hurt men,
the remainder of fifteen hundred. Prince Maurice had many men also slain,
whereof there were four hundred English: And many sick men were sent into
diverse hospitals, for that there was a discase among them, little better than
the plague.

Upon the eight and twentieth of September prince Maurice was installed lord of
the Prince Maurice dissolues his army.
town, and of the land of Cuyck: and then came the deputies of the general
Estates, both into the town and army, to take order for the breaking up of
the same, discharging the Reisters, and giving to every one half a months
pay, besides his due, to bear his charges; taking an order also for such as
fled from the admiral, being very many.

Prince Maurice made monsieur Sidlenisky governor of the Grave, being a wise
and a valiant gentleman, who had been sergeant mayor of the army, and had
long served the united provinces faithfully, in many good places. Mabuse was
made sergeant mayor in his stead.

The soldiers in the archdukes army, under the admiral of Arragon, were much
discontented for want of pay, especially the old soldiers (for the new
Italians ran away) for which Mutiny in the admirals army
the admiral retired further from the enemy, being not much beloved, but
rather contemned and hated of his soldiers, who called him El gran Capitan del
Rosario, in regard of his devotion: who seeking to suppress their mutinies by
severity, ten or twelve hundred of them forsook the army, and took a small
town in the country of Liege, called Hamont, whereas the admiral did think
to assail them, with such horse and foot as he did most trust; but they
refused that charge.

Among these mutiners there was a banished soldier of Geertruydenbergh, called
Papanken, who sent word unto prince Maurice, that he would draw a good number
of horse and foot from the enemy, to serve the united Provinces. This offer
was neither accepted The mutiners seize upon Hoochstrate^.
nor rejected, but all favor promised them, so as they would govern
themselves

The archduke to prevent these inconveniences, came out of Flanders to
Antuerpe, leaving the Infanta at Gant. In Antuerpe he borrowed money,
wherewith he caused the army under the admiral, to march foreward, with a
third part of a months pay. Whereupon many Italians, and other commanders
left the army. Theodore Trivultio, Alphonso d'Aualos, Fernando Cariglia,
Martin Lopes, and Emanuel Texera, master of the camp, and others, were put out
of the counsel of war; which caused in a manner a general revolt, so as the
nine thousand

To prevent all these difficulties, it was given out, That Dom Joan de Medicis,
bastard of Florence, 1602
refused that charge, matters being so confused.

The garrison of the castle of Antuerpe began also to be discontented, and
threatened a mutiny: but the towns men gave their words to see them paid, and
so by that means they were satisfied.

The archduke went from Antuerpe to Brussels, to levy money, whereas (by
reason of the many new grown troubles) he was not very pleasing unto them:
At that time there was an assembly of the Estates, but they concluded little
for the prevention of so great disorders. The archduke caused many peasants to
be taken up, throughout all the Wallon provinces, both for his own guard, and
to make head against the mutiners, relying not much on his Barlamont, were also
upon terms to mutine, and had attempted to surprise Dermonde in Flanders. The
archduke went to Toren, and so to his army, whereas he discharged the
admiral of his generals place, for want of money, who soon after went into
Spain, where he was not very The admiral discharged of his generals place.
welcome.

After that the archduke by policy and fair promises, got them of Venloo to
receive more men, and thereby assured the town for himself; from thence he
went to Liere, where, with certain companies of soldiers, and the boors of
the country, with the townes-men, and some others thereabouts, he thought to
charge the mutinous soldiers, who at that time were very strong, and lay in
Hoochstraten, spoiling all the country, and striking a great terror into

The Archdukes.
As we had drawn our army together to relieve the town of Grave, the which
is besieged by the enemy, and so valiantly defended by the soldiers that are
within it, as they deserve

Wherefore desiring to provide for the public cause, and the good of our
subjects, we inioyne and command all soul^rs, or other persons, or their
train, which are in the said castle of Hoochstraten, or that shall join,
there, or in any other place, with them, under color 1602
and cornets, or to present themselves unto the governor of Liere, or of
Herental, to the end they may be presently sent away unto their ensigns and
standerds, wheresoever they shall be, as if this alteration had never happened.
And we engage our word and faith unto them, that they shall neither at this
present, nor at any time hereafter, be punished, nor reprehended in particular,
although they were the chief motives thereof; but shall be entreated with all
kindness and favor: and there shall be means made to give them full
satisfaction, as men whom we desire to gratify: The which if they refuse to
accomplish, after the expiration of the said three days, we declare, as well
them that are there at this present, as all others that shall hereafter join
with them, to be rebels, traitors, and wicked persons, having committed high

And moreover, we command and enjoin all judges of our armies, estates, and
seigniories,

We command also, That not any one of our subjects, or any other that is
within our countries, as a merchant, victualer, or servant, or in any other
sort, shall assist, serve, nor feed the said mutiners nor their servants,
horses, nor any one that depends of them, no not for their money; upon pain of
death, or other pecuniarie punishments, at the will and pleasure of our judges,
and according unto their quality, and the merit of their offense: and that
finding them, they may kill them without any offense. And that the names and
sirnames, and places where the said mutiners, or their fathers, were borne,
shall be rased out of the muster books. And to the end that all men may be
the better satisfied, information shall be treason in the first degree. And
that moreover, the punishments ordained in like cases be executed 1602
condemned for this fact. And to him that shall be the means to defeat the
said mutiners, or to deliver them into our hands, we give pardon, and promise
him an honorable reward, and to all such as shall aid and assist him, although
they be of the mutiners themselves, yea of the chief motives and officers.
And to the end that our proclamation and banishment may be inuiolably kept and
executed, and may come to the knowledge of all, both general of the horse,
captains of men at arms, master of our artillery, colonels, masters of the
camp, governors, heads of troops, captains and officers entertained,
soldiers, and all other military persons, of what quality, condition,
degree, or nation soever they be, as other our vassals and subjects; we
command, that it be publicly proclaimed, and be given, in an John de Frias,
of his Majesty's counsel, and judge of the camp, that he may cause it to be
observed and executed in every point, and give it to the auditor general, and
other officers and persons whom it shall concern; to the end that all judges
of towns and villages, may have a care thereof, giving him advice of that
which shall succeed: whereof he shall advertise us, that we may provide, as
necessity shall require, for the execution thereof. And in like manner that
another authentical copy be given unto John Richardot knight, chief
president of our privy counsel, and one of our counsel of Estate; to the
end, that as far as it shall concern him, he shall also cause it to be
observed and kept in every point, as it has been decreed by us: Commanding
also all other officers and justices of our countries in these parts, to see it
in like manner accomplished. In witness Albert: and underneath, By
commandment from their highnesses, I. de Mancicidor.

This decree of banishment and proscription, may be compared to the sentence of
the Inquisition of Spain, given in February 1568 (whereof we have made
mention) against all the inhabitants of the Netherlands: as also the banishment
and proscription proclaimed against the prince of Orange, in the year 1580,
which bred great inconveniences to the king of Spain: and it is to be admired,
that the counsel of such princes, do not otherwise weigh and foresee the
consequence of these proscriptions, before they decree them: for either they
must prevent such inconveniences, by a sudden force, or receive them into
grace, else you

The answer of the Squadron, Electo, and Counsel of the Archduke
If proscriptions and threats may stand for payment, the squadron and counsel
of soldiers retired to Hoochstraten, may soon make ready their acquitances,
and send them to their highnesses, confessing that they were well and truly
paid for all arrerages: But for as much as this kind of payment does neither
feed the belly, nor cloth the back, and that in the mean time they which for
many years have hazarded both life and goods, without fee or the justice of
their cause being known by this declaration, every one may judge, if the
archdukes 1602
women and babes, but not men.

Choler makes their highnesses to say (we say choler, for truth cannot
justify it) that they had assembled their army together, to succor the town
of Grave, being then besieged by the enemy: What means this? was the town
of Grave besieged at Tillemont? was it not besieged above a month after? How
could their highnesses succor Grave at Tillemont, so long before it was
besieged? He adds with the like ground: And going my self in person to put
this design in execution. What is he among us, or any other, that did ever
see him in the army, when as prince Maurice would come to visit us, and to
charge us upon our own dunghill, being accompanied by them, who had two
years before so

He says, with the like truth, That at such time as his highness did
endeavor to succor Maurice his army. This was apparent, when as the seigniour
of Grobendonc, governor of the town of Boisleduc, after that he had labored
long in vain, propounding all the reasons he could devise to persuade the
admiral to seize upon the town of Rauestein, and by that means to cut off
the victuals which came unto prince Maurice his army (the only means to
hinder his design) in the end (seeing he could not prevail) he returned
with much coffeehouse: then we began to embrace the pursuit of our just and
reasonable cause.

If all those that have taken this course, are to be held for traitors and
rebels, there is not any one in their highnesses service, that can be free from
this imputation: for who are they that were ever paid, taking any other
course? Their highnesses name Dyest, Weert, and Carpen, places which can bear
witness of our words; the remembrance being yet fresh of that which has
lately happened.

It is also objected, That there is little due unto us, or nothing at all; and
that our demands are false, being men newly come out of Italy, and other
places: and that a little before we had been fully paid at Dyest, Weert,
Carpen, etc. If that be true or not, the accounts can witness, and if the
sum of three millions of gulderns be held little by their highnesses, yet is
it a very great sum unto us. But admit the sum be small, as their
highnesses say, it is so to all law and reason, seeing that in their
proscription they confess, that it has been to 160^.
us, as intestine enemies, in stead of giving audience to our just complaints;
was it not time (being reasonable creatures) to do that which brute beasts
do teach us, which oppose themselves with all their force, against those that
seek to oppress them? Our actions then are not without some ground of reason,
nay they are rather grounded upon reason it self, and upon the common law,
necessity being free from all law, even the law of nature, which has given
this instinct to all creatures, not to forget any thing which may tend to their
preservation.

It is a lamentable thing, that they which for so many years have hazarded
their lives, and powered out their bloods so willingly for their highnesses
service, should be now forced to

His highness remembers the example of David, who retired himself to Achis,
king of the Philist^ms, his capital enemy, when he was forced to fly from
before the face of Saul his lord. It may please his highness to let the most
worthy Infanta understand these reasons, and not to think it strange, if we
(as soldiers) have sought to imitat the example of such a man of war, as
David was.

It is said, That these course were never taken by others: Whereunto we will
make no other answer, but, That all our companions know the contrary. How did
they of Sichem carry M^urices, as their friends, and suffering them to pass
thorough them without any opposition at all?

The examples which their highnesses propound unto us, of them which have
mutined heretofore, and yet have not left to abandon their retreats, and to
offer themselves at need to serve their highnesses, etc. are matters propounded
with small consideration: For since that we were ret^red into this place, we
were never called to any service, as the others were: What subject then have
they to complain of us in this respect? But if they had sent

They will persuade us, That we are men accustomed to mutine: We will receive
this reproach upon our account and reckoning, with the rest; for of late years
those which carry arms for your service, receive no other pay. But what is
said among the people? does not every one speak plainly, That your highness
has brought in this custom, to the end, that soldiers being paid after
this manner, without money, they may make the better cheer in court? And in
truth, when there is speech of any exployt of war, those that have seized
upon any places, quit them voluntarily, and come with great zeal and
obedience, to do you service. This cannot be called a mutiny, but to winter:
for of late years all your soldiers have accustomed to winter after this
manner. At such time as your highness might have read in the Bible; which is,
Content your selves with your pay: But it seems, to your 1602.
has found that Canon, to begin to put a law in execution, which is not yet
made; which is, That we must content our selves without pay. We did always
think, that the Ecclesiastical laws had been the most strict, as coming
from God, and regarding men's consciences: but we now find our selves much
deceived.

As for the money of contributions, your highness should know how it is
employed, for even the poor peasants think it ridiculous, to say that we
enjoy it: the truth is, that to live we go unto your lands; what should we
else do? your highness gives us nothing, and soldiers are no Camelions, to
live by the air: moreover, by law the creditor has an interest to his debtors
goods. But for all this your highness ordinary contributions are nothing
diminished.

It is said, That we should return unto our ^nsignes; and that within three
days: and for default, your highness proclaims us traitors and rebels, etc.
condemning us to death, etc* and our goods confiscat, etc. To condemn them to
death, that have a desire to dye, and who have means not only to defend
themselves, but also to offend them that shall assayl^ importunity of our
wives, in the estate we are in. It were a rediculous spectacle, that after 1602
highness, they should afterward condemn them to depart out of your
territories within three days: The conduct of this naked troop, might be a
good recompense for some one of your courtiers, who by the show of so strange a
sight, might easily get a good sum of money of the people, who are curious of
novelties. But does your highness think to famish us, in forbidding them to
bring us any victuals? do you think, that it is possible for your subjects to
obey you in that respect, seeing it is not in their power to warrant themselves
against us? For if you desire that which is contained in your proscription,
causing us to be slain by your subjects, it shall be always lawful for us,
to revenge our selves of this cruelty, by reciprocal acts. It is said in the
said proscription, That your highness desires it should be executed against
our children and successors: We do not think, that your highness, Cyrus,
Alexander, Scipio, Julius Caesar, and many others, did never impouerish their
soldiers, but did rather enrich them: They used no proscriptions nor threats,
in case of coffeehouse, but have sought to pacify them by mildness and
courtesy; and if there were question to suffer with them, they did never
forsake them at need. What did Alexander, when as in a dry and hot country
one brought him a helmet full of water? he chose rather to power it on the
ground, than to drink, considering there was but for himself alone, and that
his whole army was in extreme want: showing by this example, that he would
fare as they did.

Your highness has ten, an hundred, yea five hundred crowns, to buy our
heads; but you could not find ten, an hundred, nor five hundred farthings, to
maintain our bodies and lives Charles the fifth, of happy memory, the
emperor Rodolphus, now reigning, and the king of Spain, in all sorts of pomp
and magnificence, and can you not find the means to pay your poor soldiers
(which are the only supporters of your estate) but with proscriptions and
threats? Alexander the Great, seeing the Macedonians (whom he had mightily
inricht) little inclined to continue in their duties, and in the pursuit of his
victories, he sought to pacify them by mildness and courtesy, whereby he
sped well.

Your highnesses on the other side, after that you had rashly and miserably
thrust headlong into danger, the best part of your best soldiers and
captains, and seeing your officers reduced to a lamentable extremity, have
sought, with an Austrian sternnesse, and a Spanish arrogancy, Julius Caesar
his old soldiers being one day discontented, and desiring to return home,
refusing to go into Affricke, upon a very important expedition, he did not
forget any thing that might pacify them by friendly and amiable means,
honoring them with the name of Quirites, that is to say, fellow citizens; and
by this means gave them contentment. Your highness might learn thereby, how
a prince should carry himself to his soldiers, who are miserable through his
default.

Besides all these points contained in this goodly proscription, they charge us
also, That we have been the cause of the desolation of the country of
Luxembourg, for that we did not prevent it. It is well known, that before
that time they held us for traitors and rebels: your proceedings, and the bad
consequence which may be drawn by other princes, in committing 1602


The squadron, Electo, and council entreat all princes and commonweals to
make use of this example, and to foresee, that in abusing after this manner
their good and faithful soldiers, which are the sinews of their
preservation, they draw not upon them the like misfortunes; the which do daily
more and more threaten to ruin their highnesses. Some one has said well, Woe
be to that country which has a child for prince.

Who so shall duly consider of this answer, and shall peize it with the truth
in every point, will confess that it had been much better for the archdukes
honor and reputation, not to have decreed this bitter proscription; especially
against Italians, who are not easily drawn into mutiny, without great
occasion: besides they have subtle and active spirits among them, although they
be soldiers, to answer pertinently to every point, as it appears by their
answer.

The archduke had at that time but small means to force them to obedience,
they being The mutiners protected by the united provinces.
grown strong, and in a manner protected by the united provinces, who had
contracted with them, that in time of need they might retire themselves under
the walls and ordnance of the towns of Breda, Berghen up Zoome, and
Seuenberghen, and to furnish themselves with all necessaries for their money.

Matters standing upon these terms, Octauio Frangipanny the popes Nuntio, was
sent from the archdukes unto the mutiners, to be a mediator betwixt them. He
persuaded them unto three things: the first was, Not to serve the enemy: the
second, To content themselves with

And afterward in October the Nuntio went to them again (upon hostages given)
to Hochstraten, where he was kindly entertained and feasted by them, especially
by their chief commanders, captain Frederigo a Neapolitane, and captain
Roderigo a Spaniard, with their Electo, who gave him very kind words: but their
conclusion was, That the squadron desired

After that, in December, and diverse times after, the Nuntio went unto them,
but there was nothing concluded, and they conveyed him with a thousand horse to
the gates of Antuerpe. It is said the archduke had secretly caused a general
pardon to be offered unto them, with three hundred and fifty thousand crowns
to be given among them all, that he might not be troubled with a tedious
reckoning, which would be long ere it could be cast up; and that in the mean
time, until the money were paid, they should have some strong place for

The general Estates being assembled at Brussels, held opinion that they
should be paid; but the council at war, and the kings council called de la
Hazienda, were of contrary opinion, saying, that it was fit they should be
punished, and that it were better to levy new soldiers with that money, to
punish them, and to make them an example to others: whereupon they resolved to
raise two new regiments, the one under the earl of Biglia, and the other under
the baron of Rotenau, a knight of Malta, with some horsemen under the duke of
Aumale,

Bax and du Bois both colonels, going forth on the eight of October with
fourteen cornets of horse, of the garrisons of Breda, Berghen, and
Geertruydenbergh, to do an exploit in Henault, whilst that the mutiners of
Hochstraten were busy in the Wallon parts of Brabant, 1602
two colonels being within three miles of Mastricht, and coming to Bilson,
they had intelligence given them of eight cornets of horse that had conuoyed
the archduke, which lay near them, without any fear of the enemy, being the
bands of ordnance of the earls of Mansfeldt, Buren, and Busquoy, with three
cornets of Wallons, and two of Italians; they came in the night time to the
villages where they were quartered, where they charged their guards, and forced
their quarters; some were slain, some fled, and some were taken prisoners in
their beds: the captains themselves were not there: there were five cornets
taken, and one burnt in a church; the spoil was great, they took about five
hundred horse, and two hundred prisoners, these cornets were brought to the
Hage. Monsieur Chalon a bastard to Rene of Chalon,

Diverse ships of war being sent out of the united provinces, under the lord
of Oxdam, to serve the Queen of England, some of them in the winter time had
charge to attend the coming of six galleys which Dom Frederick Spinola was to
bring out of Spain, to join with the rest which he had at Sluys in Flanders.
At the first they were eight galleys, but two were burnt by sir Richard Luson
and the English men, before Setuval in Portugal. The admiral galley wherein
Spinola himself was, was called saint Louis, the captains name was
Cardinalin, with another captain called Cascalis d' Auila, with a company of
soldiers. The vice admiral galley was the saint Joan, the captain Pedro de
Vergas, with two captains, and two companies of soldiers. The third galley
was called Padillo, the captain Hasso, with another Lucera, the captain
Calliados, with another captain and soldiers. The fifth galley was called
saint Philip, the captain Roderigo de Neruais, with a company. The sixth
galley was called the Iacinthe, the captains name was Louis de Camous, with a
company: so as in all they had nine companies of soldiers, whereof two were
Spaniards, and seven were Portugals, being nine hundred strong, and a
thousand and five hundred gallie slaves; each galley had three brass pieces
and no more. And although the Netherlanders were advertised of their coming,
yet the lord of Oxdam was forced to go into Holland for victuals, leaving John
Adrianson Cant his vice admiral in the moon Gerbrant Adrianson Schal van
Horn in the Bausome of four hundred tons, Hendrick Hartman in the Lioness
of Rotterdam, and Gerbrant Johnson in the Hope of Robert Mansel commanded; with
his pynace called the Advantage, in the which was captain Jonas. All these
concluded that the vice admiral Cant, and Gerbrant Adrianson Sch^l should lie
in the downs, where there also lay one of the Queens ships, called the
Answer, commanded by captain Broadgate: sir Robert Mansel himself lay half
seas over, betwixt Dover and Callis, with his pynace, and the two Holland
ships not far from him.

Upon the sixth of October in the fore noone, sir Robert Mansel descried the
galleys, and they A fight between ^xe galleys and certain English and Holland
ships.
him; but being a mistie weather, they bent their course along by the coast of
England; or if Robert Mansel perceiving, he sent captain Jonas with his
pynace over to Callis, and the coast of Flanders, to advertise the
Netherlanders fleet thereof, that they might attend these galleys and compass
them in, he himself doing his best to keep them still in sight: the like did
the two Holland ships, who by winding and turning, had gotten between him and
the galleys, and so chased them until the funne was almost set: in the mean
time they shot off a great piece to warn those three Robert Mansel observed
their course, and knowing they should fall among those ships which lay in the
downs, he made over to the coast of France, to meet with them, if they should
offer to cross over to the coast of Flanders; but hearing the ordnance 1602
there.

The Queens ship, and the two Hollanders being somewhat near unto the
galleys, shot violently at them, but the weather being calm, the galleys
outrowed them; yet the wind rising at northeast, they pursued them for the
space of two or three hours with all their sails up.

The galleys past so near unto Dover cliffes, as certain Turkish slaves,
having found means to file their chains asunder, leapt into the sea, and
swamme to land, and so freed themselves from slavery and bondage. Sir Robert
Mansel being near unto Goodwyn sands, espied one of the galleys before him,
and coming within his musket shot, he discharged

The four ships of Holland had them still in chase, being thwart of
Grauelyn, about ten of the clock at night, Gerbrant Johnson Schal of Horn
with this ship of four hundred tons, met with one of the galleys called
Lucera, running upon it with full sails, behind the mast, so as the gallie
slaves sat up to the wast in water, crying miserecordia, and made Gerbrant
shot two demie cannons among them, wherewith many were slain and wounded: the
gallie could no longer use neither sails nor owers, neither could she help
herself, her poope being broken down, and her rudder gone; whereupon
captain Gerbrant sought by all the means he could to free himself from her,
fearing to be boarded by so many men.

After that captain Hartman in another ship of Holland, fell upon the same
galley, thinking that he had been the first had overtaken her, he saved above
forty of her men, and so got from her again, yet one of his men stayed in
her. After that Gerbrant Schal boarded her again, and five of his men leapt
into the galley, but by means of the pitiful crying and calling out of his
men, the gallie being ready to sink, he fetched away his men with his boat,
having One of the galleys sunk.
(being about midnight) as they might see her masts lying upon the water, and
presently after sunk.

John Adrianson Cant the vice admiral met with the gallie called Padillo, the
which he did stem, and did great hurt unto himself: three other Holland
ships attending for them, o Another gallie sunk.
hearing the ordnance go off, came in and charged her, wherewith she sunk,
but they saved many of the men in their ships.

Thus these weary galleys sought to save themselves, making no resistance, and
yet were near the land: the admiral drove upon the land of Schouven, being
chased by a ship before Westcapel, where he thought that by reason of the foul
weather, it must of force have sunk, Spinola who was in her, cast much of his
goods over board, and The loss of the galleys.
promising the slaves their liberties, at the last he got to Dunkerke. One of
the galleys got to Callis without any hurt, but the slaves ran away, two
others being sore beaten and shot through, ran a ground upon the coast of
Flanders: of those two which Cant and Schal ouersailed, there was not one piece
to be found: and afterward the captains contended who should have the honor
of this action.

Thus of Spinola's eight galleys, two were burnt in Portugal, two other were
sunk upon the coast of Flanders, and the other four were forced to run a
ground, whereby they were in a manner made unserviceable: wherein Gods
judgments are to be admired, for that those were the same galleys wherein the
Netherland sailers had been made slave, and

And it is worthy the noting, of the ship wherein Gerbrant Johnson was
captain, which had ouersailed the first gallie, called the Lucera, that the
master had been three years a slave in the same gallie, and in as great
misery as any man could endure; being put into it 1602
the men were put into the galleys, and were al shaven as other Turkish slaves
are accustomed to be: wherein God showed his judgment in revenge of his
miseries, the galley wherein he had been prisoner, being overwhelmed by him,
and captain Colliado who had tyrannized over him, having both his legs
struck off with a great shot, whereof he afterward died in captain Hartmans
ship, seeing his galley sink before his face, to his great grief and
vexation.

This master being a lusty man, could never be released for any ransom,
until all the Netherland prisoners were exchanged for the admiral of Arragon.

Frederick Spinola preserved the greatest part of his treasure, which was
esteemed to be Frederick Spinola saues himself with his treasure.


In this defeat there were about a hundred and eighty prisoners, slaves, and
others, fisht out of the sea, and carried into Holland: the gallie slaves had
their liberty given them, with a suit of clothes, and a piece of money to
carry them into their countries, or where they pleased.

There were at the same time some seven ships of war of Dunkerke at sea,
the admiral whereof was so chased by the ships of Zeeland a day and a half
together, as in the end she was forced to run on ground near unto Albertus
sconce, upon the coast of Flanders, where the ship burst, but they saved the
ordnance and some other implements. The vice admiral Adrian Derickson got into
Dunkerke, having been well beaten in the Spanish seas, by the English and
Dutch, and lost above half their men. The herring Buisses went then to sea
with ordnance and small shot in them (notwithstanding their wafters) wherewith
they might make some defense, until the ships of war came to relieve them.

This year in November the united provinces intended to make an iucursion into
the duchy of Luxembourg, for that they had refused to pay their contribution:
the charge was given unto Lodowick Gunther earl of Nassau, with these four
colonels, Edmonds, Ghistels, Dommeruille, and Marquette; he had two hundred
French, two hundred English, two hundred Scots, two hundred Germans, and two
hundred Netherlands, with three and thirty cornets of horse, three field
pieces, and fifty wagons; that is, eight for the munition, Lodowick, one for
each colonel, and the rest for the horsemen. They went from Nymeghen the third
day of November, and came into the country of Iuilliers; and then they took
saint Vit by composition; the soldiers swearing not to bear arms in the
duchy of Luxembourg for the space of two months after, and to depart with
their ensigns, arms, and baggage, and that the bourgers should compound for a
reasonable ransom: and then for a months space they ran over all the
country of Luxembourg without any resistance, forcing them to pay
contribution; for that Peter Ernest earl of Mansfeldt, governor of the
country had forbad them to pay any, for which cause many houses and villages
were burnt, whereas they found no body at home to ransom them.

The archduke sent certain troops thither, but for want of money they lay by
the way,

Cont Lodowicke brought many gentlemen and pesants prisoners with him, and
among the rest, the abbot of saint Huberts, who were put to ransom. There was
little else done all this winter.

In the month of August, monsieur la Biche governor of the town of Hulst,
made an attempt with two thousand men for the archduke, upon Berghen up Zoome,
thinking to have surprised it, the town at that time having but a small
garrison; but having marched in the night time within half a mile of the town,
the governor of Berghen up Zoome caused two pieces of ordnance to be shot off,
to give warning to them of Tertolen

But to return to the siege of Oostend: the archdukes men seeing that their
battery Oostend.
upon the goullet wrought not that effect which they expected, and that
notwithstanding the 1602
is like a floor or plancher made of light boards, swimming upon the water,
with defenses able to carry a cannon, which should stop the entry of the
said goullet; the which they did think would always rise with the tide, and
that it could not be carried away, nor broken: the which they brought unto the
brinke of the goullet, but the waves of the sea brake it in pieces, and this
invention was as unprofitable as the rest.

The archduke having published a proscription (as we have said) against his
mutined soldiers, he went to besiege them in Hochstraten, where he brought
them to great extremity; notwithstanding that they were well fortified with
three ditches, and three rampars, whereas he found great resistance. Monsieur
de Rhosnes son was slain there (who in his time had been marshall of the
archdukes camp, and was slain before Hulst) yet they Maurice, to take them
into his protection, until they should be reconciled unto the archduke; the
which the prince accepted, knowing well enough, that without their troops, and
during their mutiny, the archduke could not greatly annoy the united provinces.

Whereupon the prince went to relieve them, and raised the siege, and by that
means did hold by provision the said castle of Hochstraten, and that of
Carpen, in the dioces of Cologne: for security of which places, and of their
persons, the Estates put them in garrison in the Grave; the which (having made
their accord with the archduke) they delivered into the

You have heard how that upon the sixth day of October, in the year 1599, Enno
the new earl of Embden, was quietly installed in his earldom; but afterward
by certain practices he drew many gentlemen and others (who before had been
enemies to his father and himself) to be of his faction; namely, two
gentlemen called Yonkers van Kimphousen, and van Risom, and some of the chief
bourgers of Embden, as Syndicus Dotia Wiarda, the two bourgomasters, and the
secretary: and he married his daughter, being heir of Esens, etc. to his
brother John earl of Embden, with dispensation from the pope, upon promise to
maintain the Romish religion, and to bring in the Jesuits, as he had done in
Paderborne, all his household

And for that they of Noorden (a town not far from Embden) refused to
install him in the year 1602, for that the said town did belong unto his
mother, the king of Suethlands daughter, for her dowry, denying also to pay
those extraordinary exactions: wherefore Enno (having levied many soldiers
under the former pretense) went with three companies of foot, and two cornets
of horse before the town of Noorden, their commander being Yonker van
William Kimphousen, who entered the town, and disarmed the bourgers: and then
he commanded them to come into the market place, where having environed them by
the soldiers, who bent their arms against them, a gybbet being set up, their
sentence of The cruelty of the earl of Embden.
condemnation was read; which was, That they had forfeited both their lives and
goods, with all their privileges: but their lives were spared, paying him
thirty three thousand Reeks dollers, and that for five years they should pay
chimney money: then he caused the bourgers to go under the gallows, in sign
that they had deserved it.

In the end they were forced to give him fifteen thousand dollers, and to
deliver him certain banished diverse of the chief magistrates and bourgers of
Embden, by virtue of the emperors 1602


In regard of these cruel proceedings of the earl of Embden, they of the
town of Embden sent their bourgmaster Philip Sicken and John Amelinck, unto
the Estates of the united They o^ Embden demand and of the united provinces.
provinces at the Hage, to make their complaints against the earl, for that
(contrary to the contract made at Delfziel) he had sought to entreat them with
all rigor and extremity, threat^ing to deal with them, as he had done with
them of Noorden; and that he levied many soldiers (under pretense to serve
the emperor in the Turkish wars) more than he could well pay; as also that
he had secret practices for the king of Spain, to attempt something against
the town, through the favor of the sailors, who were much inclined unto him:
hoping thereby to attain a neutrall trade into Spain. These things bred great
i^alousies Crwope entered into Embden with four companies of Friselanders, the
river also being shut up with ships, even at the very instant when as cont
Enno was with his troops within a mile of the town, thinking to have entrance
by means of his favorites: and at the same time there were certain deputies
sent from the estates to reconcile all matters, but it was in vain.

Hereupon the earl fortified the villages of Hinta and Larrels, with other
villages, to command the river of Ems* and at Logherhorn he made a very strong
sconce, with five great bulwarks, and another sconce at Eylsemerziel, to
master them of Embden, and to keep the ships from coming to the town.

They of Embden seeing themselves thus coopt up by the earls sconces, were
suitors all the summer unto the united provinces for aid; they being busy at
the siege of Grave; the which being taken, in the beginning of winter (giving
friendly advise to the earl to desist from his pretended enterprise) they sent
monsieur de Bois a gentleman of Brabant, with nineteen companies of foot, of
diverse nations, and some cornets of horse, the which passed the Ems the last of
October, notwithstanding that the earl had four thousand men; and first he
besieged the fort at Hinta, the which he battered and took by force: from
thence he went to Grietziel, which yielded by composition: some other sconces
were abandoned: Knock was yielded with the ordnance: at the last du Bois came
to the great fort of Logherhorne, in the which there were seven hundred men,
the governor was Yonker William van Kimphouse^, there du Bois made his
approaches between two banks, which they should have let if they had been
soldiers: the fort was not fully finished; so as the governor Kimphousen
seeing himself in some danger, upon the thirteenth of November yielded the
fort by composition, to depart out of the same with their colors flying,
arms, and baggage, to leave the ordnance behind them, and to be conveyed to
Lierort; all prisoners to be released, and good quarter kept, with other
conditions. Having taken al these forts in 3 weeks space, monsieur du Bois
returned to Embden, where he was honorably entertained, and the next day he
went to field again, to lodge his soldiers in the

The united Estates did advertise the electors and other princes of the empire
(who were incensed against them) what reason had moved them to undertake this
course; being advertised out of the archdukes court, that all this preparation
made by the earl of Friseland against the town of Embden, tended to no other
end, but to deliver the town unto the Spaniard; whereby he might enter freely
into the ri^er of Ems, and into that haven, and so have means to ruin the
united provinces, and the borders of the empire: wherefore they had used all
means possible to reconcile the earl, and the town of Embden; but the earl
had not only broken the contract made at Delfziel, but to the prejudice of his
neighbors had built them, as appears by the articles of peace made at
Veruins; being also daily informed from 1603.
provinces: wherefore they entreated them to conceive well of that which they
had done, not only for their own, but also for their neighbors good; and to
assure themselves that they would not favor nor aid them of Embden in any
thing that might be prejudicial to the privileges of the empire, or
emperor: but yet they could not forbear to assist them in their great
necessity.

Enno having received this loss, went to make his complaint to the imperial
chamber, leaving the government of Friseland to his wife, who was daughter to
the duke of Holstein, with Yonker Kimphousen and his council, but the next
summer the earl went into Holland, where a reconciliation was made.

In the latter end of the year, there was an enterprise made upon the castle
of Wachtendonc in Gueldres, by means of a fisherman who carried straw in his
boat by the rivers of Niers into the castle: at one time he carried ten or
twelve soldiers hidden under the straw; and after under another burden of
straw did lay captain Lambert Pasman, with 14 soldiers more: passing by the
castle bridge, the fisherman entreated the sentinel (being acquainted with
him) to lend him his hand, to leap on land, the which he did; but the
fisherman drew him into the water, and slew him: then the rest leapt out, and
seized on the castle gate, with the help of those that were there before: with
whom there joined certain soldiers of the garrison of Gueldre, who lay near
to it in ambush. Monsieur de Rihouen the governor was taken prisoner: they of
the town could not prevent it, being so suddenly done; but within Cloet, and
captain Quaet hearing thereof, being thereabouts with their horsemen, they
entered into the town, and besieged the castle: the which being in some want of
victuals, within six days they compounded, and delivered up the castle,
departing with their arms, and 20 wagons to convey their hurt men, all
prisoners to be set at liberty, and captain Quaet remaining governor,
until monsieur Rihouens return.

They of Oostend did annoy the archdukes camp all they could, having since the
beginning Oostend.
of the siege, unto the month of March, 1603, spent above 100 thousand great
shot, sending their cannon often into Zeeland to be changed, or new cast. And
upon the 6 of April they made an enterprise upon the Spaniards sentinels upon
the east side: and as some of their

The thirteenth of April the wind was very high, the which blew down many old
walls, couerings of houses, and the church steeple; under the ruins whereof
there was a man slain, and another had both his legs broken* all the
Spaniards gabions on the east side were in a manner overthrown, and their new
works upon the goullet wonderfully shaken. The night following the Spaniards
gave a general assault unto the town with great forces: they pulled up some
hundred piles at the half moon on the east side, but they were repulst and
forced to retire. On the west part they did assault the Porc-espic, and brought
two hogsheads The Polde^ square taken.
fury, as they became masters thereof, with the Polder square, or Catte,
West-square, and South-square, although there were upon the Polder square a
demie cannon, with some iron pieces, which were not idle. Having taken these
places, they put all to the sword, and in the morning they slew all that were
living in cold blood; and then they hung up a gunner, and threw his body out
of the trenches in scorn: the assault continued four hours.

The same day, being the foureteenth of April, at nine of the clock at night,
the besieged made a sallie upon these Cattes or squares, from the which they
were repulst, whereas they lost in these assaults, captain Frist, the
lieutenant colonel of the Suitsers, two ensigns, one of

During all this time, there went many ships in and out to Oostend, bringing in
soldiers, 1603
they not pass freely, without the loss of some ships and men: whereunto the
Estates men were so well accustomed, as they did willingly expose themselves to
the hazard, little regarding the enemies cannon. We may see what custom can
do, as we have showed in the ^iege of Leyden, whereas not only the
inhabitants, but even the cattle did accustom themselves unto the wars.

On the seven and twentieth day of May, early in the morning, the wind being
^asterly, A fight at sea with Spi^ola's galleys.
a high water and a calm sea, Dom Frederic Spinol^, general of the galleys by
the archdukes commandment (who omitted no opportunity to annoy them of
Oostend) went out of S^luse with eight galleys and four fregates well
appointed with slaves and mariners, and manned with two thousand and five
hundred musketeers. He first showed himself at the west end of Maurice being
admiral general* seeing what their intent was, weighed anchor, and hoist up
their sails, bending their course ^astward, although they had both wind and
tide against them, being in a manner a calm. Spinola's galleys having the
advantage both of wind, tide, and sun, went northward beyond the Franche
pol* into the W^linge or Gulf, turning their prowes against the fleet. About
five of the clock, the eight galleys divided themselves into two equal parts,
being a little distant one from the other: being thus in order, they came
furiously, and with great cries, after their accustomed manner, to charge the
Estates army. The two first galleys did Ioos de Moor, vice admiral, called
the Golden lion: Dom Frederick^ Spinola commanded in one of these galli^s, the
which had no f^gge upon her mast, but only above the captains chamber. Moor
defended himself valiantly, and his ordnance did great spoil unto the enemy;
so as Spinola himself had his deaths wound, and died before he could get to
shore. There were four other galleys that pursued the ship of captain Legier
Peterson Spinola slain.
of Groningue, called the (...), or flying dog: one of them took her on the
right side of the stearne, and striking her with his spur made her give
back. At which time the master gunner of the Dog gave fire to a piece, which
raakt through the galleys, and made a way, as if a wagon had past through them,
and overthrown all it had incountred. The black galli^ of Dordrecht in the
which Jacob Michielson commanded, encountered with the other Legier Peterson,
forsook her, and went to charge the gallie of Zeeland, called the Flight, in
the which Cornellis Iansen of Gorrichom was captain, who played his part as
well as the rest, and without doubt had won great honor, if there had not
fallen out an accident of fire in the gallie. The other two galleys did also
leave Legiers ship, and rowed against the black gallie; one of the which,
was Spinola's vice admiral, carrying a flagge upon her mast. These four had
wo^ke enough with the black galley, the which defended it self so valiantly,
as notwithstanding they were all grapled unto her, meaning to draw her into
Scluse, yet were they forced to abandon her after a long fight. The black
gallie being thus freed, it went to charge those galleys that were in fight
with Ioos de Moor the vice admiral. Another ship of captain Quirin
Hendricks of Zirrixee, called the Old dog* although it were not in fight, yet
did she much harm to Spinola's galleys, entering among the rest, and seconding
them with her ordnance; and especially against them that fought with the
viceadmirall, and the black galley.

The slaughter was very great, especially in the Spanish galleys; neither
party showing any base cowardice, they were so eager one against another with
cannon, musket, and harguebuse shot; and then they came to the half pike, two
hand sword, co^telas, and other arms, that it was a fearful sight to behold:
so as in the end the Spaniards fainting, seeing such great abundance of blood
run out at the skuppet holes of their galleys, they ^led in great disorder to
S^luse; yet carrying back all their galleys, being favored by the neerenesse
of their retreat.

There died in this sea fight, the general Frederick Spinola, with above eight
hundred of his men* and a great number of them hurt. ^e number ^e dead


Of the Estates side, there were six and thirty slain; among the which, was
captain Jacob Michelson, and his lieutenant; the viceadmirall Ioos de Moor,
and captain Ledger Peterson, 1603
there were some Englishmen of the garrison of Flessingue, who did exceeding
well, of the which there were eight slain, and some fifteen hurt. Ioos de
Moor the viceadmirall, commanded at this fight, in the absence of the seignior
William van Haulstein, who was admiral under prince Maurice: he hearing the
noise of the ordnance, parted presently from Flessingue, with five ships of
war, and one fregate, to come and succor his company before the ditch, but
the fight was ended, and the enemy retired, before he came. In this battle
the saying of the royal prophet David was verified, That victories proceeded
not from the force and strength of man, but from the aid and assistance of God.

Elizabeth Queen of England, of famous memory, being dead, upon the four and
twentieth James king of Scotland called to the succession of the crown; upon
the 8 of April the united provinces did write a letter unto the king of
England, as follows.

Most high and mighty prince, as we were with great reason grieved in our
souls, for the The united provinces letter to the king of England.
news of the death of the most high* great, mighty, and sovereign princess,
the queen of England, of most worthy and famous memory, in regard of the
great love and affection she did always bear unto our estate, and for the
aid which we did still receive from her princely bounty, for our defense and
preservation, against the king of Spain and his adherents, whereby the
remembrance of her shall for ever remain eternized in us and our posterity:
so were we much comforted, and rejoiced in our hearts, to understand, that
your Majesty with a general applause of the Estates of the whole country, was
proclaimed the true and lawful heir,

Presently after this letter, they sent an honorable embassage into England,
the ambassadors were* Henry Frederic, earl of Nassau, youngest son to the
late prince of Orange, Walraue, baron The united Estates sent ambassadors into
England.
of Brederode, monsieur Van Olden Barneuelt, counselor for Holland, and Jacob
Valck, treasurer of Zeeland; being accompanied with diverse gentlemen, as the
lords of Batenborgh, Schagen, Trelongh, Herdenbrooke, Borselle, with many
others. These ambassadors arrived in England the 14 of May, eight days after
the kings entry into London, and upon which was delivered both by mouth and
writing: but for that it is but a repetition of that 1603


The king made them a friendly answer, in general terms, excusing himself,
that he was The kings answer to the united Estates
but newly entered into his kingdom, and being ignorant of the estate and
power thereof, he thought it requisite, first to settle his own affairs, and
to be fully informed of all particularities, being most convenient rather to
seek peace than war; and that with all friendly care and affection he would
continue all love and friendship with them, as his predecessor had done, with
many other exceeding good words, wherewith the ambassadors took their leaves.

The archduke hearing also of the death of the Queen of England, sent a
gentleman called Nicholas de Schosy into Scotland to sound the kings mind, how
he stood affected, whether Charles earl of Aremberg, knight of the golden
fleece, chancellor of estate, and admiral general for the archdukes, being
accompanied with his son, the baron of Seuenberghen, the earl of Bossu, the
baron of Robles, the lord of Wakene, the lord of Swevigem, the earl of
Phirtburg, the baron of Neuele, with many other gentlemen, his embassage
tending (besides congratulation) to move the king to a peace, and to cross
certain designs of the united provinces; and for that the plague was great in
London, he road westward John Baptista Taxis, earl of Villa-mediana, his
postmaster general, in embassage, who still solicited the king unto a peace:
whereupon the king sent master Ralph Winwood in July, to be his agent in
Holland, with commission to let the Estates understand that the archduke had
made offer of a peace unto him, whereunto he would not give any ear, until
he made them acquainted therewith, and to understand if they would enter into
treaty.

In the mean time the earl of Basigny, son to the Lord of Boxtel, wrote
twice unto the united provinces, desiring a pasport for himself, and for the
pentioner of Antuerpe, to come into Holland, from the Estates of Brabant; but
they made him answer, that he should send his charge and propositions in
writing, whereunto answer should be made: but he wrote again

About this time, and whilst the army lay before Oostend, there was great
dislike and iarres among the archdukes soldiers; for the Netherlanders could
hardly agree with the Spaniards, nor the Spaniards like of the Italians: Dom
Louis de Velasco a gallant soldier, being general of the artillery, was made
general of the horse, and the earl of Busquoy general of the artillery; but
there were many commanders which refused to serve under Velasco, as the duke
of Ossuna, who had raised two companies of horse, the which he discharged,
either through pride, or for want: Dom Alonzo d'Aualos desired pasport to
depart, and so did Dom Augustine de Mexia, chastelleyn of Antuerpe: at which
time there were four thousand

It was said the year before, that the earl of east Friseland, was in
controversy with the town of Embden; whereupon this year in Marrh, he came
into Holland, to the Estates of the united provinces, whereas all matters were
debated betwixt him and the town, and at the last by the means of mediators,
they were reconciled before the general Estates, the which agreement was
comprehended in 15 articles, dated the 8 of April. There were two draughts made
of this accord, the which were signed and sealed by the earl, and the town
seal of the earl perform the accord, and to have it signed at the meeting of
the Estates of the country; 1603
end the commissioners after much toil, returned into Holland, reinfecta. The
reasons were (as the earl said) that the remitting of all spoils and wrongs
done, contrary to the emperors command, belonged only to the emperor, and
not to the parties: that the emperor had reserved all difficulties touching
the causes of Embden, unto himself, and therefore the parties might not by
means of the united provinces, make any alteration or interpretation thereof:
that the aforesaid imperial resolution was given in form of a sentence, and
to be observed by oath by both parties; so as now they ought not to do any
thing to the contrary, nor alter the same, and that there were diverse points
contained there, which did only belong unto the emperor himself. But the
chief obstacle, as it has since appeared, was in regard that Charles Nutzel
his agent.

Whereupon the said Nutzel and Miximilian de Cochy, were sent from the emperor
unto the united Estates; but Nutzel being forced to stay in east Friseland,
expecting (as he said) another commission, de Cochy came to the Hage upon the
fifteenth day of July, and there had audience of the Estates: where he made a
repetition of all the proceedings of the town of Embden, and how they were
reconciled; and that since they of Embden had begun to rebel: wherefore the
Emperor had been forced to send out certain commandments against them,
upon especial petition, and had forbidden the Estates to aid them of Embden;

This ambassador had his answer from the Estates the seventh day of August,
containing a declaration of the wrongs which their enemies had done unto the
empire, and of the Ambrosio Spinola had commission to conquer it, and to
withdraw it from the empire, as they had done the countries of Gueldres,
Zutphen, Vtrecht, Friseland, Oueryssel, and Groningue, wherein they proceeded
without any opposition or interruption: and for that it would tend to the great
prejudice and hindrance of the united provinces, they could not refuse to aid
them of Embden; wherefore they entreated the emperor not to misconstrue their
action.

And touching the accord which had been made betwixt the earl and the
Embdeners,

The besieged in Oostend had certain aduenturing soldiers, whom they called
Lopers, Lopers of Oostend*
of the which, among other captains, were the young captain Grenu, and
captain Adam van Leest. Their arms which they bore were a long and a great
pike, with a ^atte head at the nether end thereof, to the end that it should
not sink too deep into the mud, a harguebuse hung in a scarf (as we have
said of Frebuters) a coutelas at his 1603
foot broad, skirmishing often with the enemy, so as no horsemen could
overtake them, before they had leapt over the ditches again.

The second of June these Lopers brought in four prisoners, whereof one was a
sentinel perdue. And two nights after, the besieged made a sallie upon Luys-bos
with a hundred men, they won the enemies platform and trench, and turned
their own ordnance against them, whereas they cloyed two pieces, and slew the
corpse de guard, with the gunners and other officers of the ordnance, whom they
found there. The besieged lost there the lieutenant of the colonels company of
cont Ernest of Nassau, the first lieutenant of Hausman, the young baron of
Sancy, a french man; and Grouestein colonel of the Frisons was hurt, with many
more: so as in the end having a new supply from the camp, the besieged were
forced to retire.

On the twelfth day of June, the besieged set fire on the west square, the
which burnt all night: and on the foureteenth day the Spaniard began to
batter the half moons from the Polder square; among others, that of Slimmer,
to the which the night following they gave an assault. The governor of Oostend
fearing that if the enemy should win that place, he would build a fort which
might greatly prejudice and annoy the town, for that it should take from them
the means to transport their materials; and with all they might there Kill,
kill, it is won, it is won; but being furiously charged by them of the
town, they retired with more speed than they came. If they had charged home
unto the half moons, they had been entertained in the like manner; for they
were exceeding well manned. The next day the besieged found many dead, and a
part of the enemies bridge

On the thirteenth day of July, colonel Dorp, who had been governor of the
town, departed early in the morning; and at the same time the seignior Vander
Noot (who had commanded there in the beginning of the siege) returned, bringing
with him 4 companies of his Zeeland regiment. On the two and twentieth day, the
besieged did set fire of Luys-bos, the which did burn up all the bauins and
other wood, and all the loopholes, and there was a great fire in the midst of
it, the Spaniards did what they could to quench it, but it was in vain. The
next day the besieged planted gabions without the half moon of the Polder,
with an intent to raise another half moon, but finding the ground too we^ for
that purpose, they left it.

After that prince Maurice had freed the castle of Hochstraten, which was
besieged by the Prince Maurice comes before Boisledue.
archduke Albert, thinking to force the mutined soldiers that held it to
submit themselves, he came with all his army, being some 130 ensigns of
foot, and 36 cornets of horse, on the 18 of August, before the town of
Boisleduc, the which he did inuest, and campt before and about the village of
Fucht, the which he fortified, and intrencht himself after his accustomed
manner. And whereas the prince had before made a certain accord with the said
mutiners, they went and campt betwixt Boisleduc and Heusden, in the village of
Vlumen, being some 13 cornets of horse, and the rest foot, to the number of
3500 men, one and other: who having fortified the church of the said village,
the footmen were lodged in cabbins, and the horsemen in the houses. This troop
being wonderfully incensed against the archduke, by reason of his green Gueux;
keeping that passage well and faithfully, by the which victuals came unto the
princes camp. Besides, their horsemen were still in field, doing much
mischief to the archdukes men, and great service to the prince, and the united
Estates.

The third day, after that the prince was lodged at Fucht, the archdukes army
also approached, Frederic vander Bergh, who camped at Dykendonc and 1603
Oudwater, near unto the town; so as the two armies were within musket shot
one of another. But the prince being first arrived, had the choice and
advantage of the ground, camping in a place which they call Petter, where there
are certain small hills somewhat rising: on those that were nearest unto the
enemies camp, he planted certain ordnance, the which did continually shoot
into the archdukes camp, annoying it very much, by reason of the situation,
and the neerenesse of the place: yet the archdukes men did not forbear to
fortify, having a great number of pioners: The prince did also fortify with
all speed, so as within few days he made admirable trenches within musket
shot of Fucht port, before the which they of the town had certain half
moons, which had been made before: Maurice his camp, the which was like to a
simple skirmish, without any effect.

On the 23 day, three cornets of the princes horse did in the open field charge
the enemies horsemen, who were forced to retire with good speed, some being
slain upon the place, and some taken prisoners.

The prince, through the commodity of these high hills, did so annoy the
enemy, as cont Frederic was forced to abandon his works begun, giving the
prince leave to take them, and finish them: whereupon he went by a low way, and
past the river of Hekel, upon planks laid upon masts of ships, even unto Saint
Anthonies port, whereas he caused certain ordnance

On nine and twentieth of August some four thousand men went out of the
archdukes camp passing (before the port of Orten) the river of Diese upon two
bridges of boats which were brought thither, marching toward a place, called
the Deutere, a quarter of an hours march from the town, right against Saint
John's port, where they began to fortify, thinking by that means to hinder the
princes approaches unto the town; who considering what advantage this might
give unto his enemies, he resolved to charge them, encouraging his French and
Scottish men (whom he had chosen to that end) who went early on the second of
September from the camp, after that the enemy had had three days respit to
fortify. At Maurice caused an alarm to be given throughout all his camp,
which made cont Frederic think that he went to assail him: during which
alarm, an assault was given unto the fort by the French and Scottish; but they
were bravely repulst, and with some loss: whereupon the prince sent them
certain new companies to second them; who returned again with a great
resolution, and finding A fort of the Spaniards taken, with great slaughter of
their men.
the defendants dismayed, they forced it at the second assault: Of which number
few escaped, for the townes-men kept their port shut, so as most of them were
slain, or drowned in the waters near adjoining, except some two hundred,
which the princes men took prisoners, among the which there was an Italian
marquess, whom they thought to present unto the prince, but he dyed of his
wounds by the way. This fort thus won, the prince went thither

All the rest of the month of August (at the siege before Oostend) was spent
in doing the Oostend*
worst they could one unto another, either by their fire-workes, or with their
ordnance, their adventurers going forth many times, and bringing in prisoners:
neither did the ships pass in and out free from danger. One among the rest
having thirteen sick men, and five women in her, going forth, having her
helm shot off, fell into the Spaniards hands, who hung up the sick men,
except one, which could not go up the ladder, him they slew: as for the women,
after they had ravished them, and stripped them, with all indignities, they sent
them back Cruelty of the Spaniards.
unto the town. This was an act, among others, of Spanish martial discipline.

On the last day of August, the adventurers brought in a horse man of the
Spaniards, which they had taken prisoner, and two days after they brought in
an ensign, a corporal, and an enginer.

On the nineteenth of September, forty ships going out of the town, there
were six sunk, 1603
was a good booty for the enemy; and yet they hung up the pilot of the said
ship: in revenge whereof, they of the town hung up the horseman which had
been taken.

During this month the governor caused the new haven to be repaired, making
it more commodious for the ships, than before. The infectious sickness which
was in the town, began to swage, the town being better furnished with good
physicians and chirurgians, and being daily better fortified. At that time
there entered eighteen companies of supplies, sending the sick and wounded men
back into Zeeland.

On the thirteenth of October there appeared without the town thirteen great
barks, and four ships, coming from Sluice. It seemed they would make another
float upon the goullet:

On the six and twentieth of October the Spaniards planted a piece of Ordnance
behind their float, with the which they made four or five shot upon the East
rauelin: but the tide

Ambrosio, marquess Spinola, (brother to Frederic, general of the gallyes at
Sluice, slain in the last sea fight (as we have said) had an enginer, called
Pompee, who did vaunt, That he would make an artificial bridge, on the which
they should go through the goullet to the assault: of which bridge we will
discourse by and by, as of a dear and too costly folly.

On the eighteenth of December, there came one and forty sails into the
town, every The seignior of Ghi^lles governor of Oostend.
one in a manner touched with the enemies canon, and yet all of them were
saved, except one which sunk, and another laden with victuals, was abandoned
by the pilot, and yet it entered Vander Noot gave him place, and returned into
Holland, on the three and twentieth day of the month, on which day the
captain of the black gallie came into Oostend, with an hundred and fifty
mariners which he brought with him.

On Christmas day, the Spaniards brought another float, which was not very
great, against the which they of the town shot continually, day and night,
with eight pieces of ordnance, and could not break it, it was so strongly
bound together; and besides they labored at it continually. They brought also
another float, on the West part, the which they planted in a certain place
which looked toward the Porc-espic, being better than the

At that time the marquess Spinola, general of the archdukes army, cast and
displaced above six hundred men, as well commanders and captains, as
commissioners and treasorers; 1603
whereas they bought them for half a stiuer. This was ill husbandry: but as
the proverb says, A princes treasure is subject to filching. The Estates did
not husband it after this sort: for the maintenance of the army, the Flemings
did contribute twelve thousand crowns a month, comprehending the munition,
forage, and stuff for building, to be deducted by the other provinces out of
their tax, for the term of six months, beginning the first of November. And
the better to encourage the soldiers, they promised (Oostend being taken) to
pay them all their arrerages; and moreover, to give them four months pay,
with a pasport for any one to retire, that would demand it.

It was also said, That the archduke having resolved in counsel, not to leave
the siege of

This Summer the princes of Germany had assembled at the town of Regensbourg,
An assembly of the Estates of the empire.
where the archduke Mathias, the emperors brother, represented the emperors
person: at which assembly, most of their conference was about a contribution
to be levied for

In the end they concluded, to send certain ambassadors to persuade both
parties,

The emperor at that time had sent ambassadors to the princes of Saxony and
Meubourg, The emperor writes to the united provinces.
who also had commission to move the king of Denmark, to be a means for the
making and concluding of a peace in the countries of the Netherlands: To which
end the emperor sent a letter to the Estates of the united provinces, bearing
date the four and twentieth day of December, in the year 1603, containing the
great complaints of the borderers of the empire, especially of the duke of
Cleues and Iuilliers, not only for the insolences committed by the soldiers
of the united provinces, but also by the mutinous to prevent all future
disorders, and to do that which equity, right, and justice required; wherein
1604
favor, etc.

The united Estates hearing of the coming of these new soldiers (for whom
they Prince Maurice retires from Boisleduc
wrought daily to make breeches, dublets, and other apparel; for that commonly
(especially the Spaniards) they come all ragged, and almost naked) besides,
that the archdukes commanders had found means to put some soldiers into the
town of Boisleduc, being encamped near unto it, knowing well what obstinat
people were in the said town, having tried them in the year 1601 (when as,
upon the like occasion, and for the extreme frosts, prince Maurice was forced
to raise his siege) the said Estates and prince Maurice were resolved to employ
their men and means otherwise, and to retire from Boisleduc

Upon the first day of January 1604, according to the custom of the war,
they of Oostend.
Oostend, and the archdukes camp, did salute one another with their canon and
musket shot, which cost many of them their lives: and on the sixth or seventh
day, the lopers or adventurers, brought a corporal and two soldiers prisoners
into the town, by whom they understood, that the archdukes camp was fortified
with fifty ensigns of foot, and seven cornets of horse; and that they did
expect the archduke to see a general assault given in all parts of the town
(the which an Italian which came voluntarily out of the camp into the town,
did confirm) and that upon the first dark night they Pompees bridge. The
which was made in form of a chariot, upon wheels which were fifteen foot
high, and six foot broad: The bridge was on the hinder part supported by a high
cross beam, half of which bridge before, was to be drawn up, and let
down, by two cables, which past thorough two pullyes, the which were fastened
to both the ends of the cross beam: That which did bear the bridge, was a
great mast, being an hundred and fifty foot long, planted before the chariot:
The bridge was threescore paces long, and sixteen broad. But this engine was
made unprofitable by the town canon, being nothing else, but an invention to
bring men to the slaughter, as that of the duke of Alua at the siege of Harlem,
and of prince Maurice before the town of

At that time the East rauelin had been in a manner overthrown by the
tempest, so as the enemy had better means to annoy the coming in and going
out of the town, than before; who brought another float upon the West part by
the sand hill, joining to the old haven: yet from the fifteenth of January,
unto the nineteenth of February, there entered above an hundred and fifty
vessels, great and small, with four canons, two minions, and ten companies of
soldiers.

The first of March the wind was very great at the West and North-west, with a
furious tempest, the which did very much harm unto the town. The tide did
rise so high, as many were forced to leave their lodgings and houses, so as the
most ancient of S^roo-dique, that is to say, the dike made of straw, which kept
the water from under the soldiers feet, was broken in diverse places. The
Spaniards half moon, upon the goullet, was not free, nor yet their Luys-bos,
whereof there fell betwixt the two batteries, above an hundred paces, even to
the foot of the rampar, with the principal battery toward the sea, so as
there was not any thing left standing: and had not their new work been,
Luys-bos had been quite carried away with the water, with the soldiers, and
all that was within it. The old town of Oostend, had a good share in this
wrack, and if the wind had not toward the old square and West square, were
ruined, except that which they had newly made 1604


On the 6 of March the besieged abandoned the fort of Beckaff, which the
archdukes men perceiving, they cast themselves into it: but soon after,
fearing there was some hidden fireworkes, which might blow them up, they
forsook it: and that day there were spent on both sides, above 3000 great shot.

The one and twentieth day of the month, in the after noone, the seignior of
Ghistelles, colonel, The seignior of Ghistelles governor of Oostend, s^ine
and governor of Oostend, was slain with a musket shot: being opened, they
found that the bullet had pierced his heart. His bowels were buried in the
town, and his body was imbalmed, and sent to Vtrecht. Colonel Loon was
chosen governor in his place: And the next day M. David d'Orleans Iegeneur, and
chief controller of the fortifications, was hurt, being the

All this month the Spaniards toyled at the sap on the side of Albertus fort;
so as Catris, master of the camp, with the Bourguignons, were lodged in the
counterscarp by the polders, whereas Catris was shot thorough the body with a
musket, whereof he dyed, Rouville his sergeant mayor having been slain the
night before. The seignior of Torres was sent to command in his place, who
made a fair escape, having a grenado, or ball of wildfire, fallen at his
feet. Captain Liestre, brother to Catris, was sore hurt there, and so was the
seigniour of Malaise, lieutenant colonel of the Liegeois; the sergeant mayor
of which regiment, called captain L'Ensant was slain. You may see how
dangerous it was to lie so near unto the

The Estates of the united provinces, and prince Maurice, having for the
reasons above mentioned raised their siege from Boisleduc, seeing the archduke
to continue his siege obstinatly before Oostend, the which he held straightly
besieged by land, and did daily importune it; and although he had not much
prevailed in his design, notwithstanding his great expense of money, and loss
of men, they were resolved, in the Spring, to draw their army together, and to
force the archduke to raise his siege, or at the least to provide him work in
some other place, so as he should be constrained to leave Oostend, and turn
toward them, or to draw away some of his forces, and give them some respit to
breath, from his continual alarms and assaults, having been now besieged
almost three years. For the effecting of which design, Maurice caused all
ships and boats fit for that service, to be staid, both in the countries of
Holland, Zeeland, and Friseland, to the number of three thousand at the least,
one and other; the which they caused to come to the towns of Dordrecht,
Rotterdam, Gorchum, Schoonhouen, and other places. The rendez vous being given
them before the castle of Ramekins in Walchren, which is one of the islands of
Zeeland; they of Amsterdam, Horn, and Enchuysen, did furnish five hundred
sail. It was an admirable thing to see the soldiers and mariners, which came
to Dordrecht, for whose service the said ships were made ready, as well to
transport the men, as for the artillery, munition of war, provision of
victuals, wagons, horses, sackes to fill with earth, pipes full of fresh water,
and all other things necessary for such an exploit as they had designed, being
a goodly fight to behold

On the one and twentieth of April prince Maurice parted from Dordrecht, with
some fourteen thousand men, of the which there were twenty cornets of horse,
being accompanied by all the ships of war, and others, which were come from
diverse parts; the which continued the whole day, from morning until night,
before they were past. Being come to an anchor before the haven of Middlebourg,
and along the side of Arnemuyden, they were found to be three thousand and five
hundred ships of war, besides such as carried munition, and the baggage of
the army: at which place the prince did consult with the Estates, where he
should land in Flanders.

On the 24 of the month, the gates of the town of Arnemuyden stood open all
night, and betwixt Cadsant and Walpen, in the black hole, whereas they landed,
the place 1604 The army lands.
from Sluice.

On the six and twentieth day they entered into the isle of Cadsant, without any
opposition. Such as were in guard in the black haven, and in certain other
places, fled, so as the prince marched directly to the fort of Hofsted: and
having taken it, he went to the fort of Lyppine, causing the captain (who
commanded there) to be summoned to yield the place. Who answered, That he
would first see the canon before he did yield it. Whereupon the prince sent
him word, That if he attended but one volley of the canon, he would put all
within the place to the sword: yet for that the captain had spoken like a
soldier, the prince command two canons to be brought, the which were no
sooner seen by the besieged,

Those of the fort of East Vlyet, were also summoned to yield, who made no
other answer The prince master of a the isle of Cadsant
to them that were sent, but by the canon: but seeing the ordnance planted, in
the evening, they yielded, leaving within the fort their artillery, munition,
and victuals, being some six hundred men in it: so as the whole isle of
Cadsant, with all the forts, were in the princes possession. In the mean time
the rest of the army was busy to discharge their ships in the said island.

The archduke being advertised of the princes landing in that quarter of
Flanders, he sent some troops from his camp before Oostend, who arrived the
six and twentieth day, and intrencht themselves in a half moon, on the West
part of the haven of Sluice, to stop the princes

On the seven and twentieth day the prince sent home some of his ships, with
soldiers, and with them the black gallie, toward the mouth of Sluice, to
pass his men in shaloups: but the archdukes, men being there, to the number
of one thousand horse, and three thousand foot, camped near unto the said
mouth or entry, and their ordnance being planted even with the water, they
gave them such entertainment, as they were forced to retire, with the loss of
some mariners: notwithstanding the prince had two batteries on this side the
haven, either of six pieces.

The next day there was little attempted, but only the prince assured himself
of the isle of Cadsant, and the archdukes men wrought in their trenches and
fortifications. The prince

In the mean time the besieged in Oostend, having good intelligence of the
princes landing, began to rejoice, hoping to have some rest (as indeed they had
for a little time) but Oostend.
they did not leave to shoot their fiery bullets at a great bulwark which the
Spaniards had made, called Lou^quen Pot, where the fire took; the which the
archdukes men perceiving, they drew forth their ordnance, and suffered it to
burn.

Prince Maurice having done what he desired in the isle of Cadsant, being
loath to loose any time, he sent to discover the most convenient places to
enter into the maine of Flanders,

The archduke in the mean time was constrained to disperse his forces,
according to the advice of his counsel, and of his Estates, and to divide them
into three troops: one before Oostend, the second against prince Maurice, and
the third against the incursions of the mutiners, the which were about three
thousand foot, and one thousand and two hundred horse; to whom were joined a
thousand and six hundred of prince Maurice his horse, and a

Prince Maurice making his approaches to besiege the great fort of Isendike, he
changed his mind, resolving first to force three other forts, which lay near
unto it, so as on the first of May he camped before Saint Marguerites fort,
against the which there were some hundred 1604
there were about two thousand men, horse and foot, with the peasants, yet they
abandoned the place the night following, saving themselves by flight: And the
like was done by them that were in S. Katherines, and S. Philips forts,
notwithstanding that in all these three forts there were 3000 foot, and 16
companies of horse.

On the third of May the prince did in like manner besiege Isendike, whereas
he intrencht Isendike besieged.
himself in such sort by land, as nothing could get in or out; causing his
ordnance to be planted, and commanding certain ships of war to put to sea,
and to lie before it, with certain pinaces and long boats, to stop the
passage, that nothing might go in or out; so as they were very straightly
besieged, both by land and sea.

In the mean time the archdukes men which were on the other side of the haven
of Sluice, thinking now to have a good opportunity to recover the isle of
Cadsant, they caused a great number of boats to be brought from Bruges, in the
which (and in some others that were in Sluice) they did imbarke 2000 men. But
they that were appointed to guard the island by the prince (having suffered
about a thousand of them to land) they charged them so furiously, as they put
them to rout, most of them being Italians and Spaniards; who seeing themselves
so roughly entertained, crying a la barqua, a la barqua, they sought to recover
their boats again, where pressing to enter hastily into them, one of them was
overwhelmed, and a great number drowned: so as they could take but eighteen
prisoners, and eight boats. The prisoners were sent unto the prince.

On the eight day of May there came three soldiers out of Isendike, unto the
princes camp, who said, That they had want of all things in the fort, and
especially of fresh water: that if the canon played upon them, they would not
make any great resistance. Whereupon the prince sent to summon them the next
day, by one of his own trumpets, whom they slew with a musket shot. The prince
being much incensed for this outrageous act, committed against the law of arms
(which does not allow any such excess, unless the trumpet or drum (being
called unto) does not retire himself) he sent a drum, to demand him that
had committed this act; threatening them, That if they refused to deliver him,
he would not receive any one to mercy. Whereupon the besieged sent forth two
of their captains to excuse the fact; saying, That they knew not who had made
the shot: and being desirous to enter into Isendike yielded upon composition.
of this strong fort was made upon these conditions.

1 First, That the besieged should go out of the fort with their arms, and as
much baggage as they could carry, their matches out, and their drums silent.
2 That they should leave the ordnance, and all the munition of war. 3 That
for the space of 4 months, they should not carry any arms in Flanders,
against the prince nor the united Estates. 4 That they should furnish them with
shipping, to carry away their sick and hurt men unto the haven of Sas: which
ships they should be bound to send safely back again; for
The next day the prince went with a thousand foot, and seven cornets of horse,
before a little ruined town, intrencht with barricadoes, called Ardenbourg,
lying betwixt Gant and Sluice, the which is another passage, joining to a land
which is drowned by the sea, in the which there was a regiment of Germans, and
some troops of horse, to stop the passage; but they had as little courage and
resolution as the rest, flying into the marshes behind, and abandoning
withal, a good strong castle, into the which there were two thousand men put
in garrison, the which holds Sluice besieged on that side. Thus the prince
entered the second

When as the united provinces had resolved, upon the enterprise of Flanders
(having contracted 1604 An enterpise in Brabant, made by prince Maurice and the
squadron.
Westphalia, where they had committed many outrages, and insolences, upon the
poor people, clean contrary to their contract made with the united
provinces, whereupon the country bordering thereabouts, had held an assembly
at Essens, but to small purpose) they procured them to make an incursion with
them into Brabant, and Henault, the prince having lent them certain troops of
horse (as we have said) led by the drossart of Zeeland, who had three demie
canons with him, meaning thereby to divert the wars in Flanders. These were
appointed to go by the country of Liege into Brabant, along by the causey,
thereby to divert the archdukes forces, and to keep them from going strongly
into Flanders: the Squadron promising to spoil all the villages in Brabant,
and to force them to contribution; whereof

Whereunto the mutiners made answer, That they would have their full pay that
was due unto them; and for their securities, Mastricht, Venloo, or Ruiemonde:
and for hostages for the accomplishing thereof, they demanded the earl of
Fontenay, Stephano d' Ihanna, and Dom Alphonso d' Aualos: which done, they
would restore Hoochstraten and Carpen, with the ordnance of Erkelens. The
archduke was moved to yield unto their demands (for that there were some
inconveniences doubted in Flanders: and besides, there were 800 Spaniards more
at Gemblours, ready to mutine, and to join with them of Grave.
Notwithstanding this proposition, the mutiners marched forward with the Estates
horsemen, thereby to make the archduke Frederic being newly come into the
town, had put all things in good order) so as they were forced to retire, with
the loss of 30 men, and many hurt: yet they made certain shot with their
great ordnance, against the town (but to no purpose) where one of their pieces
burst. And so parting from thence, they went to Hanuyt, where they entered, on
the nine and twentieth day, and there rested certain days; but they would not
have the villages forced to pay any contribution, but that which was behind;
and yet they had promised Herman, earl Vanden Berghe, having obtained a
pasport, entered into the town of Grave, to make some other offer unto them,
and so to stay them from making any further invasion: but he returned the same
day; which they that were abroad understanding, from that time forward they so
carried themselves, as they would not commit any more insolences; but sought
delays to win time: for being moved by captain du Bois, and the drossart of
Zeeland, to march into Henault, and to do some exployt there, they answered,
That it was impossible for them to effect borders of Liege, for certain days,
and to keep them from Brabant, and so to free that province 1604
treaty with the archduke.

The Estates commanders seeing their determination, were forced to yield; yet,
after that, they found, that the mutiners themselves had advertised them of
Hoy, and willed them not to open their gates, thereby to have some new color
of excuse, and further delay; so as coming the fifth of May before Hoy, the
townes-men refused to open; so as they returned back to Cassy and by small
iourneyes approached near unto Henault, doing nothing upon the way, but sent out
messengers, to get in the contributio^ which the villages did owe, without any
further demand, so as the Estates horsemen could hardly get any victuals: and
sometimes going forth to seek some, they were slain. Upon the 10 of May they
entered into Henault, between du Bois and the drossart did certify prince
Maurice, by their letters, being in Flanders, and got the Squadron to consent
to lie there certain days; which staid the archdukes soldiers from going out
of Brabant into Flanders, fearing least they should follow them, or undertake
something in their absence: In the mean time the mutinous Squadron did nothing
else, but seek by all the means they could, to get in the arrerages of their
contribution, without attempting any other thing with the Estates soldiers,
which bred great jealousy and suspicion.

The sixteenth of May, the whole army (that only excepted which was left for
the guard of the isle of Cadsant) being dislodged from Isendyke, past by
Ardenbourg, taking Dom Louis de Velasco had intrencht himself at this passage,
being four thousand horse and foot; whereas the passage was so narrow, as two
horsemen could hardly march in front. The fort was defensible, and able to have
staid the princes army, yet after some resistance, they quitted the place, and
retired by Dam, unto the other side of the river. They lost at this charge two
hundred men upon the place slain and hurt, besides many that were drowned;
among the which there were eleven captains slain and prisoners, whereof two
were Italians, one of them Spinola's kinsman, and one Spaniard, a sergeant
mayor very

The same soldiers being on the other side of the river, made a show, as if
they would once more attend the prince; and to that end they lodged themselves
in a place of more advantage, than that which they had abandoned, having a
great channel, by the which the sea did flow unto the town of Bruges; and
besides that, the river and the banks which did cover them.

On the eighteenth of the month, part of the princes army having been all
night in battle, The prince camps before Sluice.
monsieur de Chastillon having the point with part of his French regiment,
thinking to go and charge them, he found that they had abandoned the place: So
the same day, at night, the army went and camped before Sluice: and upon the 23
day S. Georges fort (which stands upon Vander Aa, captain of his foot guards,
who had his arm shot off with a canon, and was thrust through the body with a
pike by an Italian; yet in the end the princes men were masters of all, even
unto the town ditches.

On the thirtieth of May, the archdukes men, being four thousand foot, and
2600 horse, thinking to put some men, victuals, and munition of war into
Sluice, were charged, and put Spinola's galleys being to no use in Sluice, they
took forth the slaves, and sent the^ out of the town, with some soldiers; who
being incountred by the princes troops, were presently amazed and dispersed.
About an hundred of these slaves being chained two and two together, fled unto
the princes 1604


On the fifth of June, being Whitson eve, general Spinola gave a furious assault
unto Oostend in three several places, with the greatest obstinacy that might
be. They renewed this assault thrice, and it continued eight hours. The
Spaniards had made certain mines, the which did more hurt unto themselves,
than unto the besieged, having given fire too soon. On the enemies side there
were 800 men slain, and 500 hurt; and among them the seigniour of Bossompiere,
who had been a great leaguer in France. Of the besieged there were about an
hundred slain, and some hurt.

On the seventeenth of June the enemy gave another assault, the which
continued from two of the clock in the afternoon, until eight at night, in
the which the Spaniards did win

The archduke having been constrained to employ a good part of his forces, to
suppress the insolences and incursions of the mutiners, the which he could
not do: he therefore The mutiners reconciled to the archdu^e
Maurice, who lay before Sluice: the which he did, upon promise, to pay them
what was due, remitting all which they had levied by way of contribution, with
an abolition and pardon of all that was past, and reuoking and disannulling the
proscription which was made against them: giving them for their security and
pay, the town of Ruremonde in the country of Gueldres, in hostage, to every
footman 12 pence a day, and to every horseman 2 shillings 6 pence, until
they had received their full pay.

According unto this accord made, with the consent of prince Maurice and the
united Estates they delivered up unto the archduke, the castles of Carpen and
Hoochstraten, with the artillery which they had taken from Erkelens, and to the
prince and the Estates, the town of Grave,

Prince Maurice having now no enemy in field, to make head against him, after
that he The disposition of the prince^ camp before Sluice.
had taken Saint Georges fort, and the Spaniards having abandoned a half moon
before the town, wherein they left four pieces of ordnance: having now no
more obstacles, he set down the order of his camp, making his own quarter
on the North side, the which he did fortify with many trenches, and square
forts, as well against the town, as the enemy William of Nassau, his cousin,
governor of Friseland, had his quarter fortified almost like unto the princes.
Cont Ernest, brother to cont William, was somewhatfurther off, on the West part
of the town, entrenched and fortified as the rest, with a bridge upon the
river of Kreck, to go to Sternenbourg, upon the South-west. Within the drowned
land, there were fourteen ships, and some barks, the which was the quarter of
colonel Vander Noot, with some square forts.

The prince having caused them of Sluice to be summoned, their answer was, That
they had store of powder and bullets for him. Whereupon it was told them, That
the prince was sufficiently informed, that they wanted both the one and the
other. And although that the prince had so straightly besieged Sluice, both by
trenches, forts, and palisadoes, yet seven

The prince wished there had entered more men, that they might consume their
victuals the vander 1604
Noot to keep a guard in his ships, and where as the greater vessels could not
go, he should place boats, with five or six soldiers in either of them, to
remain there in guard; so as it seemed, that not any one could get in or out:
whereupon there were four or five messengers with letters taken in the same
place.

The besieged seeing themselves thus pressed, made certain sallies, but of small
importance, and to their loss, the princes canon being so planted against all
their sallies, as they could not peep out of the town, without the loss of
many men.

Certain soldiers come from the siege of Oostend, had taken their way whereas
the rest had past, where being gathered together, they called unto them that
were in the boats (thinking them. In the end these Spaniards finding their own
error (but too late) cried out, Good God, whither go we? we have committed an
error which will cost us dear: we were blind, or asleep, to put our selves
thus infortunatly into our enemies hands. What reason had we to leave a good
country, to come into these cursed marshes, and to dye of hunger in a baren
meadow? Whereat the captain of the ships begun to laugh, seeing them thus
perplexed, to whom he said, You are come somewhat too late in all things,
especially in matter of enterprises, whereas time imports much: but despair
not, we will not leave you here, but will bring you to our storehouse of
cheese, where we will entreat you so well in that respect, as you Maurice, how
it stands with the siege of Oostend, I will employ my best credit to set you at
liberty: the which he did; for after they had been examined, and paid their
ransomes, as soldiers, they were let go into Sluice.

The prince understood from these prisoners, and others, That the archdukes men
pretended to put great store of victuals and munition into the town; which was
to deprive him of the most assured means to take it speedily, whereon he did
chiefly ground his design. To prevent this danger and inconvenience; besides
the approaches and fortifications of his camp (wherein the soldiers and
mariners labored continually) he fortified the seigniour Vander Noot with
some troops, commanding him in particular (for that the

The besieged expecting this conuoy, they sent forth fifteen hundred gally
slaves, and five hundred soldiers, at the very instant, when as the tide was
gone out of the drowned land; but they could not pass, by reason of the good
order which the prince had set, and their careful guard. Some fourscore and
ten of these slaves escaped, who came and yielded themselves at the princes
camp, who after he had asked them some questions, suffered them to go where
they pleased. In the mean time this conuoy approached secretly, the which
being come unto the drowned land, they were so entertained by the ordnance, as

Upon this alarm given to the camp, the prince pursued them with a part of
his army, The convey overtaken by the prince, and defeated.
and having overtaken them near unto Dam (in the same place where he had
defeated the others some days before) even as they had caused some of their
wagons to pass over, after that he had shot two vollies, with two field
pieces, which he had brought with him, he charged them suddenly: their
horsemen, being a thousand, fled to Dam, whither the footmen followed; and the
carters left their horses, to save themselves. Thus this conuoy was put to
rout, of the which there were a great number slain, and two hundred prisoners
taken: they had an hundred wagons laden with meal and other victuals and
munition, which they had laden at Bruges; all which was lost, and served to
victual the princes camp: Another conuoy in rout.
which were carried to the camp.

The besieged being out of hope of all relief, were amazed, and did try if
they could free 1604
out the same way; but they were beaten back into the town, as before, and
yet some forty of them escaped.

There was another letter surprised from the governor unto the archduke,
whereby he did advertise him, That he was straightly besieged without the town,
but within he was incountred with two cruel enemies, hunger and gally slaves.

The besieged and the besiegers entertained one another daily with their shot,
but they within the town were better husbands, reserving their shot and powder
at greater need, for an assault. There appeared daily some of the archdukes
troops, to give courage to the besieged, and to try some means to succor
them: Once among the rest there came 9 corners of horse Ernests quarter, who
seeing good guard kept, retired, through favor of the night, without any
exploit.

The prince in the mean time, as well to keep the soldiers occupied, as to
be prepared for all events, caused diverse trenches, platformes, and bridges to
be made, as well to pass over waters, as to go covered unto the assault.
Sometimes a dike brake in the camp, which filled all their trenches with
water, and made them work for eight days to repair it: during the which the
besieged seeing that the princes men shot not at them, they cried out, Where is
now your canon have you laid it to pawn in the Lombard? be gone ye beggars, be
gone. To whom they answered, You shall see it but too soon, to your loss,
with the which we will have you shortly, and then we will go and raise the
siege of Oostend, with other such soldier like threats. The besieged Many
soldiers come to the prince.
thirty, or more. There came four hundred Switsers at one time, the which,
with others that came before, had their quarter under cont Ernest. The lord of
Terms arrived also, with a good troop of French horse, who was very kindly
entertained by the prince, and after they had walked about an hour with cont
William of Nassau, they supt together.

There was very good martial discipline, and severe justice in the camp,
which made all

The besieged shot much at the princes ships which lay in the haven, to drive
them out, or to sink them: but the captains having commandment to continue
there still, they vanquished their importunat shooting by patience, so as they
were forced to cease, and to spare their powder. The princes men shot at the
wind-mils within the town, and beat them down.

By reason of the inundation of the country, which was covered with water, the
town could not be so straightly besieged on all sides, as the prince desired:
for there are certain meadows,

The united Estates commanded public prayers and fasting throughout all their
provinces, to crave assistance at Gods hand, in this important action. The
prince did also command the like throughout all his army, forbidding them to
buy or sell any thing that day, upon pain of death.

If the prince did press the town without, hunger did afflict them more
within: among The besieged in Sluice in great extremity.
other necessaries, they had great want of wood to bake their bread, so as they
were constrained to pull down houses to that end; which made them to practice
all means to write unto the archduke, and to acquaint him with the estate of
the town. A Spaniard went out of the town on horseback, to try if he could
find a passage, but being discovered by the guards, he fled back into the
town leaving his horse behind, the which was drowned. 1604


The fourth of July Cont Henry Frederick the princes brother, with Cont Ernest,
and Lewis, with some soldiers, being weary to lie so long idle without any
action, went even unto the gates of Dam, where as the sentinel gave the alarm
presently: these young noble men staying to brave it before the town, were
soon charged with the garrison which was much

The mutinous soldiers of Hochstraten having made their peace, and compounded
with The mutiners serve the Archduke at the relief of Sluse.
the Archduke, being two thousand strong, they went to serve him in Flanders at
the relief of Sluse, where they showed themselves more forward than any, and
diverse of them were slain: but many of them having received their full pay,
ran away, some home into their own country, others fearing punishment went and
served prince Maurice; among the which two of the chief being both horsemen,
left their fellows being in Roemonde, and went to the Grave, (their names were
Thomas Viller and Papouken) with a good troop with them, who upon the 17 of
August came before Sluse to the princes, army, where they carried themselves
very valiantly; so as Papouken being banished out of the united provinces, for
that he had been one of them that had sold Geertruydenbergh, in regard of his
valor and experience, was reconciled Maurice.

The prince assuring himself to take Sluse by famine, caused his batteries to
cease, for that he would spare his powder and shot.

And the Archduke weighing the necessity of the besieged, and the great
importance of that place, meaning not to defer it, after the taking of
Oostend, as he had hitherto done, he resolved to succor them: to which end he
sent the marquess Spinola with a good number of the best soldiers which he had
before Oostend. The prince knowing his victory to depend Spinola comes to
relieve ^luse.
only on the prevention of these succors, prepared himself to resist them,
visiting his camp often, and giving order for the guards and fortifications,
and for all things necessary to receive

On the 28 of July, their succors camped betwixt Bruges and Dam, being ten
thousand men, who conducted six hundred wagons laden with meal, and other
provisions to relieve the town: from thence the Archdukes men went before
Mittlebourgh, the which they took by composition, yet the castle held out 4 or
five days longer for the prince: then they passed close by Ardenbourg, where
as they skirmished with the garrison of the town,

The 29 and 30 of the month, they showed themselves toward the quarter of
colonel Vander Noot, and there took a little fort which the princes men had
abandoned. In the mean time they played so furiously upon them from three
batteries, as they were forced to give back: they left six and thirty men in
this fort, the which was presently recovered by the princes men, and those
within it put to the sword. The besieged meaning to make a passage for their
succors, the next day made a sallie with two hundred men, who carried a
certain bridge to cast over the channel, but they were driven back into the
town, without any exploite doing. Spinola seeing that he could not enter into
the town by the quarter of Vander Noot, he sent some part of his troops to
camp near unto the village of Lapschuyre, by the which he thought to find a
more easy passage.

The prince knowing that the enemies design was to cast himself into the
town by the fort of Pimster Blom, in 48 hours he made a great trench to cut
off his passage. Those which labored making some show of fear, for that the
enemies small shot played continually upon 1604
Spinola's men made sundry attempts to force the camp, but they were still
repulst with loss. The prince seeing the enemy camped so near him, caused*
64. pieces of ordnance to be mounted betwixt the qua^ters of cont Ernestus and
Vander Noot, commanding the cannoniers to discharge every piece once in an
hour both day and night; the which did a great execution, and slew above 500
men in 24 hours.

The besieged in the mean time did all they could to favor their succors,
and did often send of their men toward Spinola; whereof some past, but most of
them were taken by the way. Spinola also for his part omitted nothing that
might be put in practice; he caused certain caualiers and batteries to be
made in his trenches to shoot into the princes camp, especially upon a bridge
400 paces long, the which was before the mariners fort, making a show Spinolas
pioners, the which disappointed that design.

Omitting to make a particular repetition of all the batteries, skirmishes, and
ordinary exercises of soldiers before Sluice; in the end the number of Spinolas
men decreased daily, as well through the spoil which the princes canon made,
as by reason of other discommodities: and as it is an ordinary thing, that one
mischief draws on another, the soldiers being Spinolas men run away.
tired with such toil, ran away to the prince in troops of 40 or 50 at a
time, the number whereof in a short space came to seven or eight hundred men;
beside those that did steal

This did trouble Spinola, but the necessity of the besieged did much perplex
him, seeing there was no means to make a passage into the town, but by a
general combat: wherefore he resolved to force the princes camp, and on the 6
of August, having discovered that cont Williams quarter was the weakest, he
assailed it in the morning: his horsemen had every one a musketier behind him,
they charged and entered the trenches, where they did fight valiantly on both
sides; whereas the combat was doubtful and cruel. At this fight ^hey of the
town caused their bells to be rung, to move every one to pray unto God for the
good success of the archdukes army: some cried out victory already: the
advantage inclined sometimes Spinolas men to slye. There were a great number
slain of either side, but the greatest number were of the archdukes men, who
were slain in the retreat. At night Spinolas men presented themselves before
the same place, as if they had an intent to charge again, but seeing the
princes men more resolute than before, they retired. Yet Spinola not satisfied
with this assault, having discovered a marish place toward Lapschuyre, where
there were no ships in guard, he sent certain men in a boat, who found the
place full of stakes and piles, so as there was no means for their boat to
pass: one of them cast himself into the water to swim into the town, but
being discovered by the sentinel, he returned.

Their wants were exceeding great within the town; the best bread was made of
all sorts The great want in the town.


The^ made a sallie of 40 men on the 14 day of August at night, and being in
fight, there came 50 of the archdukes men to join with them; but they found
such resistance, as either of them was forced to retire from whence they came,
without any great effect. This was 1604
into prince Maurice his trenches, entertaining the sentinel with words, that
he might get away; saying, That he was the round: the corporal being come at
the sentinels call, demanding the word, he slew him, and so past on.

Spinola being well informed of the estate of the town, and seeing that he
could not relieve it, nor enter, as he had imagined, he retired in great have,
without sound of drum or trumpet, in the night about 10 of the clock, on the 16
of August: and the same night he went with all speed by Ardenbourg, unto
Ostbourg, where, without any stay, he went before S. Katherines fort, in the
which there were 70 soldiers in garrison for the prince; the which he
battered, and took by composition. The besieged did their duties* and would
not yield, until they had filled

The prince being advertised of Spinola's retreat, he took a certain number
of soldiers out of every quarter, and went after him. Spinola seeing himself
pursued, put his army into battle, near unto Ostbourg behind a dike. The
prince charged him furiously, having given the point unto his musketeers. In
the end Spinola was forced to retire, leaving 300 of his men upon the place.
The prince lost some ^0. The same day the prince sent to advertise them of the
town that their succors were defeated: and his men burnt Spinola's camp. For
all this Spinola fled not, but had another design, meaning to enter into
Cadsant, whereas the besieged would have made a bridge. He took S. Philips fort
also by composition, having not then above 4000 men in his army. The prince
having observed his design out of Vander Noots quarter, went to Coxie, Spinola
must pass, sending cont William before, to hinder his passage at a certain
small square fort; the which Spinola did charge furiously: and the princes men
made such resistance, as they spent al their powder and shot, defending
themselves a good space with their pikes, halberds, and swords; who were in
danger to be forced, but for the virtue and valor of cont William (who had
withstood the assault in his trenches, on the 6 of August, and now again he
performed the duty of a courageous soldier, and a valiant captain, giving a
goodly example unto his followers.) In the mean time the prince sent them 4
fresh companies, with powder and shot, the which did so encourage his men, as
they repulst their enemy, and slew three or four hundred upon the place;
among the which was the marquess of Renty, of the house of Lalaine and Croy,
Alphonso Borgias, a commander of the Spanish foot, and monsieur Maintenon, a
French man, with diverse other men of command; whose bodies, with the soldiers
permission, were ransomed.

From thence Spinola went and camped before Isendike; but in the end, seeing
his number so decreased, and his soldiers so daunted with so many losses, he
retired, and effected not any thing, being the 18 of August. The same day the
besieged, being without all hope of succors, they sent an It^ian captain,
called Lippin, unto the prince, to demand 6 or 7 days liberty, to They of
Sluice demand a parle
advertise the archduke of the estate of the town, and to treat of their
yielding. To whom the prince answered, That he would give them six weeks, as
soon as six days. The women and children stood upon the rampars, attending
the princes mercy; who refusing to give any time unto the besieged, in the end
Lippin besought him to send three hostages into the town, for

The next day betwixt 8 and 9 of the clock, the prince sent Elst, Eckeren, and
a Frenchman, all three captains: and there came unto the camp Lippin, the
sergeant mayor of the town, and the earl of Styerems lieutenant; who trifling
out the time in long discourses, and impertinent demands, the prince said unto
them, Choose one of these conditions, If you deliver up the town The princes
offers to them of Sluice.
on the 20 of this month, I will suffer you to depart with your arms, matches
light, bullets in the mouth, colors flying, and all that belongs unto
soldiers. If you attend until the 21, you shall carry away nothing but your
swords. And if you stay until the 22, I will have you at my discretion.

Hereupon two of the deputies, leaving the third in hostage, returned unto the
town, with The articles of the composition.


1 That all churchmen might depart with their ornaments, goods, and all that
belonged unto them.

2 That the governor, captains, officers, and soldiers, of what condition
soever, as also 1604
freely unto Dam, with their baggage, arms, and colors flying, bullets in
their mouths, drums sounding, and matches light: and to that end they should
have barks and boats to convey them to Dam, for the which they should give
hostages, until they returned.

3 That the governor, and the seigniour Aurelio Spinola, should be bound to
deliver into the hands of such as his Excellency should depute, all the
gallyes, barks, and fregates, ordnance, powder, and all that belonged unto
them: as also the town canon, munition for war, and all other engines and
instruments, without any fraud or spoil done unto them.

4 That the gally slaves should be all set at liber^ie, without any exception,
and it should be lawful for them that would follow the garrison, being once
at liberty, to do it freely.

5 That all prisoners should be delivered without ransom, upon condition, That
the governor, and the seignior Aurelio Spinola, should procure, that captain
Say, having been taken prisoner with the mariners, by them of Boisleduc, and
captain Iay of Raed, being prisoner with his men in Viluoord, as also the
three mariners of Breda, being prisoners at Gant, shall be set at liberty,
every one paying a months pay to those that took them, and their charges: or
for want thereof, the said Aurelio Spinola, shall promise, upon his faith and
word, under his hand and seal, to put himself prisoner into his excellencies
hands.

6 That no man shall be detained for any debt or money, which the bourgers have
lent unto the governor and others, the governor promising to give them
satisfaction in the town of Bruges.

7 That all muster-masters, and other officers, which have managed the
accounts and paying of soldiers, may also depart freely with their mouable
goods and papers touching their charges, not taking away any of the charters or
registers of the town.

8 That all officers and commissaries of the victuals, of the admiraltie, and
of the king of Spaines army shall do the like.

9 That the governor shall be bound to deliver the castle this night into his
Excellencies hands, that he may put 200 men into it.

10 That to morrow the garrison shall depart out of the town.

Made in the camp before Sluice, the 19 of August 1604.

Behold how the united Estates took this town of Sluice, by prince Maurice,
their great captain, What the prince found in the town.
great galleys, whereof 7 were very much shaken (but afterward repaired by
them) the rest were very good and new, with a great number of other sorts of
boats; 84 pieces of brass, and 24 of iron, with great store of powder,
bullets, and other munition for war; the which made them much stronger, both by
sea and land.

And with these honorable conditions they departed out of Sluice, being about
4200 men, almost hunger starued.

The Estates after this conquest, being contented for this year with the
importance thereof, spent some time in fortifying Sluice, and Isendike, the which
they did enlarge more than half, and have made it a good town, with a capable
haven: they fortified Ardenbourg also, and

The archduke having lost Sluice, resolved to have Oostend, rather to repair
his honor 1604
not in so great danger, as the good of his wives country which he enjoyed;
whereas now there was no practice nor invention omitted to take the town: And
the besieged, being encouraged by the victory of Sluice, made a wonderful
resistance: there was a generous emulation, and miraculous deeds of arms.

There were diverse mines made, which wrought diverse effects, sometimes hurtful
to the besieged, and sometimes to the assaylants. Spinola having made his
approches, by mine and other devises to Sandhill, he resolved to give an
assault; but finding the Spaniards unwilling, and to fly from all services,
for the envy that they bare unto him and to the Italians, he made choice of
the Germane regiments, under the earls of Folgia, and of Barlaimont, being
most Spinola gave unto these soldiers out of his own bounty forty thousand
gulderns to drink, with great thanks and commendations.

The besieged expected succors daily, but they failed them, as there is
nothing more doubtful than the events of war. There was great hazard in the
relief of Oostend, the which although the siege had been raised, could hardly
have been kept, and in the end would have wearied the united Estates,
especially wanting succors from England, by reason of the peace concluded
betwixt the kings of England and Spain: besides it might be dangerous for the
Estates army, if they should fail in their attempt, or receive any affront,

The besieged in Oostend having attended succors a month after the taking of
Sluice, and had sent often unto the united Estates, and to the prince
aduertising them in what estate they They of Oostend resolve to compound.
were, and that the archdukes Germans had taken a part of the town, from
whence in short time they might cut off their haven, and deprive them of the
benefit of the sea; they thought that without doing wrong unto their honors,
they might lawfully compound with so courageous an enemy: besides they had
advice from the prince, to make the most honorable

According to which advise monsieur Marquet governor of the town of Oostend,
with the council of war, entered into treaty with the marquess Spinola; and
having first sent aaway their best ordnance into Zeeland, leaving some only for
a show, they yielded the town unto the archduke, leaving it all ruined, and
without inhabitants, after a siege of three years An honorable composition at
Oostend.
and eleven weeks (the which has not been seen these many hundred years in
Christendom) and departed the 22 of September, with their full arms, and
marching like soldiers in battle, with four pieces of ordnance, and munition
for ten shot, (the most honorable

The archduke having Oostend at command, would needs go see in what estate the
town was; whereas they found nothing but hills of earth and trenches, and
heaps of stones of the houses and churches which had been ruined with the
canon, where they had work enough to repair, so as he was forced to
entertain his army there all the rest of the summer, before he could bring it
to any good order, and cast down his trenches, with many of the forts. For the
repeopling of this town, he granted goodly privileges, and gave land by
inheritance to them that would build and inhabit there, with immunitie of
excises and customs for certain years, and accommodating the garrison as
well as he could.

It is uncertain what numbers were slain during this siege of Oostend, yet it
is said, that there was found in a commissaries pocket, who was slain before
Oostend the 7 of August before the yielding thereof, diverse remarkable notes
and obseruarions, and among the rest what number died without in the archdukes
camp of every degree.

Masters of the camp 7. 1604
Colonels 15. Sergeant majors 29. Captains 565. Lieutenants 1116. Ensigns
322. Sergeants 1911. Corporals 1166. Lanspisadoes 600. Soldiers 54663.
Mariners 611. Women and children 119.

All which amount to 72124 persons.

Which number is not so great considering the long siege, sickness, and the
cold winters upon the sea coast, in so cold a clymat, fighting against the
elements. It is unknown what number died in the town, the which is thought
was much less, for that there were not so many in the town, who were better
lodged, had more ease, and were better victualed.

At the same time about three hundred horse of the united estates, made a
sudden incursion into the country of Luxembourg, whereas they surprised the
town of Arlon, the which they spoiled a whole day together at their pleasures:
then carrying away their booty, and many good prisoners, they came to Duyts
right against Cologne, where having shipped their goods and prisoners, they sent
them by the Rhin into Holland, and they returned by land into the united
provinces, to their garrisons.

The Marquis Spinola having (as we have said) finished the siege of Oostend,
and won thereby much honor and reputation, he was sent by the archdukes into
Spain, as well to The marquess Spinola goes into Spain.
give an account of his actions, as to procure a new provision of money, and to
receive the reward of his services from the king; the which were such, as at
his audience in the kings chamber, Seuerino, whereof he gave him the title, he
made him lieutenant general to the archdukes in the Netherlands, gave him the
earldom of Vogira in the duchy of Milan in Italy, with a pension of twelve
thousand crowns a year for his diet; commanding he should be put in the
number of the Grandos of Spain, besides other goodly rewards which the king
gave him.

Sluice being taken, Lodowike Gunther earl of Nassau, who had married the
countess of The death of Lodowike earl of Nassau.
Walckenstein, and Broeke being sick, died in Sluice: this Lodowike was the
son of old John earl of Nassau, and brother to William and Ernest earls of
Nassau, being a gallant young earl, and one that was much lamented, having been
employed in many great enterprises: and at the same time prince Maurice, and
diverse others were also sick.

In remembrance of the long siege of Oostend, and the winning of Sluice, there
were certain counters made in the united provinces, both of silver and copper,
the one having on the one side the picture of the town of Oostend; and on the
other the towns of Rhinberke, Grave, Sluice, Ardenbourgh, and the forts of
Isendyke, and Cadsant, with this inscription round about it, Plus triennio
obsessa, hostirudera, patriae quatuor ex me vrbes dedi. Anno 1604. Oostend
being more than three years besieged, gave the enemy a heap of stones, and
to her native country four towns. Another counter, having on the one side
the siege of Sluice with this inscription. Traxit, duxit, dedit. Anno 1604. On
the other side were the arms of Zeeland, and round about it, Beatus populus
cuius adiutor deus.

The town of Vtrecht did also make a triumphant piece of coin, both of gold
and silver, Iehoua prius dederat plus quam perdidimus. 1604.

The king of England being quietly seated in the royal possession of the
crown, the king of Spain, and the archdukes had sent their ambassadors into
England to make an ouerture of a peace (as we formerly showed) and this year,
on the nineteenth of May certain commissioners came into England to that end,
during the siege of Oostend and Sluice: for the Archdukes came the earl of
Arembergh, sir John Richardot president, and sir Lewis Vereycken, secretary of
estate; and for the king of Spain came Alexander Rouido, doctor and councellor
for the king in Milan, who had in his company as an assistant Martin de la
Falia, Baron Van Niuele: but Dom Joan Fernandes de Velasco, Constable of
Castilia and Leon, duke of Frias, ea^ of Hara etc. counselor of estate, and
for the wars, had only full power and authority to conclude for the king of
Spain; who remaining sick at Wynoxberghen in Flanders, by virtue of his
commission, gave authority to Joan Baptista Taxis earl of Villa Mediana, and
to doctor Rouido to treat. What followed in this treaty, I think it needless
to 1604


After the conclusion of this peace betwixt England, Spain, and the archdukes,
the general Estates of the united provinces called sir Noel Caron their agent
(then resident in England) to come home into Holland, and to acquaint them with
the estate of England since the peace with Spain; whereupon the king gave him
letters of recommendation, with certain instructions concerning the money
which was owing by the united provinces unto the crown of England, the king
desiring that ambassadors should be sent over unto him to that end, the which
was done accordingly. The general Estates returned sir Noel Caron back into
England, giving him the title of their ambassador, and commission to carry
himself so in all places: the The united provinces give their Agent in
England, the title of their ambassador. The Spanish ambassador complains of
it.
which made many to wonder, and the Spanish ambassador to storm, who presently
demanded The kings answer.
to make answer for them: showing him further, that he was not restrained by
the contract from giving audience unto any of their servants, in what quality,
or howsoever they would name him, leaving that to their discretions: and that
he would show himself unto them, as he had been accustomed to do: and that it
was no wonder if he followed the example of other princes, who would not do
any thing that was inconvenient, and not beseeming their mutual friendship,
who had already received their servants by the names of ambassadors, and sent
theirs unto them, with the like titles. With which answer the Spanish
ambassador contented

This year in May Peter Ernest earl of Mansfeld, governor of Luxembourg,
died in the Death of Ernest earl of Mansfeld.
Netherlands, a man who in his life time had been in many honorable
employments: and for that he was one who had managed many causes in the
Netherlands, I thought it fit to make a brief relation of his life.

He was borne in the year 1517, and brought up in the court of Ferdinando king
of the Romans, and afterward emperor: at 18 years of age, in the year 1535,
he was with the emperor His life.
Charles the 5, at the siege of Thunis, and was caruer to the emperor: in the
year 1543, he came into the Netherlands, and commanded a company of horse
before Landresie: in the year 1544, he was made lieutenant colonel of 1000
horse, under the baron of Brederode, Marie queen of Hongarie regent of the
Netherlands, as General of the army into France, he took the towns of
Astenay, Montfalcon, Grenu, Pree, and others: after that being in the town of
Iocoy, he was besieged and wounded, and the town being taken, he was led
prisoner into France, where he remained five years; and in the year 1557, he
was set free upon a great ransom. The same year he was sent ambassador from
the emperor to an assembly of army before Dourlans, where the king of Spain
was himself in person. In the year 1565, he 1604
bride from Lisbon, whom he brought into the Netherlands. In the year 1566, in
the beginning of the troubles in the Netherlands, he was by the duchess of
Parma made governor of Brussels; and was a means to moderat the said
troubles. In the year 1567, he pacified (...) troubles in Antuerpe, and
continued governor there until the coming of the duke of Alua: after which
time he did convey the duchess of Parma unto Plaisance in Italy. In the year
1569, he was sent into France by the king of Spain, to aid the French king
against the Huguenots, where he won great honor at the battle of
Montcounter, where he had his right arm lamed. In the duke of Aluaes time he
had the charge of 2000 horse in Luxembourg, when as the prince of Orange was
before Berghen in Henault. In the great commanders time he was marshall of the
camp, and commanded over 2000 horse, at such time as Lodouike earl of Dom
John of Austria's time (when as a peace was made, and the Spaniards to depart
out of the Netherlands) he had charge to convey a great number of them into
Italy. After that, the peace being broken, he took part with Dom John, and so
continued until his death. In the prince of Parma's time, he was marshall of
the field, at the siege of Mastricht; and after that he went with some troops
into Gueldres: then he was sent into Henault, and made governor of Arthois,
Henault, Ryssel, and Douay (until that the prince of Parma had performed
Ernestus archduke of Austria; after whose death, in the year 1594, he was
again made governor for a time. And in the year 1597, under cardinal
Albertus government, he was made marshal of the field; the which he did
execute, although he had been governor himself. Being very Francis, in the
town of Luxembourg. He married with Marguerite, daughter to the baron of
Brederode, by whom he His children:
had three sons and one daughter: the first was Charles earl of Mansfeldt* a
gallant soldier, who dyed in Hongarie (serving under the emperor against the
Turk) without issue. His second son was slain in a quarrel betwixt him and
the vicont of Gant. The third son was Octauius, earl of Mansfeldt, who was
slain before Knodsenbourg sconce. His daughter married, against his will, with
Palimedes, bastard to Rene of Chalon, earl of Nassau, who was slain before
Saint Desir, and in his mothers right was called prince of Orange and of
Chalon. This Palimedes had two sons, both which served under the archduke,
the one dying of a wound which he had received; and the other being a colonel,
was in suit with the bastard son of Peter Ernest, earl of Mansfeldt, touching
the inheritance.

This year, during the winter time, the provinces under the archduke, sought
to have the The archduke will no: suffer the general Estates of Brabant to
assemble.
general Estates assembled at Brussels; the which the archduke would not
allow, for that the united provinces had written unto the chief towns in
Brabant and Flanders, aduertising them of certain designs of the archdukes:
which letters were discovered by some of them unto the archduke, whereupon he
did forbid the receiving of any such letters; commanding they should be
brought sealed unto him, which bred certain iealousies and distrusts, for that
many had given him advice, not to suffer the general Estates to assemble, who
without doubt would propound such matters unto him, as he should be forced to
yield unto them; the thousand gulderns, which at the first the bishops and
prelates (in the name of the whole clergy) 1604
the soldiers. They of Brussels refused to pay chimny money, and so did they of
Flanders: but there was some hope of a peace, and to that end certain articles
of peace were dispersed abroad, as if they had come from the king of Spain; and
at that time there were both letters and ambassadors sent to the Hage in
Holland. It was also reported that the marquess Spinola at his coming into
Spain, had 300 thousand gulderns a month promised him by the king, with other
sums of money to pay the mutynous soldiers, and for the entertainment of the
archdukes court: wherewith the Estates and the common people were put in good
comfort, and so contented themselves for a time. The archduke with the help he
had from the provinces that were under his command, and by means of certain
bills of exchange that were come The archduke prepares to war.


The united provinces began also to think upon their preparations, for that
upon the 16 of The united prouiaces prepare for war.
October past the council of estate had informed the general Estates what was
to be done concerning the wars: desiring that an army might be sent to field
in the beginning of the nextspring, whereby they might fortify such places as
they had gotten in Flanders: as also that some course might be taken for the
payment of all their arrerages of debts, the which could not be discharged the
year before, for that their receipts were less than their disbursements;

There was a demand of 4 stiuers upon every barrel of beer, to be paid by
them that drew it, and twenty stiuers upon every barrel of salt, toward the
payment of the money due to the king of England; as also to have consideration
of the general interest, and that they would continue the conuoy^s and
licenses. To aid the admiralty with 400 thousand gulderns, which they were in
arrerages, notwithstanding all booties and prizes. That they would consent unto

To this end upon the first of November, the Estates sent unto the provinces to
gather the monthly contribution, as follows viz. of Gelderland and Zutphen
monthly 28286 gulderns 2 stiuers, 7 deniers; of Holland, 337646 gulderns, 4
stiuers, 8 deniers; Zeeland, 83029 gulderns, 4 stiuers, 5 deniers; Vtrecht,
35131 gulderns, 18 stiuers, 7 deniers; Frizeland, 69721 gulderns, 16 stiuers,
11 deniers; Oueryssel, 16770 gulderns, 1 stiuer, 8 den. Groningue, 39271
gulderns, 16 causes: so as it seemed the united provinces had resolved to make
an offensive war 1604
pay before, with 36 cornets of horse: besides, they had contracted with the
marquess of Auspach, for 1000 Dutch reisters to be newly levied. They did
also expect great aid from the French king: they of France aduising them to go
early to field, with 170 or 200 companies of foot, and 36 or 40 cornets of
horse, that they might attempt something before the marquess Spinola were
ready. And this was their design for the year following.

This winter and the precedent, there were great means made to procure a peace
in the Netherlands, especially by the emperor and the house of Austria, who
did affect it the more in regard of the division of the empire; and the rather
for that France and England had now abandoned the united provinces, but
especially for that the empire was much troubled with Stephanus Botschkay took
upon him to be their leader: and besides this disordered government, bad pay
and mutiny of the soldiers, they sought by means of the Jesuits, to force men's
consciences, and to alter their long reformed religion in so dangerous a time,
of civil and foreign wars; and for that cause they grounded their rebellion
upon the same foundation, which the Netherlanders had done, as breach of
privileges, government

In the mean time there were many things propounded how a peace might be made:
the Certain considerations of peace, being very weighty, containing three
points. The first.
which for that it is a matter of great importance, I have thought it fit to
be inserted. One terming himself a Netherlander, and yet dwelling out of
those countries, sets down his opinion in three special points, and first
concerning the bad government of the united provinces: Secondly, that they will
not be still able to continue the wars: and thirdly, that they shall be forced to
submit themselus under Spain, France or England. Of these 3 points he makes a
long discourse; and also of the forces and qualities of each one in particular.
If any man would argue and maintain that it were the best course to yield the
countries over to prince Maurice, in regard Maurice to undertake so great a
quarrel with the Estates of Holland and Zeeland; and that they which are so
well seated, and at this present in the government would not willingly give
their consents, unless they were forced thereunto by the said kings. Therefore
he sets down a means how to settle the archdukes after another manner in the
said Netherlands: which if it were not found good and convenient, then they
should devise how to further prince Maurice in this design. The means he
speaks of are, That seeing the king of Spain and the archdukes are so united,
as they are not to be trusted in regard of the maxim of pias frauds, holy
deceits, that therefore to bring the 17 provinces into Ferdinand and Maximilian,
with the like conditions: and if it so fell out, that the said successor in the
Netherlands were chosen to be emperor, he should then likewise give over his
title to the Netherlands, unto the next heirs males of the same house: and
that if the whole house of Austria should chance to die, and be extinct, only
the emperor and

It should be also necessary that the king of Spain should give security for
the effecting 1604
and France with the Netherlands should force him thereunto, with the consent of
the emperor; which he affirms is easy to be done, by many reasons by him
alleged; and for that cause men must take heed of the Jesuits maxims, or
subtle fetches. He also makes answer to many arguments objected to the
contrary by the Spaniards, who would not endure to be cut off from their
patrimoniall inheritance: but Christian peace ought to persuade him thereunto,
that so he may employ all his power against the Turk: therewith he sets
down certain articles to be observed in this peace, which are 6 in number;
which if the king of Spain will not agree unto, and that the said articles
were not liked on either part, then the kings of France and England, shall
seek to put the said countries (if it were possible) into the hands of prince
Maurice of Nassau; but the other contract with the archdukes (he says) were
better: he shows moreover, what profit all Christendom may expect and attend
by the said peace, wherein we should neither fear pope nor Jesuit, but call a
general council, whether it were with the good liking or otherwise of the
pope; and according to the decrees thereof, to begin a war against the Turk,
in such order as monsieur la Noue describes, whereunto all other princes would
willingly give consent: and by that means the golden world would begin again.

Another being a catholic and under the archdukes government sets down
certain reasons for a peace, as follows. He shows the strength of the
united provinces which are compassed in with the seas, and great rivers that
are nauigable, having great store of shipping, The second reason to move men
unto a peace, made by a catholic under the archduke.
therewith to provide them of all things necessary: and on the other side he
sets down Andrew and Creueoecur, the ships in the river of Scheld, in 2
fortes upon the Scheld, the Sas of Gant, Sluice, Hulst, Hochstraten, and the
fort of Isabella before Oostend, etc. and that these mutinies were likely to
increase, for that they make no musters, as they were wont to do, allowing the
soldiers 4 stiuers a day: which

Furthermore, he sets down the Spaniards high minds, who will rather see
the Netherlands go to ruin, than they will yield; adding withal, that there
is no likelihood of peace to be made by men of several religions, for that
they had lately caused a poor woman to be buried quick, having been better to
have banished her, seeing she could neither teach nor preach.

Touching the attayning to a peace, by means of the wars; their mighty
neighbors would not endure it, the Spaniards high mind being suspected by all
the princes of Europe:

To conclude, seeing that he perceived nothing else but disorder and despair,
he feared that the French trumpets would in the end suddenly awaken them, the
causes of wars being as 1604
pretenses and reasons to move them thereunto, and what were to be feared if
the French men should once show themselves upon the frontiers; how hardly could
it be prevented, but that upon some conditions they would put themselves into
the French kings hands, and so they should presently be enclosed by the enemy,
as by the Hollanders and the sea, and by the French men, having nothing but
Luxemburgh open, which might easily be shut up; so as there were no aid to
be expected but from heaven, which does not open every day to show forth
miracles: but setting miracles aside, he asks, where they should have corn
to to bake and brew withal, if the plough go not, and where should they get
salt, wine, and munition if France were stopped; so as they should then be as in
a town besieged.

That the Hollanders seeking their own profit, and winning certain towns by
force would alter the catholic Romish religion, which ought to be vpheld by
all the means that may be.

These things notwithstanding, yet he doubted not so much of the matter, as
long as there was one that knocked at their door (meaning the French king)
finding it in no sort convenient for the provinces under the archdukes
command, to agree with the Hollanders alone, doubting the success of the duke
of Aniou; but with a mightier power, who should be able to give them peace, and
to maintain it, and to chase away the Spanish garrisons: wherefore he
counsels them (to prevent such mischiefs as threaten to fall upon them, to
hold the catholic Romish religion, and to enjoy an assured peace) to put the
country into the French kings

That the Spaniards (only interessed herein) were far from them, and had lost
the passage out of Italy, by means of the peace made with Sauoy: that they had
garrisons but in 9 places, as in the castle of Antuerpe, Gant, and the Sas,
Hertogenbusch, Nieuport, Oostend, Duremond, Cambray, Ruremond, and Dixmuyden,
and that in some of them there were but few spaniards; in other some they were
mixed with other soldiers, and in the rest the inhabitants were the strongest;
and that of all those places there were but three that were strong, yet would
they not be able

He says further, that all Christendom (except Spain) would like of that
proceeding, and it would make traffic and trade of merchandise to flourish
throughout al Europe.

Furthermore that the two mighty and disunited kings, after the uniting of
these countries could not well hurt or prejudice each other, as they did in
times past, having the Pirenean mountains and the sea for their frontiers; and
so they would suffer Christendom to live in

Touching religion, it was well seen and apparent, how orderly they are dealt
withal in France, without forcing any man's conscience; which in truth has
bought more men into the right way, than ever any force or violence (used to
that end) did.

To conclude, he extolleth the fruits of peace, traffic and trade of
merchandise: and touching the trade into the Indies, he refers that to the
Hollanders and Zeelanders themselves.

That all preferments, governments, states and offices of the country, which
now are in the hands of Spaniards, and other strangers, should be granted to
none but natural borne subjects of those countries. To be short, he says,
that the Netherlands should not be given to France, but rather France to the
Netherlands, and that there were neither walls nor forts that could seperat the
mutual league and friendship of France and the Netherlands. This is their 1604
himself a stranger, and an upright indifferent party, who had nothing to win
nor to lose in the The third discourse touching peace in the (...), made by an
indifferen^ party.
Netherlandss, sets down his opinion, touching peace, excusing his
boldness, and diuides his propositions into 3 points. The first, Why both
parties ought to seek after peace: The second shows diverse means that are
and may be produced to attain unto peace: The third, showing which should be
the best means, and wherefore they are not to be rejected by neither of the
parties.

Touching the first, he makes a learned discourse, to show the necessary use
of peace and unity. After war, peace ought to follow, although it cost both
parties dear, and therefore reason and necessity ought to move men thereunto.
The Turk ought to be withstood, and the tumults clergy, being against it, as
bishops, preachers, and Jesuits, who forbid the people, upon pain 1604
masters) would either by policy or power, chase away the Catholics, and
bring in the Reformed religion. Thus much for the first point.

Touching the 2, How to find means to attain to a peace, he says, That the
King of Spain had called the united provinces to meet at Cologne, in anno
1579, and makes mention of the the principal articles treated of at that time:
and how as then the provinces of the Netherlands would have had the authority
of the general Estates established, and the religious peace maintained,
according to the pacification of Gant: and so they granted to acknowledge the
king for their sovereign lord. But since that time the case was altered, the
provinces by extremities and long wars, being estranged one from the other,
since the murder of the prince of Orange, so Note.
which now it has: who can say, or tell, whether he shall hold it still? God
gives, and God takes. The house of Austria long since made great wars against
the Switsers, to bring them under their subjection again, but at the last they
thought it better to leave their right, 1604
his right with all extremity, who should live in peace? But he says, He
would not that the king and the archdukes should simply resign their right
(although neither the one nor the other ever yet possessed or enjoyed any thing
in Holland or Zeeland) but would rather have them to imitat the example of the
children of Albert duke of Saxony; who, after that their father and they had
long made war against the^ of Groningue, finding that they were still to begin
again, having to do with a stiff rebellious people, they esteemed them
unworthy to be accounted their subjects, and so sold them for a great sum
of ready money, unto the emperor Charles 5, with all the rights they had unto
them, and returned into their country of Mesnia, there to live in peace. In
like manner the K. of Spain, being so much incensed against the united
provinces, Themistocles once gave profitable counsel unto them of Athens, but
for that it was not honorable, it was by Aristides advice rejected. Now if
this counsel be found both honorable and profitable for both parties, why
should it be rejected?

Touching the united provinces, he says, That he saw no reason to the
contrary, why they

This was the counsel of this peacemaker, concluding with a petition unto the
prelates, noblemen, and magistrates, representing the Estates, That they would
put their helping hands thereunto, or else find out some better means, which
might as easily be effected by either party.

Thus have I declared, as briefly as I can, the advice of these three
counselors unto peace, the first being one that is fled out of those
countries, who would have the archdukes settled there by authority of the
neighbor kings. The second a Romish Catholic, who to assure the Romish
religion, would have the Netherlanders give themselves to the French king, and
drive the Spanish forces beyond the mountains. The third being a neutrall
person, would have the 1604


How these propositions of peace like the parties that are in arms one against
the other, the reader may judge by that which on both sides has since ensued,
each party seeking to do as he thinks good; for that at the same time there
were certain articles, to the number of 27, both printed and written,
published abroad in the united provinces, and in the other countries under the
archdukes government, especially, as it is thought, to procure the provinces
under the archdukes command, to live in better hope, and more quietness,
attending peace, through the mediation of France and England; as also to
disappoint the assembly of the general Estates. Which articles being presumed
to be set forth by the archdukes procurement, at the same time there was an
admonition written, and sent out of Holland, to persuade the people, not to

It seems (O Netherlands) that this year you shall be hardly assailed, both by
politic counsel, The admonition unto the united provinces, against peace.
and by force of arms, and that the archduke Albertus of Austria, will employ
his power to vanquish you, and all cunning practices to circumuent you: but you
need not fear his power, as having felt the uttermost force thereof, and
valiantly withstood it: but in regard of cunning practices, I thought it
convenient to give you some counsel and forewarning, as being so much the more
to be feared, seeing they come not openly, but will covertly and secretly
undermine you. There is much spoken of the archduke and the Infanta's good
natures, and of the

The duke of Brabant will say, That his meaning was not so: and you by this
presentation which you imprint in your minds, are likewise deceived. The truth
is, you shall plainly find (observing well the archdukes proceedings) that they
are to be esteemed idle speeches, which are cast forth in passage boats, and
wagons (without any certain author) when as men travel 1604
towns, and amongst the rest, there was a young maid buried quick: thereby
taking away alreasons, why they should once doubt of his mind and resolution
touching religion; for that whatsoever had bin done to a man, might have bin
colored with some other show, if he had sought or conspired to do any thing
against his person or the government.

Upon the 10 of January 1599, he writ unto the bishop of Paterborn, in very
rough manner, saying, That if the religion were not forbidden, that his
Catholic soldiers should come thither, and that he would not keep heretics
from spoiling, as it appears plainly by his message sent to the lady
Isabella, duchess of Cleues, bearing date in Niuelles the 15 of September
1599, That in his presence it was fully concluded, to ruin and spoil the king
and the duke of Ferdinando not long since has by force banished the religion
out of Styrmarke and Carinthia, which had bin allowed therein, since the time
of the emperor Ferdinando, his grandfather, making no account of the complaints
and protestations of the Estates of the country, but esteems them as wind,
which is an introduction to a civil war, and a means to lose the whole
country: wherein neither the authority of his grandfather and father, the
bloody wars in France and the Netherlands, nor yet the neerenesse of the Turk,
that bordereth upon him, can move him to any tolleration Charles archduke of
Austria: for that when as the emperor Maximilian (a peaceable prince, and no
persecutor of the religion, but temperat in all his actions) sent his brother
Charles, archduke of Austria, into Spain, to move the king unto the like
temperance, setting before his eyes, the commendable example of the emperor
Charles 5 his father, who had allowed the religious peace in Germany, and
willed all men to observe it, before that the common people were brought into
despair, and were quite fallen from him: He made a full and a resolute answer,
That he would rather lose the country for ever, than endure the least wrong
that might be offered touching religion. You know well an. 1579, what favor he
granted to them of the religion; which was, that he would neither burn nor
hang them, but that they should be banished out of the country, and must seek
for harbor and protection (like the Jews, and misbeleeuing Heathen) in other
countries. This is the meaning of all the house of Austria at this present: all
moderation and mildness dyed with the emperor Maximilian, and his sons have
sucked a bitter hatred out of their Spanish mothers breast, against the religion:
and by their daily conversation with the Jesuits, are more and more confirmed
therein. This is that which in the contracts of marriage, made between the
archduke and the Infanta (and was openly sold in Brabant, so as there is no
doubt of the authority thereof) was so firmly set down, That they should make
no alteration in religion, upon pain of forfeiture of the said countries,
which in such a case the king of Spain conform themselves in religion, and
grant them any liberty therein: for the prophecy says, 1604
the other out of the East into the West, that is, out of Asia into Grecia, and
from thence to Rome; the which is so imprinted in the hearts of the king and
the Spanish counsel, as they esteem all means of accommodation to be
needless, and do constantly believe, that they shall be masters over all, and
at last, in spite of all the world, shall satisfy their desires. And they are
persuaded, that by means of such accommodation in religion, they should break
all correspondencie with the pope, and thereby overthrow all hope of their
expected Monarchy. Nevertheless, if according to the necessity of the time,
he seems to be any thing conformable therein, and grants some liberty to
religion, it will be no other thing for you, but for a while to save you from
ruin; the which shall be broken again, when as the Spanish and Jesuitical
Ayda, a Spaniard, auditor general of the prince of Parma's army, writes in
his book of Martial Law, printed in Antuerp; saying, That all contracts and
treaties made between the prince and his subjects, that bear arms against
him, are of no force nor power: and that the subjects cannot help the same;
but they shall do wisely, by humble petitions to crave pardon at their princes
and lords hands, and to commit their cause to his discretion. Which Spanish
doctor, you ought heartily to thank, for his so true, round, and upright
dealing with you, and to govern your selves thereafter: if not; at some time
or other, you may wrongfully Ayda can plainly tell you, that he had warned you
thereof before, and that you despised his counsel. But to return to our
former matter. Mark what good means they have on the other side, to deceive
you, and to make al promises (with a grace and fair show) to be of no effect:
for that when you shall have obtained any freedom in religion (which
nevertheless shall never be) the duke of Brabant may plainly say thus unto
you, Seeing I have let you enjoy the freedom of your consciences, because you
have always said, That God only ought to rule over the same: yet at the least
show me obedience in other worldly matters. And so, if he can by your
simplicity attain thereunto, to place all the officers, judges, and
magistrates, in towns and provinces, that he may have the forts and strength in
his own power, and become master of the whole: then assure your selves, to In
prejudice of the King of Spain, of whom he holds these countries as in fee,
and 1604.
has bound the same with unspeakable Infraction of the said Provinces
freedom unto the Crown of Spain, thereby to enjoy the Kings aid, and on the
other side faithfully to aid him to the erecting of his pretended Monarchy.

It is well known unto them that these countries being separated from Spain,
and inioying their liberties and freedoms, such a Monarchy can never be
raised; and therefore they have long since resolved (whatsoever it cost) to
reform the privileges of the Netherlands, that without hinderance of the
same, all the power and means of the Provinces (whether it be money, ships,
havens, sorts and all other things) may be used to the subiecting and
conquering of the neighbor countries,

By means of the Kings absence, and the staying for his resolutions, we have
often seen many disseignes made void and lie dead, but the Archduke always
sitting still by you, and looking unto you will always be listening and prying
into all occasions, and will strike when he sees his time, to your miserable
destruction and overthrow: much less also ought you to suffer your selves to
be deceived by vain words, that the Archduke is descended of Duch blood,
and is no Spaniard: but I say that being borne of a Spanish mother, so
strictly bound unto the King of Spain, so Catholikely given of himself, and
persuaded and incensed by the Jesuits, you have cause to expect less grace,
favor and courtesy to relieve your miserable Estates, then of any natural
Spaniard.

But now you may ask me, what will be the issue? shall we still be
distrustful? and shall we cast away al hope of ever obtaining a good peace?
Hereunto I make answer, that subjects must endure and bear much wrong and
injury at their Princes hands, before they rise up in arms against them, not
only for their conscience sake, (seeing that God has made them subjects unto
them, and also commands them to be obedient and subject even unto Infidel
and Heathen Princes and Magistrates, and to pray for them) but also in respect
of other worldly considerations, and for that civil arms borne by subjects
against their Princes (although their case be good and lawsull) do often times
breed more mischief, then the tyranies of Princes, which men thereby hope to
withstand; and may well be likened to a Physician, who curing of one disease,
arming himself with a constant and fit distrust against the devises and
practices of 1605.


You shall find no examples neither in ancient nor modern histories, that the
subjects which once have fallen from their Prince, or that defended their own
freedoms, or were fallen into greater slavery and misery, could ever find
any mean to work their reconciliation, and to procure restitution to their
former estates, unless that their territories and countries were so strong and
mighty; as they had their own assurance within themselves, thereby at all
times to force the agreement made to be

By this means the Switzers being hardly dealt withal by the house of
Austria, would no more subject themselves under the same yoke, but by means
of their constant resolution, they obtained such freedom, as at this day they
are seen to flourish; and yet their wars continued not any thing the longer.
God Almighty by his wonderful providence, ordered the matter in such sort, as
the house of Austria itself refrained from arms, and in tract of time had
need of the aid and assistance of the Switzers, who after they had made
wars together for the space of a hundred years, Sigismond Duke of Austria
made a perpetual peace, permitting them to enjoy their full freedom, the
which the Emperor Maximilian the first, and Charles the fifth (both of the
house of Austria) did afterward ratify and confirm, and had great aid and
assistance from the Switzers in their Italian wars. In like case also they of
Denmark would by no means be persuaded to accept of Christian King of
Denmark, whom they had driven out of the country, although the Emperor
Charles the fifth his brother in law and others, both by arms and entreaties
embraced the cause, and yet neither the Switzers nor the Danes had not so
weighty, lawful, nor well grounded a cause for the leaving of their said
Princes, nor yet not be any more under the yoke of Antiochus, whom they had
rejected but continued 1605.
Albertus, will at the last by your constant resolutions, be brought to the
consideration of the bad advise and counsel which they have thus long
followed, and be weary of this pestiferous war, (being

This is the true, and only means to attain unto an assured peace and
quietness, all other means and agreements are mixed with many cares and
suspicions, the common nature of men cannot subject themselves after the
leaving and rejecting of their King, neither can he put any assured trust or
confidence again in you, nor you in him, although (in regard of your good
nature, and upright hearts) you suffer your selves to be persuaded to cast of
all fear and distrust, (wherein always the weakest have the greatest cause)
and to judge other men's hearts by your own, hoping that men will deal in
like-sort without faulse-hood with you, as you do with them, and yet there is
nothing more certain then that the said distrust will never be remooed out of
the King himself of his contract and dispense therewith; according to the
argument of 1605.
Ayala aforesaid, as in effect the King that last died brake and recalled al
his contracts made for certain years with the Italian merchants? and thus you
shall find your selves intrapped on every side wheresoever you turn you.

As touching the security of Princes and Potentates, it is mere folly once
to think, that any sureties will begin or undertake for to make wars in
your behalf, no man halteth for an other man's lamenesse, the charges and the
troubles of wars are so great, as no man will take them in hand for the love
or profit of strangers, yea men fear to enter thereinto, although they should
thereby revenge their own wrongs.

Look into the Articles of peace made between the Kings of France and Spain
in the year of our Lord 1598. have not the Spaniards by taking of towns upon

To speak of the Emperor it is needelesse, for that no man is so simple as not
to conceive that there is more partiality then trust to be expected at his
hands. But you say, the Emperor and the Princes of Germany, yea and the whole
Empire do of themselves offer to embrace our cause, and as good mediators will
procure us a good peac: shall we distrust both enemies and friends, and hear
no man's counsel?

I answer, that you have more then to many reasons, to suspect all whatsoever,
that comes from the Emperor, not only in regard of his neerenesse of blood
unto

In the year of our Lord 1598. you saw the bad agreement that was amongst
them, and the slowenesse they used in helping and comforting of their oppressed
members, together with the badde government of their affairs, by reason of the

Touching other Princes of Christendom there is no hope to be had, in regard
of their weakness. Therefore, beloved Netherlanders, help your selves, and
God will help 1605.
anno 1566. there rose such a zeal in the chief Noblemen of the Netherlands,
to defend the liberties of their native country, as they

The Prince of Orange with the aid of his friends in germany, and some relief
of such as fled out of the country, twice brought a good number of horse and
foot with him, which without fear might have gone against the Turk; past
over the Meuze, entered into the heart of the country, and gave some new hope,
but his power, and your comfort was of as small continuance, as a fire of straw.
The Duke of Aluaes cruelty (especially after the first enterprise) was more
strengthened then impaired, and in the second, them word also, that if they had
not good regard to themselves, they might be ouerrunne, 1605.


All particular accidents, whereby GOD almighty (during the wars in Holland)
has showed his gracious aid and mighty power, as when after the loss of
Harlem* he sent the spirrit of dissension amongst the Spanish army, that the
town of Al^kmaer had time to breath, and to defend it self: when miraculously
he wrought the releeuing of Leyden, when wi^h a short thawe he set at liberty
the frozen ships of war in the Zuyder-Zee, and presently again caused the
River to freese, when they Don John at Lepanto had given him against the Turk,
to revenge his wrath conceived against them of Holland and Zealand; and to that
end he made a truce with the Turk, and maintained peace with all his
neighbors thereabouts, that he might here employ all his ^orces and treasor,
having also as great and strong an army,

But when the enemy after the winning of Ziriczee, thought to set his foot
upon their throats, and that he held the victory assured in his own hands,
and that some of the neighbors grieved, and others laughed and thought that as
then they should suffer the punishment of their folly. To conclude when all
the wise men of the world, thought Gods help to be furthest from them, it was
nearest unto them, who provided in such sort as the other Provinces which
seemed to sit under the great Kings grace and protection, were more impatient
to bear the great oppressions of the soldiers their friends, then Holland and
Zealand were to endure the bloody blows and wounds of their deadly enemies,
using a kind of relief; whereon the

You are always much bound to praise and commend the affection of the famous
and praise worthy Queen of England, although some of her Commanders brought
your Estate for a while into no small combustion: the best, most ass^ed, 1605.


What better assurance of his fatherly regard and care for your preservation,
can you have, then that he has defended you, contrary to all men's
expectations, not only against the power and force of forreyne enemies but
also against so many domestical deceipts, practices and treasons? your own
protectors and Governors sought to deceive you; as the Earl of Renebergh in
Freezeland and Ouerissell, the Earl of Bergh in Gelderland and in the Earldome
of Zutphen, and the Prince of Chymay in Flanders.

The chief of your Deputies, sent to the treaty of Cologne in anno 1579.
Achitophels wisdom brought it to naught. It is not impossible in man's
judgment, that the loss of so many towns, so many treasons, so many crosses
in battles given in the field, as at Hardenberge heath, at Gemblours, at
Northoorn, at the Borentang, at Boxum and elsewhere: The loss of the strongest
towns in the country, which were partly taken by force and famine, and some
willingly falling from you, could not overthrow yours, nor better the enemies
state? You see the people by means of overthrows and other losses, became
vigilant, wiser, and more provident: all your losses were to

Every year you have built an innumerable number of ships of war, made
infinite store of Ordinance, all manner of weapons, munition, and other
necessaries for the wars; but above all the experience of the wars
increases, and teaches

Therefore oh Netherlands, seeing you have for so many years defended your
freedoms of soul and body, and likewise spent so much blood and treasor in
the said quarrel, and caused your name and fame to be spread abroad
throughout all the 1605.
Philip the second, that with all his treasure, wise counselors, great
respect, authority and experience, and continual labor for thirty years
together, lost more then he got from you. Much more hope is there then that
by Gods grace you shall go thorough with the cause to your honor against his
son, whose counsel, authority, and experience is nothing comparable unto
that of his Father, who finds the spring of his treasures exhausted and
drawn dry, and his credit weakened, whose imposts and revenues (by means of
forbidding trade

Suffer not your selves (as in the beginning you were deceived by the Duches of
of Parma) to be again now at the last circumuented with policy and fair
speeches, for the treasure of Spain will not come so abundantly unto them as
it has done, neither shall they be able to draw it from the bare and
impouerished Provinces, (which through their government will soon be wearied,
and seek some alteration) Alua, with Don John, nor the Duke of Parma, whose
wise conduct, experience in arms, diligence and fortune was to be feared,
whom you nevertheless have valiantly withstood, but with young and
unexperienced Commanders and Leaders, under whose government you may already
mark an alteration in the enemies marshall discipline and counsels, and
consequently in his proceedings: whereas to the contrary you are blessed of God,
with such a general of your Army, as you never had before, whose service the
Empire of Rome requires against the Turk, and such a one as the King of
Spain

Besides all this, you are to put your trust in the equity of your cause, and
in Gods favor, who here-to-fore has sundry times assisted you in greater
necessity: whom you (besides incurring the shame and disgrace of all the
world, both to you and your posterity) shall offend, and make him with-drawe
his favors from you; if that forgetting his benefits, and distrusting his
favor, now without cause, either to spare your purses, or upon an immagined
further rest and ease, you will leave and forsake his word and true religion,
as the Gargasens (because of their Swine) entreated Jesus Belial cannot agree
together, so cannot you by means of the true religion at this time, obtain a
peace with the King of Spain, the Archduke Albertus, and the Infanta, (whom
I place all in one degree) but through your valiant resolution and continuance
in arms, you now remain assured of religion and your freedom, and in time
are also to hope of 1605.


And you Romish Catholics, (amongst whom I know that there are many that wish
and desire the freedom of your native country) be not persuaded that in
regard of your religion, your burdens and charges under the Spaniards
government shall be any thing diminished; for there will be still some cause
of offense found against them that have any thing to loose, as being friends
and wel-willers to Protestants: were it only but for that they have not done
their endeavors, made resistance, nor borne arms against their neighbors and
kinsmen. This is the crime of

This is that which Vergas President of the bloody council, in the Duke of
Aluas time said. Heretici fraxerunt templa, Boni nihil fecerunt contra, ergo
debent omnes patibulare; that is, The heretics brake down the Churches, the
good did not seek to hinder nor let them, and therefore they must all be
hanged. For these reasons John Baptista Taxis in Anno 1595. wrote unto the King
from Brussels; that his Majesty ought by no means to consent by any contract
of peace, that the Spanish garrisons Taxis had not so plainly showed this
distrust which is had of you, unto the King and his counsel, yet the deeds
themselves declare it; for all the world knows, that the Noblemen of the
Netherlands (notwithstanding their reconciliation with the King) are not
trusted, but with hearts grief, must see, yea and frette that the Spaniards
are preferred not only to be Counselors, but to the highest dignities, to
government, and other preserments, and they despised, rejected, and badly dealt
withal. It prevailed Lamorall Earl of Egmont nothing at all, that he
labored to chase away the Mounsieur la Noue, and others likewise were released
by the like unequal exchange.

And when as the Baron De Selles, Champigni, the Bishop of Ypre, and the Lord
of Auchi were prisoners to the Estates, the Duke of Parma was so slow in
seeking their delivery, as the Barron De Selles dyed in prison with
melancholy and grief, complaining that he and his brother the Barron De
Noircarmes services were badly Van Hese was beheaded upon a surmised crime,
many others were made away here and there in diverse places, as Vrias was, and
little lamented. Charles Earl of Mansfield had such strong Pepper given him by
the Spaniards, that he left the Kings service in the Netherlands, and went to
serve against the Turk in Hungary where he dyed. It is needless to rehearse
many examples; you see before your eyes, how that they of Antwarpe, Gant, and
other places, have gotten nothing by living like faithful Catholic subjects
under the King, for that notwithstanding they must be slaves to the Spanish
nation, and bear the intolerable abuses, wrongs, molestations and injuries,
of the Spanish garrisons, and yet their complaints cannot and a more assured
argument, to confirm the same, from the example of their Estates 1605.
Anthonio Perez, with whom the King being so much offended, as he could not
apease his wrath against him, because according to his countries priueledges,
he was to be called in question before the Judges of Arragon, and not by any
other strange Judges, he caused him to be prosecuted by the inquisition,
although he were not accused of any matter

A Gentleman of Spain, borne in Salamanca, and that came with the Duke of Alua
out of Spain, being in my house, said openly, that in their town their was
no man of any estate or quality, but would gladly loose one of the joints of
his fingers, that he might be released of the fear they have of the
inquisition. The merchants of Lisbone being the greatest Catholics in the
world, at King Philips first coming into Portingall, sought to buy out that
fear of the inquisition, only craving this small favor, that the inquisitors
should commit no man to prison, without making them acquainted with the cause,
and letting them know their accusers; that they should adiorne them to appear
in open court, and that no man should be condemned

Finally, they sought nothing else but reasonable audience before they were con
demned, and an ordinary course of law, according to all right, equity and
reason, but it might not be granted unto them of Lisbone (although they
offered two milions and a half, and would gladly have given four) for the
inquisitors would not be brought to such a straight, but would hold their
unrestrained power and liberty, to condemn every one that they once catch
within their nets, although they have no other witnesses then the prisoners
own sworn enemies, or some base villains, which otherwise will not be
credited for a matter of three guildens, or else Annas and Chayphas, did against
Christ, and yet they did better then the inquisitors do, because they brought
the witness before him.

The general Estates of the united Provinces being well acquainted herewith,
although they were Catholics, yet could not allow of the bringing in of
Bishops, perceauing that it tended not so much to the advancement of the
Catholic religion, as to overthrow the priueledges of the country, and to
bring in an absolute government, where, at the assembly of the Estates of the
country, they sit, and overrule them, and by that means would look into all
men's proceedings, thereby to demynish the ancient liberty of voices, and of
the speaking for their priueledges.

In the year of our Lord 1576. the catholic Provinces, yea and many Abbots,
and Prelates themselves, finding this decay of their preueledges, for the
defense thereof made a contract with Holland and Zeeland, although God did
suffer, (for the sins of the country which as yet were not punished) that
some fell from them again, whereof many beholding the bad success, were much
grieved thereat. Therefore be not so mad nor blind, to let this insupportable
yoke, (against the which they of Arragon, Naples, and Millan strove, and
resisted) with fair promises to be brought in among you, think for certain
that the inquisition shall be more rigorously executed in these countries then
in any other places, for that the true Religion has here been longer
exercised, and has taken deeper root then else where, so as the Spaniards
esteem all nets, fire, and sword when you least think thereof, and when you
speed best, although 1605.
Viliacos, Lutheranos, Tradidores etc.

As often as you behold your children, you shall with sighs think, that you
bring them up to be slaves unto the Spaniards, and that your successors, and
posterities, shall see an unspeakable alteration in the estate of the
country. The riches, trade, and seafaring, (which by their good policy,
justice, and priueledges is much augmented) shall by altering thereof also
decay, and be carried into strange countries, as it is already dri uen out of
Brabant, Flanders, and other Provinces, considering that every man seeks to
rule f ecly. The Spaniards and the Archdukes counsel, will by all secret and
open Philip at his first coming to that crown considering, that the said
country was as strong of ships and sailors as all the territories of Spain, and
that the same in time might blemish his authority

Thus shall the Spaniards weaken and disarme the Netherlands, which have
provided them so much work, for these thirty years, that so they may not
fear the like resistance. They will put the old resolutions again in
practice, thereby to bring all the countries (with their several rights,
customs and priueledges) under the laws of

To conclude they will make such an alteration, as with in these fifty years
men shall not know their own native country. Believe it for certain, that
this is no vain fable, but a true forwarning, built upon a good ground. Learn
at the last, that they under pretense of the catholic Religion, cover their
ambition, and oppression; be not otherwise persuaded, but that you are to fear
all the fore-passed euells, not only from the Duke of Brabant, but also from
the King of Spain, who although he bears the name, yet the Spanish Council,
spirit and resolutions,

Upon the fifteen of may Prince Ma^rice having gathered his horse and foot
together An ente^pise made by Prince Maurice upon the river of Scheld and
Antwerp.
marched toward Berghen up Zoom, causeing 80. companies of foot to be shipped
Ernestus Earl of Nassaw, (as it seems) to make an enterprise or to besiege
Antwerp, if he could be master of the point of Flanders on the other side of
the river but the wind being strong, and contrary in some reaches of the
river of Scheld; Ernestus could not land his men as he was appointed, (as al
enterprises are subject to water, wind and weather) yet he valiantly passed by
the Spanish sconces, 1605.
Ernestus could have brought his ships to Cloppers bancke or dike, and there
have landed certain companies of men, they might have done what they intended,
but the wind being contrary, and they thereby driven to shore, they sought
with certain shallops and great boats to land some men on Flanders side, but
being somewhat slow in the execution, they were easily repulsed frrom thence
by a small number of the enemy, wherein the night did much help them, which
made the soldiers to doubt that the Spaniards were much stronger: where-vppon
they were somewhat abasht, and the rather for that they had no Ordinance with
them: for although that the Marquess Spinola had been gone with certain
soldiers into the land of Waes, to view Issendicke Fort, Mounsier van Rollegum,
Governor of the cross Sconce, there were more men placed there, by Don Inigo
de Mendoza Governor of the Castle of Antwerp, to the number of three thousand,
with some Ordinance, who fell upon this small number of Prince Maurice his
men, which were set on land (lying behind the banks) they being not above
three hundred, whereof part fled again into their shallops and The States
men defeated.
boats, the rest were defeated and slain, whereof fourscore were taken
prisoners and carried into the Castle of Antwerp, amongst the which was
Captain Legier, Lieutenant to Captain La Croix, and a Sargeant. The
Burgonians had almost taken Collonell Dorp, but he leaping into the water saved
himself, not without great danger of his life: it is thought that there was
not above one hundred slain, whereof one Michael Tutelaer and his Lieutenant
Francis, son to Francis Tutelaer, some of the shallops were suncke and burnt.
This was done upon the seventeenth of Mai^ in the morning, when as Earl
Ernestus thought to have made a bridge over the Scheld, about Ousterwele, their
ships of war, and others being come within sight of Antwerp; but their
enterprise failing by reason of the wind and other accidents, Cont Ernestus
went with all his men and ships to Ousterweele on Brabant side, where he
landed them, and marched toward Eckeren, where Prince Maurices army then was,
who went back again to Berghen Up. Zoome, the ships with their provision
sailed The Governor of Ordam sconce slain.
back again, shooting against the fort aforesaid, and they at them, at which
time the

This attempt bred a great alteration in Antwerp, the rich being in great
fear, and the poorer sort wishing the enemies might have good success, every
man according to his humor. Notwithstanding that Spinola had at least eight
thousand men thereabouts, and upon Flanders side: presently there-vpon the
prices of all victuals did rise, many men packt up such things as they had and
fled to Mechelen and Brussels, but there were four companies of horsemen
sent presently into the town, the which were lodged in such Innes as had good
fourage, without any cost or charge to the Bourgers, but when they heard of the
enemies retrait the horsemen also left the town.

Prince Maurice parting from Eckeren, beseeged the Castle of Wouwe, which lies
in a marish ground a League from Berghen vp-Zoome, a very strong Castle, being
Wouwe Castle beseeged.
the Marquess of Berghens chief house: the which a French man lying there in
garrison for the Estates, sold some eighteen years ago unto the Prince of
Parma, and it since became a harbor and retre^ for thieves. This garrison did
wonderfully annoy the ships, which past between Holland and Zealand, being
always ready on Prince Maurice took the Castle of Wouwe.
the water, to take such ships as for want of wind were becalmed, and forced
to stay or lie at anchor, setting upon them with certain Scutes which they
kept hidden under the water, taking the passengers and sailors out, and
carrying them to Wouwe, where they kept them til they paid their ransomes: here
the Prince planted his ordinance before it, they within the Castle slew some of
his men which were busied about their out of the capitulation but the Marquis
of Brandenbergh begged their lives. Marquis 1605.
Spinola caused some of the Captains of Wouwe to be executed for that they
gave it so lightly over. In the mean time the Marquis Spinola drew all his
^ces neere-vnto Antwerp, and lodged at Mercxon and Damme, and the horsemen at
Berchen and Wilricke, and by that means defended Antwerp, and made a bridge
over the Scheld, from the town wharfe unto Flanders side, by which means he
might join his divided forces (which lay in Brabant and Flanders) upon any
occasion together as need (...)
required.

The admonition to the Netherlands, to dissuade them from a peace, being
published, The Emperor sends for a pasport to the Hage, for his Ambassadors to
treat o^ a peace, which they refuse.
about the same time the Emperor sent Maximilian de Cochi his commissioner to
the Hage to demand a pasport for certain Ambassadors which should be sent
from him Maximilian de Cochi had the year before declared unto the general
Estates in the Hage, how careful and desirous the Emperor was of the welfare
and common good of all Christendom, in regard that he found it to be so much
thretaned by our Arch-enemy the turk, together with his rebels in Hongary and
elsewhere: to which end he now required a pasport from the states, for certain
Ambassadors to be sent from him and the Princes of the Empire, with certain
soldiarsto come from Cologne and go back again: The which bred some jealousy
in the Estates, as if they sought by their coming with so great a number, to
breed some alteration and tumult among the common people, for that all men did
affect and desire peace, and that generally they The Estates answer to the
Emperor who refuse his request.
Christierne the second Duke of Saxony, Electors: Wolphe Dieterich Archbishop
of Saltsbourg, Philipe Ludwighen Paltsgraue, and the Bourguemaisters and
counsels of the towns of Cologne and Nuremberg, by the hands of Maximilian de
Cochi, one of the Emperors household, together with a proposition in writing
touching a peace to be made with Spain and the Archdukes; showing, that they
had often found it by experience, what harm and prejudice the united Provinces
had before that time Sedem belli, and from thence invade their neighbor
Princes, and the poor subjects of the Empire, and to prescribe them laws,
having conceived a general monarchy in their imaginations, with this
supposition (as a Maxim of Estate) that neither Christendom nor the whole
world could be well governed, unless the Pope of Rome were supreme head and
governor in spiritual causes. This being duly weighed and considered, they
Netherlanders: but seeing that with all their long patience, they could not
turn 1605.


And again this year of our Lord 1605. by Letters, the which were carelessly
and negliently delivered unto the Archdukes, whom they without offense to
GOD and their honors, cannot esteem but enemies to the Netherlanders; knowing
well, that seeing they do acknowledge the said Archduke and the Infanta for
their Sovereign Princes and governors; they must also of necessity
acknowledge the King of Spain, the Council of Spain, and the Spanish
Inquisition. And as for their Netherland causes, they were governed and ruled
altogether by the Spanish and Italian Commanders and Protectors, as it has of
Spinola, to the disgrace of the Arche-dukes, Prelates, Lords and Estates of
the Netherlands.

But if they sought by that treaty to bring the said Estates of the united
Provinces, to consent to any thing against their obtained, and till then
continued government and rights, tending to the dishonor of God, and
prejudicial to their safeties (from the which they prayed him to defend them)
they humbly entreated his Imperial Majesty, and the said Princes and Towns,
not to advise them to any thing that might tend to the furtherance and
advancement of their Spanish desseignes, not only in respect of the
inhabitants of the Netherlands, but for the general

But if the united Estates by the aid and assistance of the Emperors Majesty,
Princes, Estates and commonalties of Germany, for the maintenance and support
of their resolved, undertaken, and now for many years continued government,
might obtain the means to chase away from their frontiers, all such as seek
the subversion of the Netherlands, they would acknowledge it for a great grace
and favor, whereof if they might be assured, they would upon their request,
make a more plain and ample declaration, and let them know by the effects, how
much they did grieve at these bloody wars. But if the said Treaty tended to
no other end, they then entreated the Emperor, Princes and Towns, in regard
of the good of

Touching any wrongs done, or insolences committed by their soldiers upon the
frontiers of the Empire, as also concerning the raising of new licenses, tolles
and other Imposts, they said, that they did hope to take such a course, as they
should have 1605.
Spinolas desseigne was to pass his army over the Rhine, from whom the
frontiers of the Empire were to expect no better then they had found, at the
hands of the Admiral of Arragon, in the year 1598.

This was the Estates answer unto the proposition made by the Emperor, Princes
and Towns, desiring Maximilian de Co^hi, to make a favorable report of their
said

In March this year Cont Frederic Vanden Berghe, Brother to Cont Herman, had a
A vain enterprise upon Bercke.
certain enterprise upon Rhinberk, the which being discovered, failed, so as
he was forced to retire, yet without any loss of his men.

This year in April the King of England sent his Ambassador into Spain, to
see The Earl of Hertfor^ sent to the ^chduke out of England.
the King swear the peace; and at the same time he sent Edward Lord Seymor
Earl of Hertford, son to the Duke of Somerset, unto the Archdukes, to the
same effect: who arriving at Dunkirke with a gallant train of Noblemen and
Gentlemen, were honorably received there by Diego Ortes Governor of the Town:
The Baron of barbanson, brother to the Earl of Arenbergh, Captain of their
Highness Archers, Pedro d'Alega the Governor, and at Bruges by Monsieur de
Croselles (of the house of Montmorencie) Governor of the Town, and great
Bayliffe of Frank. Thither the Earl of Busquoy Master of the Ordinance was
sent to entertain him. The Earl coming to Alost, he was met by the Earl
of Ligny, the Baron of La Bastie a Frenchman, with diverse other Gentlemen;
whether the Duke of Aumale sent a Gentleman with letters of congratulation unto
the Earl.

The Earl approaching near unto Brussells, within a mile of the town, he was
Spinola, two Poland Dukes, the Marquis of Hauerec, the Earl of Aremberg, the
Prince of Palestrina, the Prince of Caserte, Dom Louis de Velasco, Cont
Theodore Trivulce, Cont Frederick Vanden Berghe, and many other Noblemen and
Gentlemen. The next day after his arrival at Brussells, he was visited by the
Marquis of Laguna, son to the Duke of Medina Caeli, Ambassador for the King
of Spain with the Archdukes.

At the Earl of Hertfords coming to Brussells, the Archdukes were attended on
Ladies attending on the Infanta.
with great estate, whereof I will make some particular relation: and first of
the Inf^ntaes ladies without any distinction of precedence. First there was the
Lady Iohanna of Chassincourt Claudia Catherina Liuia her Sewer, and cousin to
her Chamberlain, the Lady of Croy her Caruer, the Lady of Selles, the Lady of
Montmorencie: the Lady Maria Manuel a Spanish Lady, the Lady Magdeline de Bye,
the Lady of Marle, the Lady Vincentia of Ferrara, the Ladies Ermesyna and
Clara, daughters to the Earl of Aremberghe, the Lady of Balanson Cousin to
Varambon, the Lady Marguerite of Bourgondie, Cousin to the Earl of Busquoy,
with twelve other waighting women, most of them Spaniards.

There were then also present (to honor the Infanta) the Countess of
Mansfeldt, daughter to the Earl of Egmond, the Countess of Aremberghe, the
Marquess of Berghen, the Countess of Egmont, the Countesses of Barlaimont,
Lalaine, Solue, Bossu, Fontenay, Berghe, Bye, Essingen, Fressin and Bruay, the
Countess of Saint 1605.


Upon the Archduke their attended the Earl of Essengen, the Earl of Saint
Aldegond, Attendance upon the Arch duke.
the Marquis of Monte-negro his Mayordomo, Don Pedro de Ponce, the Vicont
Octauio his chief chamberlain, DonGaston Spinola vice chamberlain, Don
Innigo de Mendosa, Don Diego de Mexia, Don Diego d' Acuna, Don Alonzo d'
Aualos. Don Inigo de Borgia, Brother to the Duke of Gandia and Captain of the
Castle of Antwerp, the Earl Enenbergh, Cont Frederic vander Berghe captain of
the guard, the Lord of Brabanson, brother to the Earl of Arembergh, captain
of the Archers with many others.

Besides al these attendants, there were diverse knights of the order of the
golden fleece, as the Duke of Arschot, the Marquis of Haurec, the Earl of
Aremberg, the Marquis Spinola. There were also the Earl of Egmont, the Earl
of Solme, the Marquis of Robaix son to the Earl of Ligny, the Marquis of
Renty son to the Earl of Solme, the Earl of Busquoy, Henin, Hochstrate,
Rassingen, Isenburgh, Be, Euerbergh, Bossu and Fresin, most of them young
Earls. The Lord of Seuenbergen Son to the Earl of Arembergh, the Lord of
Chalon Nephew to the Earl or Mansfeldt, the Lord of Wesemael, the Lord of
Vendesy of the house of Montmorency.

Of strange noblemen there were the Duke d' Aumale, the Duke of Ossuna, Don
John de Medicis base brother to the Duke of Florence, the Prince of Caserta a
Neopolitaine, the Prince of Palsterino a Columnese, the Marquis of Malespina of
the house of Paluoisin, Cont Thedore Triuultio, Don Louis de velasco general
of the light horsemen, with many other Spaniards and Iraliens, that were
commanders in the army. With this Attendance the Archduke received the English
Ambassador, with all honor and state; but whilst they were feasting and merry
at Brusselles Prince Maurice had an enterprise upon Antwerp, so as Spinola,
velasco, vanden Bergh, Busquay with many cmomanders were forced to pack away
speedely for the defense of the country. The Earl of Hertford having seen the
Archduke swear to the contract of Thomas Edmonds there for Ambassador leeger,
took his leave of the Archdukes, having performed his legation and charge
with great honor and bounty; from Brusselles he went to Antwerp, and so into
Zecland, where he took shipping for England.

Prince Maurice having taken Wouwe castle, he made a general muster of his
army and upon the second of June he past over the Scheld into Flanders and
landed near to Isendike, leaving the forts upon the river well appointed of
men, as in Lillo there was Abcl van Catz bailife of the marquisate of Campuere,
making a show as if he would have beseeged the Sas of Brugges, and so draw
the war into the enemies contry, but Prince Maurice could begin no seege, for
that the Marquis Spinola, was still at his heels ready to charge him, by means
of the said bridge over the Schelld, which Maurice doubted at the first, and
therein he was of a contrary opinion to all the estates, holding it more
profitable for them to go to the Rhine; and for that cause to assure his
conquest of Sluice, Isendike, Ardenborgh, and the sconses thereabouts, he
lodged his army at Watervliet, for that there were some speches given forth
that the Archdukes had an intent to beseege Sluice, and with the great number
of men which they expected from al places they would with a second army
beseegeRineberke, and yet keep a fl^g camp to prevent all dangers.

Prince Maurire insconsed himself very strongly at Watervliet, and to let him
from attempting any thing against ^as and other forts Spinola came withal his
power to camp by him, in a place full of wood, where they could hardly come
one at the

The General Estates of the United Provinces, being advertised of a Fleet
1605. Sht^s and men come out of Spain^: defeated by the Estates ships.


In this month of June, the Town of Meurs belonging to Prince Maurice, was by
certain traitors fired, on the which the enemy had an enterprise, the which
the Governor discovering, he did forbid them to open the gates, for the saving
Meurs set on fi^e by traitors.
of any thing: Where-vppon the whole Town (except some four of five houses)
was burnt, the Governor desiring rather to preserve the gates, walls and fort
for the Prince, then the houses, and let it fall into the enemies hands.

In Iulie following the Marquess Spinola sent a good part of his Army out of
Flanders, causing it to march toward the River of Rhyne, under the command of
The Marquis Sp nola marches toward Friseland.
the Earl of Busquoy, the which past a League above Cologne, going from thence
to lodge at Dugts a Village opposite unto the town; and some days after in
Keysers-Weert, Spinolas men over the Rhyne, they turned head toward Friseland.

The Estates hearing that Spinola was past, and what course he intended, they
presently gathered together all their troops out of their garrisons of
Berghen, The Estates bring their army near unto Rhynebercke.
Breda and other places; giving them their Rendezuous at Berke upon Rhyne:
Whether came also such companies as were in Flanders; who seized upon the
Island right against the town, on the fourth of July: Upon the which day all
the Burgers of Weezel which were able to bear Arms, were mustered, the which
the youngmen also of the said town did the next day, promising and swearing to
assist and succor one an other* with all their means, bloods and lives. And if
there were any that

Cont Henry Frederick of Nassau, Brother to Prince Maurice, and Ernestus of
Nassau his cousine, passing the ninth of the month with three thousand foot
close by the Town of Weezell, and Colonel Edmonds General of the Scottish
men, with ten Cornets of horse, approaching the rest of their troops which
were before Bercke, they made new fortifications without the town, if happily
the Marquess Spinola should come and beseege it, as it seemed he had an
intent. On the nine and twentieth day of the month there was such a great
storm of rain and hayle in the camppe before Bercke and thereabouts, as in
the memory of man

On the fourth of August the Marquess Spinola parting from Keysers-Weert with
three thousand horse and two thousand foot, he left the Earl of Busquoy with
five thousand foot and eight hundred horse along the Rhyne, to guard these new
Forts which he had taken, and marched himself toward Essen in the country
of Westphalia, knowing well that it was not very strong in one place, he
planted his Canon there, 1605. Oldenzeel yielded to Spinola by composition.
Herman vanden Berghe for Governor, with 14. Companies of foot and 2. Cornets
of horse.

Spinola having taken Oldenzeel, he sent his army unto Linghen belonging by
inheritance to Prince Maurice, which as then was but ill fortefied, and weakly
furnished of a garrison, the which he resolved to beseege with all the speed
he could: but Spinola besiege^ and took Linghen.
the situation of the place gave him some cause to doubt, for that he found
he should hardly get from thence unless he made his passage with his
sword, and won a victory with his honor, in regard that he should be
followed and enclosed round about, but at the last he thought it expedient in
all haste to set upon the Town and to make trial thereof, wherein as he
himself writ, he found an old Governor who seemed to have forgotten his
occupation, and certain young Captains who as then had not well learned it,
who scarce daring to look over the walls The indiscretion of the Governor and
Commanders in Linghen.
defend themselves against the Ordinance, then to keep their enemy out of
their ditches, the which they neglected, and although the town were well
flanckt in every place, yet they suffered them to come to their ditches before
their Ordinance was orderly placed, and to cut off the water, filling the
ditches with faggots, hurdles and plancks, and so to pass over them to the
point of a Bulwark, before they had discovered it; who being once lodged
there, they within knew not what to do, wanting both men and knowledge to
defend themselves; so as being in fear, and supposing the danger to be
greater then it was, within few days after upon the eighteenth of August they
concluded to send out a Drum, to parle with the enemy, before Spinola had
made a full breach, or that he thought it time to summon them to yield. For
which cause he granted them the best conditions that might be to get the
garrison out of the town as soon as he could, knowing that Prince Maurice
was marching toward him, and so (as they of Oldenzeel had done) they yielded
the town Linghen yielded by composition.
unto him upon these conditions: That Collonell Martin Cobben Governor of the
Town and Castle, should yield it up upon condition that the soldiers should
depart with their Coullors flying and full arms, and might carry away what
goods they could in six days, and the Burgers in eight, except the Artillery,
munition of war and other provision. Whereupon Colonel Cobben went forth
with eight Companies, and presented himself before Prince Maurice, who
reproched him bitterly for his base Spinola there-vppon being as it were half
drunk with that sudden victory, knew not well what to do, but for certain
days lay there and attempted not any thing, having the way open to have done
some other exployts, giving his enemy leisure to fortefie himself and to
provide for all the places lying thereabouts. While both the armies lay in
Friseland, the Archduke finding himself to be strong of men which yet
remained in Brabant, he resolved to enterprise something An enterprise made
upon Berghen vp-Zoome by Mounsier Hericou^t.
against Berghen vp-Zoome, giving the charge thereof unto Mounsier Herricourt,
de la Biche Governor of Hulst, and John Terrail a French man, who made
profession to be very expert in making of Petards and forcing of towns
therewith, for the effecting of this disseigne, there were above four thousand
footmen and three companies of horsemen gathered together at Beueren in the
land of Waes, upon Blockers dike, giving forth that they had an enterprise to
do In Cadsant, having all things prepared to 1605.
John's gate, they took it, who thinking that as then they were within Berghen
in danger.
the Town, cried, Ville gaigne, courage, viue la mess, with such like words,
but the Townes-men with the soldiers valiantly defended themselves, both with
their shot and other short weapons, and when their powder failed them, they
fell to it with stones, whereby the Spaniards were forced to give back, and to
fly away before the water begun to flow. The other part of the Spaniards went
along upon the bank of the Haven, beneath to the foot of the said outward
work, where in short time they caused two strong gates which were without the
watergate to be forced with their Petards, by the which they entered with
their troops to go to the watergate, Barnard Pluchart was shot, whereof he
dyed, and diverse others, but the Petard failing, they fighting long, but to no
end at all, the water beginning to flow they were forced to retire.

The Governor Sir Paul Bax, showed himself in every place where need
required, from the beginning to the ending, encouraging the soldiers and
townes-men to do their best, and giving order for all things necessary,
notwithstanding by all likelihood, (without Gods providence) the Town was in
great danger, for that but The Spaniard repulst from Berghen.


The same day the Lord of Grobbendonke Governor of Boisleduc made an enterprise
upon the town of Grave with sixteen hundred men, and diverse wagons and An
enterprise upon Grave made by the Governor of Boisleduc.
boats, thinking with his boats to put two hundred men into one of the Bulwarks
and with a bridge made of dryfats and pipes to get to the walls, but coming
near unto the town his enterprise was discovered, and so he was forced to
go back again without 1605.


Notwithstanding that the aforesaid enterprise made against Berghen up Zome
failed, yet the said enterprisers, viz. Monsieur la Biche, Du Tarrail, and
D'ette, who had been Bergen up zoom once again assailed by the enemy, upon
the 20. of September.
Governor of Wouwe, would once again adventure an other enterprise against the
said town, thinking to repair their former error, whereof they hademade
trial to their costs, who being five thousand foot, and five companies of
horsemen, upon the nineteenth of September, a month after the first
enterprise, set forward. Sir Paul Bax Governor of the town, understanding that
diverse Soldiers were assembling about Antwerpe and Brussels, every day sent
some of his horsemen out, to know the enemies viz. at the Nuns Bulwark, the
Steenberghen gate, the Orange Rauelin, and with a James polder, all with great
force and fury, respecting not the Ordinance, Muskets and small shot out of
the town, marching as if it had been an Iron wall; they themselves not
shooting much: at the Steenberghen gate they used great force, where they
thought to let in their horsemen, where (in less then half an hours space)
they had forced open three gates, cut down the drawbridge, and broken the
Portcullis, so as there rested nothing but the inner-gate to be forced open,
which the Burgers fortified, and mured up with earth, wagons, and trees, which
they placed against it, and by that means kept them from entering the Town,
casting stones down upon them from off the gate.

The Spanish Drums struck up an alarm before the said gate, as if they had
been within; whereupon their horsemen came before the town, sounding their
Trumpets, as if the gates had been open, the Townes-men stood upon the walls
with their colors, encouraging one the other, and giving their enemies all
the spightfullest words they could. Claes Luytsen Captain of the company of
Amsterdam, who was in guard in the Forte called Beckaf, by the Polder, behaved
himself valiantly, forcing the enemy with his Musket and great shot (as
they marched along) to retire, and slew diverse of them, the which they carried
with them in the wagons, wherewith they had brought their Bridges, Hurdles and
other furniture, which they were forced to leave behind them.

The like happened to them at the Rauelin, where they had two and twenty men
slain; at the Bosch gate their powder failed, but the Bridges were ready, and
they had gotten over the Palisadoes, and a hundred of them at the least were
climing up the walls, before they within the town could discover them, the
night was so dark, by reason that it rained, but the Burgers continually
burning Pitch and straw, 1605.
The endeavors of them within the town.
piche, stones, and the straw from their beds; and laying the children out of
their Cradels, carried stones in them up to the walls; this the stoutest sort
of women did: the rest being of weaker complexion, went along through the
streets, and kneeled before their doors, lifting up their hearts, eyes, and
hands to heaven, in that sort fighting by prayers and sighs unto GOD, which
moou^d the Soldiers to greater courage.

The Towns men and inhabitants without respecting of what religion they were,
Paul Box road into every place upon his horse, holding his Bridle and
Courtelax in the left hand, and a Pistole in his right hand, with a guard about
him, commanding all that was necessary to be done. The Bougue-maisters, and
also the Ministers of the reformed Church, did what lay in them, and showed
not to be slackest, but armed themselves and went to the walls to resist the
enemy, and to animate the Soldiers to be resolute.

In this sort the Spaniards having attempted to surprise the Town, and finding
great resistance, until day light, at last they were forced (with their loss)
to retire

In the way to Antwerpe, there were many of the Soldiers found which dyed of
the wounds they had received before the Town, and it was known that they The
Spaniard retires from Berghen.
had laden six and thirty Wagons (which they brought thither with Bridges,
Petards, Ladders, Hurdels, and other municion, and left it all behind them,)
full of dead and wounded men, wherewith they filled all the Hospitalls that
were there-abouts. They within the Town lost but one of their Soldiers, and
had six Maurice sending five companies thither out of his atmie, those eight
were sent back again into Flanders.

Whilst that Marquis Spinola was busy on the other side of the Rhine, the
Earl of Busquoy, who (as we have said) was left behind with five thousand
Wachtendonk taken by the Spaniards.
Maurice could not draw any army to field, but kept himself close. Yet they
made hot war at sea against the Ships of Dunkerke, so as Captain
Moy-Lambert of Rotterdam with a Ship of war of Enchuysen, took the
Admiral after a long fight, who chose rather to be slain

There were forty of his men hanged at Rotterdam, and the rest at Enchuysen,
for 1605.


About this time Prince Maurice understanding, that Spinola had lodged
fourteen companies of Ruiters and eight companies of foot men, in a village
called Mulhem up the river of Roere, by the house of Brook, the which were led
by the Earl Theodore Trivultio, Lieutenant general of the horsemen, he
resolved to set upon them, and upon the eight of October in the evening went
out of his army, with all his horse, and four and twenty companies of foot,
of diverse nations, which he caused to be carried in wagons, apointing his
brother Henricke Earl of Nassaw to have the foreward and with him Marcelis
Bax, each with eight cornets of horsemen. Prince Maurice himself following
with the rest and three field pieces, their conclusion, was that Bax Henrick
with other eight companies of horse, and the foot men should ride to the
village, which doing they found the Boome open; and therefore stood still to
slaie for the foot men, in the mean time the Spaniards took an alarm, and
left the village, and went to the house of Brook, which by policy they had
taken, but if they had suddenly charged the enemies, they would without doubt
have soon overthrown them, for Earl Henricke riding through the village,
found them in the Roere busied to pass over, but by his standing still, they
took courage, and charged Cont Henricks horsemen, putting some of them to
flight, but for that Prince Maurice Maurice gave charge to follow, so as not
only most part of the horsemen, but certain troops of Englishmen of Sir
Horatio Veres regiment ouer-tooke them.

In the mean time Ma cellus Bax, past over the Roere with his horsemen, to
stop the passage: but coming thither, he found the Spanish horsemen
standing to watch them, or else to go on with some conuoy: having a good number
of footmen. Where he put the horsemen to flight, but being relieved by their
footmen, they made head again, (the way being of advantage for the
footmen) aided also by them of Miulhem, but they were once again forced to
give back, so as at Bax found himself to be charged by one thousand horse at
the least, with whom for the space of an hour and a half, he held play
only with four hundred horsemen, chargeing and recharging one the other so
valiantly, as Bax kept his standing, wondering that no man came to second him;
at last Cont Henricke came thither, whom Bax entreated to charge the Spaniardes
which stood upon the Roere, and he would second him, the which they both did
with great resolution, but Don Lewis De Velasco having in the mean time gotten
an other company of horsemen together, at last Cont Henrickes horse were
again shamefully put to slight, abandoning their Lord, who so resolutely led
them on, the which would have brought the whole army into disorder and
confusion, if the resolution of Sir Horatio Vere Dommerville came to relieve
them, where he was slain: Earl Henricke being thus abandoned by his
horsemen he went with some few that were left to Baxes troops, upon whom all
the Spanish horsemen fell, so as they doubted how they should save themselves,
charging the enemy oster times very valiantly; where the Earl to his great
honor and commendation so valiantly charged a Spanish captain, as he bent
his pistol upon him, which he likewise did to him, Bax perceiving, he bent
his pistol at him, thinking to shoot him into the face, but with over great
have he shot him lower in the armor, and their they sat both on horseback,
hardly be-sted amongst their enemies, and but weakly relieved, by means of
the noise 1605.
Baxes Nephew came and relieved them, and by that means they gathered some
horses together, and once again charged the head of a troop, but were again
put back, and in that sort they fought for the space of seven hours.

In the mean time Prince Maurice came on with three field pieces, and some
troops of footmen, which as then were more necessary then the horsemen, who
being led on by Cont Ernestus and colonel Marquette, they discharged a
volley Earl Theodoro Trivultio slain.
of shot amongst the Spaniards, at which time, Earl Theodoro Trivultio was
slain, being Lieutenant general of those troops, a brave soldier and of a
Noble house: and Henrick giving a new charge, the Spaniards were once again
put to flight, and were driven up a hill; some ran into the wood, and many
saved themselves in the house of Brook, which at the first they took by
policy, but it was taken from them again, and for want of good order, they
recovered it again, and so it served them for a good retraict, many were taken
and slain in the flight, and diverse horses won, but such as fled into the
wood, heareing of Spinolaes coming from Roeroort with the whole army gathered
together again.

After this long and tedious fight, Prince Maurice hearing of Spinolaes approach
he caused his men to return, willing Bax to stay there to favor the
retraict, as he Maurice called for those horsemen which had fled, giving them
many reprochful speeches, and showed them what confusion they had made amongst
his men, whereas he put his greatest trust in them, and by that means mist so
good and fair an occasion to overthrow his

It was thought in this fight, there were about five hundred of Spynolas men
slain, whereof one was the Earl Theodoro Trivultio, (whose body being
imbalmed was the next year sent unto Milane where he was borne) and
Gambarotta and others of account, amongst the prisoners one was Nicholas Doria
cousin to Spinola, and others, having two cornets taken from them; and of
Prince Maurices side they lost two Ensigns, and about two hundred men, amongst
the which Mousier Dumdeville was one, and certain captains: the prisoners
were Mounsier de Bethune, (who was presently exchanged for Nicholas Doria,) as
also captain Sald, captain Pigot and captain Ratclif, but Sir Henry Carry,
a gallant Gentleman (and Master

This was done upon the nineth day of October, which gave Prince Maurice
great cause not to put so great confidence in his horsemen, being as then but
weak of foot, so as after that he durst not by any means hazard the like
again.

This Winter there was little done in the Netherlands touching the wars,
only that the garrisons on either side made many enterprises one upon an
other, as upon 1606. Marquis Spinola goes into Spain.
Nuys, Grave, Erckelens, and Deuenter, especially over the Ice during the
frost, but they took no effect, the fear thereof being the cause which made
the general Marquis Spinola to stay longer in the Netherlands then he
thought to have done, so as it was the first day of January before he took
poast to pass through France into Spain, where on the way he was hindered
by sickness, and being in Spain he found more want of money then he
expected, by the bad traficke in Spain for that the East and West Indian
fleetes were not come, as also in regard of the dearth 1605.


In this winter also the counsel of war assembled in the Hage to give their
censure A sentence pronounced against the governor and captains of Linghen for
yielding up the town.
upon the governor and captains of Linghen, for that they had so basely
yielded up the town, this counsel consisting of the Earls, Henricke, Ernest,
and John of Nassaw, the young Earl of Solms, the Lord Vander Noote, governor
in Flanders, Emerie van Lidie, governor of Williams Stat, Mounsier van
Lookeren, with some English and Scots Colonels, and other captains with
Colonel Warner du Bois, as president, which met

They of Gelderland, with certain of the Barron van Hemerts kindred, who was
beheaded in the Earl of Leicesters time, by rigor of law, said that if they
were not beheaded, that then the said Barron of Heemert had great wrong offered
him, for that he had endured three assaults given against the town of Grave,
and received above a thousand eight hundred cannon shot, whereas they to the
contrary suffered three bridges to be laid over the town ditches in the day
time, without any resistance, and that therefore, if they would proceed
severely against the one, and not against them, they should then have good
cause to apeale against the Judgment given upon the Barron de Hemert. This
counsel sitting tell the 11. day of February, at last they gave Marten Cobbe,
and captain John Wit should be dismissed, and with ignominy declared
incapable ever after to bear arms, and that the Drosart Albert of Itersome,
John Ruysch, John van Dyck, Ernestus Mellinga, Nichalas Audaert, and the
Licentiate Iuthiema should be deposed from their places, and cassiered, and
should serve under such companies as they should be appointed unto, to recover
their credits again if they could.

This sentence was much spoken of, for that many were of opinion, that if at
the first these men had been censured, they had been likely to have lost
their heads, but so much time passing over before they were judged, and for
that their action was not found to proceed of malice, but of mere cowardice,
or want of experience, had saved

In the beginning of this spring Count Ernestus of Nassau was called by Duke
Henry Iules of Brunswicke to be Lieutenant of his army against them of the
town of Brunswycke, in whose aid the Hans towns of the East countries
leauied certain men. The said Duke gave unto Cont Ernestus one of his
daughters in marriage, the The Archdukes in jealousy of the Duke of Bouillon.
which was celebrated at Wolffenbuytell where the Duke keeps his court. The
Barron of Barbanson, brother to the Earl of Arembergh did leauy at that time
for the Archduke a regiment of three thousand German foot; the Earl of
Busquoy one of two thousand five hundred Wallons, and the Lord of Luxembourg an
other of the like Maurice, least he should have some secret intelligence with
the French King, and that both of them (having joined their forces together)
should fall upon him. For as the duke being in disgrace with the King, was
retired to Sedan, where he leauied men for his defense; so the King made
preparation of an army to go and assail the duke, but by means he was
reconciled to his Majesty upon these distrusts, the Archdukes sought to
fortefie their army with new leauies: sending one part of all his forces into
Luxembourg, and an other into Henault, Arthois, Namur and other frontier
countries, but the Duke being reconciled to the Kings favor, the King dismissed
his army, and the Duke discharged his men.

The Earl of Busquoy having gathered some troops together in march about
Keesers-weert, he made show as if he would build some new fort upon the Rhine,
near unto Berck. But upon the foureteenth day of the month about midnight,
he surpri^ed the town of Brevoort; the governor and some of the souldiars
(seeing the towns thus taken) retired into the Castle, which they defended
against the enemy. The Estates 1606.
Ernestus toward the Duke of Brunswick were by good hap returned the day
before out of Germany into those quarters, who presently cut of the enemies
victuals, so as the pesants could not bring them any thing unto the town.
Cont William of Nassau governor of Freezland and Groaning, hearing of this
surprise and that the Castle held good for the Estates, sent presently all the
horse and foot he could gather suddenly together in his government, who went
and beseeged them that had surprised the town: Cont Henry Frederec of Nassau
was also sent from the Hage, and captain du Bois, having charge to command all
the forces they could get of Breda, Berghen and other places to follow them.
Prince Maurice And abandoned again.
meaning to be there present himself parted from the Hage the twenty one of
the

In the beginning of the year 1606. Philip Earl of Hohenloo, Baron of
Langerbergh, Lieutenant general of Holland, Zeeland, West Freeseland, Bomell
and Thieldwert. etc. Philip Earl of Hohenlo died.
being sick of a long lingering disease, which grew to be a general lamenes
both of hand and feet, so as he could not stire nor help himself, died at
Iselstein upon the fifth of March, being above fifty years of age. A man of a
tall comely stature, and of good experience in Marshall affaiers, but somewhat
stout and hasty, having Maurice his son being then very young, so as then
there was not any man that seemed able to take there cause in hand to direct
their marshall affaiers, and to be tutor to Prince Maurice, but only this
Earl to whom every man had a respect, to the end he should undertake their
affaiers, in regard of his authority and credit amongst the soldiers, as also
for his skill in marshall affairs, being also very rich, and withal very
bountiful and affable; he married the eldest daughter of the Prince of Orange
borne by the Contesse of Buren, who died without children, his lands he gave
to his brothers children, whereof Ernestus Earl of Hohenlo was then in the
Netherlandes with him, and commanded his cornet of horse, being a gallant young
gentleman of great hope; his funeral was appointed to be kept at Iselstein upon
the 6. of April, with the accustomed ceremonies, where Prince Maurice and
others of the house of Nassau were present, with the Deputies of the general
Estates, the counsel of Estate, and the counsel of Holland and others; but by
reason of the taking of Breuoort it was put of for a while, his body was set in
a coffin in the Church of Iselstein until his kindred came out of Germany to
fetch it, and so carried it to the country of Hohenlo.

The Archduke being freed of the fear he had of the French King, the
garrisons of Flanders attempted a certain enterprise upon Sluice being
conducted by Frederik Vanden Bergh which was very secretly undertaken, but not
fortunately effected.

Not long before there were two Spaniards who having for a time served in
Sluice, ran from the Estates again and gave intelligence to them of Flanders,
how that the An enterprise made against Sluice by the Archduke.
watch house without Sluice which stood upon the bridge of the East gate was
burnt down, so that as then there was no guard held, that bridge served to come
from Coxy, Cadsant, and from all the parts of the drowned land into the town,
being very long, with two draw bridges and a good pale on the one side, but
only where the sconses which had been broken down stood, thinking it very
difficult that the enemy should attempt any thing on that side, in regard that
the drowned land was round about fortefied with sconces, being almost
impossible for them to

The town gate as then was very weak, being only of double plankes nailed
one upon the other, and along by it but a slight low wall, which they might
easily climb over. Mounsier vander Noot the governor of the town being partly
advertised of an enterprise to be made upon that part of Flanders, had sent to
all the sconces and forts 1606.
Mounsier de Terrail, but by GODS providence wounderfully prevented, for that
few men might easily have effected it, there being a large plain within the
gate, which lay beteewne the town and the castle, where they might all have
put themselves in bataile.

The petardiers of Terrail with some others being well informed of this
situation, they concluded that on the west side, upon the twelth of June there
should be a slight alarm given, and that thereupon they should assail the
East gate, their number being

Whereupon it chanced, that the Sexton of the great Church, or of the great
clock, which was heard through all the town, about ten of the clock at
night, went up into the steple without a candle, and as GOD would (by a mere
accident) ouerwound his clock which was the reason it struck not all that
night, so as the soldiars on the West side, knew not when to begin their
alarm, and fearing to be discovered and betrared, stood still. They at the
East gate having stood above an hour watching behind the (...), and not
discovered, hearing no alarume given

The Petardier c^d three of his men to swim over, and commanded each man to
do a several work, the first with a small petard to break open the lock of
the first draw bridge, the second to do the like to the second draw bridge,
and the third with a great petard to break open the gate, having a great space
between it and the draw bridge, and they were all three effected accordingly,
the two locks of the drawbridges being broken, the gate also flying open, and
the drawbridge being let fall, the soldiers marched forward, as many as cold
march one by an other Mounsier van Noots Sargeant, which Sargeant hearing some
noise, went to hearken at the gate, and with the blow of the petard was slain,
those that were in guard came all out, and seeing no, man advance toward them
they put to the gate again as well as they could: in the mean time (as I said
before) the bridge stood full of soldiars, who had nothing but there
cortelasses and pikes, (which was a graat error in them, as having more need
to have been musketeers) but they stood still looking one upon the other,
being much abasht, not only for that they heard no alarume from the West side,
but for that they saw no great resistance made against them.

The Petardier speaking unto them and crying, March forward the gate is open,
but they within having some respeit, the gate being half open into the which
they thrust with their pikes there came presently to aid the court of guard,
(who had shot of their pieces) an English Captain with about sixteen soldiars
and Gentlemen, who lay not far from the gate, but half dressed, and presently
after that diverse others, as the captains ^oost, Broufaulx, Haultaine, and an
other, ^euery one with there rediest men, and not long after the governor
himself also came; most part in their shirtes, so as if the enemy had charged
them furiously, and presently clome up the walls, although it had bin done at
the first but with ten or twelve men (as it is thought) shot cross over the
bridge which caused the ennemy to give back, they within the gate 1606.


Not long after there was a drum sent into the town for certain prisoners,
who said that the enemy mist four or five hundred of their men, and they
within very few: After this enterprise there was a fair half Moon made at
Sluice before the said gate to prevent the like attempts. This enterpise falling
out thus unfortunately, Certain captains and soldiars punished by the
Archduke for failing of the enterprise before Sluice.
Terrail (with his petardies) made great complaint thereof unto the counsel of
war, saying that they had opened the gate, and that the soldiers durst not
enter, whereupon the counsel of war caused some of them to be aprehended and
committed to prison, whereof three were openly beheaded for the same in
Brussels upon the nineteen of June, one being a Captain called
Cruycklenborgh, another was Sergeant Wael Rasoir who had served long time under
the Spainard. Cruycklenborgh being a young gentleman of good parentage in
Brussels was much lamented, and great means were made unto the Archduke for
his life, who being much importuned by his friends, willed them to repair unto
him again after noone; in the mean time they were all three beheaded before
noone, by commandment from the counsel of war, and that which caused the
matter to be more spoken of, was, for that it happened even at such time as the
Earl of Busquoy was married in the court at Brussells unto the cousin of the
Earl of Biglia. Colonel Challon was discharged of his Collonells place and a
company of horsemen given Mounsier de Terraile with the rest of his petardiers
hearing what murmuring speeches were used among the soldiers by reason of that
execution, feared least they would secretly do him 1061
The castle of Wouvve and Hoghestrate razed.
Archduke and the united Provinces (the better to relieve the countries on both
sides,) that the castle of Wouwe, and the castle of Hoch-strate (fortefied by
the mutinous esquadron,) should be razed, as being both a like injurious unto
the countries, the which was as then done. The 20. of June there was a great
quarrel and tumult in Antwerp, between the Netherland sailors and the Spanish
garrison in the castle, about a whore or some such like matter, wherein some
Spaniards were hurt and a sayler slain: the sailors An uproar in Antwerp.
accompanied with the Burgers ran in heaps to the Oue and the Minte, not far
kill, kill, so as it was likely there would have been great bloodshed.
Wherewith the Burgers being moved and up in arms, the Burguemasters with
great entreaties and promises appeased them, and caused the Castelaine with his
souldiars Two women murdered by a Spaniard in Gant.
had sent her daughter away, whom he followed, and (as he said) thought to
have married, which Spaniard after he had done the deed, went to save himself
in a cloister, where because the porter would not let him in, before he had
gotten license of the Prior so to do, he snatched a candle stick out of his
hand, and struck him therewith, whereupon the people running thither, they
took him and bynding his hands and feet, laid him in the street, until that
the officers (being made acquainted therewith) came and aprehended Don John de
Silua captain of a cornet of horse, and one of the council of war to the
Archduke, boldy entering into the Earl of Barlaymonts house, who had married
the daughter of the last Earl of Lalain, with who^ the said don John was too
familierly acquainted) was by the said Earls servants assailed and wounded in
nine or ten places of his body and almost slain, whereof notwithstanding the
Archduke had given him warning, to

The one and twenty day of Iulie in the morning, the Earl of Busquoy coming
from Moocke with three thousand foot and five and thirty shalops or boats
laden in wagons to the Wahal, at Keeckerdom he had planted two demi cannons, by
means and under the favor whereof he thought to put his boats into the water,
and so to pass over, and also in the mart ship of Keeckerdome, wherein he
shipped the Spaniards of Don Inigo de Borgias regiment, and some of Pompeto
Iustinianios the Italians regiment, over, colonel du Bois, (who came thither
the night before, having heard news thereof 1606.
Roques, and two companies of Englishmen led by Sir Thomas Harwood and
captain John Vere, and two half companies of horsemen, the one colonel
Edmonds, the other Sir John Ratclifes, who had newly received the company from
Richard Arthure an old soldier, who being sickely, had made it over unto him
with which companies he withstood the Spaniards landing; who sought all the
places thereabouts both below and above, to go to shore, where the fight
continuing betwixt them about an hours space, at the last (having sought all
the means they could to pass) they were compelled to put back again in
great disorder, one hindering of an other, with the loss of a hundred of their
men, whereof five were captains, as the ouerlopers du Bois men, thirty were
slain and wounded; and so the Earl of Busquoy went back again, to his army
at Moockle, which he there fortified in an Island lying in the Meuse. It is
since understood that his intent was to enter into the Betuwe, and to incampe
himself, on the side of the Rhine, either above or beneath Arnhem, and that
then Spinola should also come to the Rhine, and so to join both together,
which had been a great furtherance for them, wherein du Bois did the united
Provinces very good service at that time, for which cause Prince Maurice
caused good watch to be kept in every place, by water and by land, both with
horse and foot, especially along by the Isel, or where their enemies might
have the best means, to get over, placing ships of war in guard upon the
rivers, who kept watch with half their men in shalops, as also in herring
boats, which sailed too and fro, and every hour Maurice had at least a hundred
companies of men lying all there abouts.

This enterprise of the Earl of Busquois failing and the enemy thereby brought
to a new resolution, Spinola lay still at Lochem, until the last of Iulie,
thinking to give Spinolaes enterprise to get into Suider sea.
Prince Maurice a sudden blow, and to that end went with his army toward
Brouckhorst and Doesborgh. In the mean time sending an other troop of
soldiers to Almeloo, where as then he was gathering together a certain
number of boats to bring his soldiers down the river to Bercklenmeers
bridge, and so into the Blackwater between Sasselt and Swol, mean time the
garrisons of Linghen and Oldenzeel came thither to him, hoping with them and by
the aid of the said Scutes, upon Warmeloo Drossart of Salant, who lay in
Swol, understanding thereof, went forth with three companies of foot and
cornet of horsemen and so valiantly withstood them, as after a long fight
Spinolaes men were let of their passage, and forced to retire, and that in
great have, fearing that their enemy had been stronger, many of the men of
both sides being slain and only by their obstinacy.

Spinola seeing that this passage also could not be gotten, was forced to
proceed to his third resolution, and so upon the third day of August, he went
with his army before Grol besieged by Spinola.
Maurice had put the young Lord of Dort with eighteen companies of men: being
about thirteen or fourteen thousand men strong, at their first coming they
were entertained with skirmishes; but after that he made his trenches, and the
tenth day of August he took two half moons, which stood without the town by
force, where he had at the least six hundred men slain and wounded, whereof
some were of his own kindered, and eigh or ten captains with many officers,
and amongst the rest two Earls of Embden, viz. Earl John of Redbergh, and his
brother Earl Christopher were wounded, they within also had much hurt, and
lost captain Appel vander Schuren Lieutenant to colonel Dort.

In the winning of those half moons, Spinola showed great rigor and cruelty
against counterscarfes, and cut of some part of them of the town, so as they
could not 1606.
Spinola had taken certain messengers with letters sent to them of Groll,
willing them to withstand the enemy valiantly, and that they should be
relieved within three days, as he also understood by the soldiers, which
daily Maurice from all places, for that he had sent for William Earl of
Nassau out of Freezeland, to come with all the men that he could spare, and
for Colonel Edmonds out of Reinbergh; Collonell du Bois from the Betouwe, and
the soldiers of Deuenter and Swoll, which all marched to Doesborgh, with
Ordinance, Munition and all other preparations for an army. Where-vppon
Spinola used all the diligence he could to win the town, determining upon
the fourteenth of August to assault it in three places at once, and to that end
in great pride he placed his men in order of battle, and made a terrible
show, and therewith he willed a Trumpet to certify them within the town,
that he would give them but one hours time to bethink themselves, which if
they refused, he would put them all to the Groll yielded (...) Spinola.
at their request, was content to hearken unto a composition without once
showing Prince Maurices letters to the soldiers, who promised they should be
relieved upon the sixteenth of August, and there-vpon he and the Captains
without any great need, yielded up the town by composition, and so issued out
with 18. Ensigns, displayed, being about 1200. sound men, and 100. wounded,
and 15. or 16. horsemen of Batenborghs company.

Within it also there was a company of New-geusen who (like to them that sold
Gheertrudenbergh) were prescribed and banished in all places, but for that the
Maurices coming, and to that end had wagons given them to bring them to
Zutphen, where they arrived the next day at noone: And although Spinola was
much commended for his good order and discipline, yet that garrison past not
without ransacking of the men and some wagons. There was about a hundred men
slain in Groll, but many more without, some said eight or Spinola to win the
town, for that at the same time Prince Maurice was gone to Doesbourgh;
whereupon the 15. of August when all the Ordinance and Munition was laden
ready to march forward to relieve them, he had news that the town of Grol was
taken, whereupon presently he dispersed his army, and sent every man unto his
garrison, therewith to furnish al places, staying to see what further attempt
Spinola would make.

Spinola having soon (beyond all expectation) gotten that town, even at such
time as his army had great want of all necessaries, and (by reason of the
abundance of rain which then fell) was hardly lodged, his enemy being in
field, ready to attempt some great exployte, and he being but meanly
intrencht, was did, first passing by Nimmeghen, as if he would have done
something there-abouts, 1606.
Monsieur Grobbendonck, but having given the peasants charge to cast down all
his trenches at Mooke, upon the twenty of August he past along by the Rhine,
and suddenly set upon a ship of war, which took no great regard unto
himself, where-as the Captains wife had her head smitten off, he himself
and hi^ Lieutenant with diverse Sailors being taken prisoners.

In the same manner also there was a Galey burnt by Boisleduc, through the
negligence of the Captain, in the beginning of September; which Galley lay
before Herdrighsvelt, to let all incursions. Upon the ninteenth of August
Spinola raised his army before Groll to go to the Rhine; which Prince Maurice
understanding, upon the twenty Reinbergh besieged by Spinola.
the Earl of Busquoy invested Reinbergh toward the land beneath the town,
and shut up the rivers and to that end, upon the four and twenty of August, he
brought twelve Shalops into the water, wherewith he carried his men over the
Rhine, and made a battery of two Canons, to let the passage, where he placed
the Sailors of Antwerpe, and the same day Spinola went to Lip to pass over
there.

In the mean time Prince Maurice sent his brother Cont Henrick of Nassaw with
seven and twenty companies of horse, and fourteen companies of footmen to
meet them and to set upon part of the Earl of Busquoyes men, which were
marching from Mooke and other places, but they marching toward the Meuse, and
so to Venlo. Cont Henrick could not come at them, wherefore according to his
further commission, he past Monsieur de Sonbyse, brother to the Duke of Rohan,
cousin to the French King, and Monsieur de Varennes, who were excellently well
mounted, and behaved themselves valiantly. Cont Henrick left the town well
furnished of all things necessary, under the government of Monsieur Van
Vtenhooue, and the trenches upon the Weert and over the Rhine, were committed
to the charge of Sir William Edmonds a Scottish Colonel, as being necessary to
be well guarded.

The Marquis of Ausbach of the house of Brandenborgh, being come to Prince
Maurice with certain horsemen, and he perceiving that Spinola would besiege
Reinberghe, and to that end had past over the river of Lip, upon the eight
and twenty of August he followed him with his army, to get hard b^ Wesel, that
he might incampe himself between Wesel and Bislicke, and to that end he
presently sent for ship-Bridges; there to make a Bridge over the Rhine: and
upon the nine and twenty of August he past by Emericke, and so to Dornick,
(where he understood that Spinola made a Sconce at the mouth of the river of
Lip, to let him from passing over,) and upon the thirty of August he went to
Wesel and there insconced himself.

Reinbergh being round about besieged, upon the eight and twenty of August,
they Spinolaes quarter, being lead by some French Gentlemen, in very good
order, and to the great loss of their enemies. After that they made another
salie out upon Busquoyes quarter, where they were driven in again by the
enemy with six hundred horse, but the Ordinance of the town played so upon
the horsemen, as they made a great spoil amongst them, at which time the Cont
of La Flesche one of the French Gentlemen, venturing too boldly amongst the
enemies, was taken prisoner.

In the mean time Spinola had made his bridge from Roewort over the Rhine,
somewhat above Reinbergh, and caused great store of Fagots and other furniture
to be brought thither, to assail the trenches over the Rhine, at which time
also Prince Maurice in-sconced himself, staying for his ship-bridge that was
to come up against the stream, and by that means lost his opportunity and
means to relieve the Trenches which were before Reinbergh, for that before he
was well in-sconced, and had gotten his ship, it happened that Collonell
Edmonds (who had then command (...) 6. (...) ^d (...), ne (...).
Spinola got great advantage, much incumbr^ng Prince Maurices seeking to
relieve the town who at the same time having received some shippe-bridges,
Edward Cicile to make a trench for the keeping of his bridge: besides the los^e
of the great intrenchment over the Rhyne, they of Rembercke left diue^s other
works, lying without the town, as Cont Ernestus old quarter, and the sconce
of Hollestrate, which gave the enemy great advantage, and would have been the
means to have procured a relief unto the town with more ease, whereunto the
long detraction of Prince Maurice did much help, for that it was the tenth of
September before he battered the sconce at Lip, and being put back from
thence with a light skirmish, he went into his quarter again, but attempting
the same again upon the twelfth of September, he put over and there
insconced Spinolaes sconce, upon the mouth of Lip, the which (presently after
they saw a piece of Ordinance) yielded up, from whence there (...) why (...)
Mau^uld ^e (...) ^es (...) b^o ^rcke.
went two hundred and seauenty men: The sconce was made with six points, but
not fully finished: and although all Prince Maurices men were very willing to
charge the enemy, nevertheless Prince Maurice by reason that he was not
there entrenched, and without victuals, and for that Spinola lay well
insconced, as also that the ways to come to him were well covered and very
close, and for that Spinolas Camp was fortified by four Regiments (brought
thither by Frederick Earl of Bergh) the which had been taken up about Liege)
he put all his willing men into his quarter again, leaving some Maurice could
not relieve the town, for that the ways were to much covered, and Spinolas
camp lay well insconced, the which was the more probable for that upon the
sixeteenth of September about evening Prince Maurice sent all his horsemen out
of his Camp with Cont Henricke to put eleven companies more into Meurs,
besides the six companies that were in it, which Cont Henricke that night
happily performed. Many men discoursed strangely of Prince Maurices resolution,
for that he relieved not Reinbergh, but therein (as many men judged) consisted
many difficulties, because it was not well to be relieved but with a battle,
which is uncertain against an enemy Spinola strike of the tippes of his
horns, which might well be repaired, and could not infect the body within,
nor bring it to the uttermost extremity: In the mean time the^ within the
town made many sallies, and amongst the rest upon Spinolas camp, the letters
cer^efying Prince Maurice, that the enemy approached very near unto them on
the luyt (...) side, so as they could hardly hold out six days longer.

The thirteenth of September they wrotte again that the enemy had taken all
1606.
Spinola sent a Trumpet to the town, for which cause they ceased their
shooting (which otherwise never left off day nor night) which made all the
places round about to suspect that they were in parle, but it was but a short
prolongation

But Prince Maurice (notwithstanding all these aduertisements) resolved not to
relieve the town, holding it impossible, and so lay still, thinking it best
for him to keep his army in safety, and not to consume it by ouer-venturing
upon the enemy, in seeking means to relieve the town, and to no end. Upon
the six and twentieth The Estates send to persuade Prince Maurice to relieve
Rhynbercke.
day of September, the Deputies of the general Estates came into the Camp, to
know Prince Maurices mind and resolution, or else to move him to undertake the
relief of the town, whereunto they used a long persuasion, but he would not
be brought thereunto, esteeming it both impossible and unnecessary, where of
one of his chief reasons was, that, that the Town was not to be relieved,
but along by the East side of the Rhyne, and by bringing the army near, which
could Maurice feared, that Spinola would leave Reinbergh, and on the one side
keep his army still in alarm, and on the other side seek to do some
exployt in the Betouwe, whether Prince Maurice should be forced to go to aid
it, and in such a case his army (being mixed with the enemies) could not well
get from them without confusion; besides he said that to be always ready,
and to have means to aid those places that were of most importance, he
thought it best to keep his Army free and whole: which reasons by those which
had experience in wars were well allowed of, and thought to be of great
importance, for that men must always have a care to keep wounds from their
hearts. Therefore seeing that they could not relieve the Maurice had committed
an error for that he had not beseeged Grol, when he saw he could not help
Reinbergh, but that was not so much urged, some reasons leading to the
contrary; at last they resolved to enterprise something against Venlo, to see
in the mean time if they could get it, to which end it was agreed that Cont
Henricke with twelve hundred horse and six thousand footmen should attempt
it, and that the same night it should be attempted, Prince Maurice with the
rest of the army should lie in the way, that leads from Reinbergh to Venlo
to prevent them that upon the alarm given at Venlo would adventure to go
thither from the enemies camp.

To this end Cont Henricke and Cont Earnest with their troops upon the last
of September departed out of their camp to Grawenweert, from thence to turn
again to Venlo, and upon the first of October in the night to take their
enterprise in hand, Prince Maurice also went from the camp the same night to
the aforesaid way, but there happened a great alteration in the mean time, for
that they of Reinbergh, being out of hope of relief, and perceiving that the
enemy had gotten so near unto the town, as they were in great danger
thereof, upon the same day being the first of October they compounded with
Spinola, to yield the town unto him. Cont Henricke being before Venlo with his
Petards, brake open the gate before day light, but the Van Etten General of
the victuals, An enterprise upon Venlo.
come into the Town, whereby it happened, that some of Cont Henricks men being
already entered into the Town, were by the said horsemen (with some loss)
driven out again, and forced to retire. Prince Maurice also lay on the way
1606.
Spinola, had commanded that no man should that night go out of the camp.

They of Reinbergh agreed with Spinola to depart the town with arms and
baggage like soldiers, and with three pieces of ordinance that lay in the
Weert, as also Reinbergh yeeld^d to Spinola.
the new Geusen, or Saint Andreas soldiers, but they must leave all the
ships, puntes, bridges, and the rest of the ordinance, and so upon the second
day of October, there issued three thousand men, with three companies of
Ruyters, with the dead body of general Edmonds, it is thought there were five
hundred lost within the town, both dead and wounded: The French gentlemen also
departed from thence with their honors, as also the governor and the Lord of
Sweten: it seems that the greatest cause of the giving over of the town was,
that they saw no hope of releife, and therefore

It was thought there were many of the enemies slain before the town, and
amongst the rest three Engeneurs or masters of the fortifications, and Pompeio
Romano their chief The Spaniards los^e at the ^ge of Rhine-^erck.
Engeneur wounded, before it also was slain Colonel de Tores who had the
regiment of Catrice, and the Lieutenant Colonel of the Barron of Achicourt,
with diverse Spinola and the Earl of Busquoy. Their loss of men was found to
be so great, at also by reason of the disease and wetnesse of the weather, as
their companies at the musters were found to be but forty or fifty strong,
so as many regiments (as amongst the rest two Italian regiments, one Cont Guydo
St. Georgios, the other Pompeto Iustinianios) were less by a third part then
they should be.

By means of the winning of this town, Spinola had great advantage, and much
help, for thereby he had means to have victuals follow him from the town
of Cologne and the country of Cleave, and all little enough, by reason that the
ways (by means of the great store of rain that had fallen) were so foul and
deep, as Spinola was in all places commended for the good order and discipline
he observed amongst all his soldiers, and in these Netherland wars no man
better deserved it, which was the cause, that his army was not evil thought-on
in the newterall countries.

The loss of Reinberghe caused no small fear in the united Provinces, each

The Marquis Spinola having won honor in the taking of Rhine-Berck, went
(...)
the which Prince Maurice understanding, he raised his camp and marched with
all sp^ed before Grol, with an intent to recover it again, lodging his men in
the town ditches, without any one cannon shot.

But Spinola advertised of this desseigne, he presently gathers his forces
together, 1607.


The mutines of Dyest continued all this time in their mutiny, seeking to
draw contribution from all the frontiers, even out of Germany, until they
were paid. The mutines of Dyest.
The which the Prince Elector of Mentz understanding, he caused a diet of the
Circles to be held at Ouerwezel, to ptouide some means to stop their
incursions, but there was nothing effected: but in the end the King of Spain
and the Archdukes, were forced to give them contentment. More-ouer Dom Ihon de
Medicis, having

In January 1607. the mutines of Dyest made a road even unto the suburbs of
Liere, the which they said was friend to the King of Spain and to the
Archdukes, and therefore subject to contribution as well as the Netherlands,
whereof they came to do execution; by Lont-recht, as they call it, (which is
as much to say as Military Justice.) But the Townes-men (who are given to
arms) took arms Cornelis Munster at sixeteene thousand ricx Dallers, but the
refusing it, did levy men, and muster up all his subjects to resist them. But
soon after there cam^ an assignation out of Spain for six hundred thousand
Ducats* to be paid in six months: so as the mutines were satisfied according
to the agreement they had made with the Archdukes, and had leave to depart
freely where they

To end the troubles between the Earl of East-freezeland and the town of
Embden, Peace made between the Earl of East-Freezeland and the town of
Embden.
this year certain mediators took upon them to deal therein; as the King of
England, by a Gentleman called Mr. Ralph Winwood, now a Knight, who lay at the
Hage for the said King, and certain Deputies for the Estates, as John Ba^el,
Jacob Boelissen Vitus Caninga, and Abel Coenders van Helpen, who propounded
certain articles unto both

That they of Embden, according to the decree made in the Hage, should restore
the Ordinance and other things which they had gotten.

Further, that they of Embden should suffer the Earl to enter, and yield unto
him without refusal give the Burgers of Embden convenient letters for the
seas, and entreat 1607.


Upon the tenth of January 1607. the Earl caused the said agreement to be
openly 1607.
proclaimed.

The last of January 1607. at the earnest request and intercession of the
Townsmen of Groaning, it was agreed by the general Estates of the united
Provinces, that The castle of Groaning broken down.
the Castle made there to keep the town in awe, should be opened and thrown

This year the young Earl of Brook a Nobleman of great hope, riding out of
The Earl of Brook murdered by the Spaniards.
Holland to the house of Brook unto his brother, with a small conuoye of
horsemen, was intercepted and watched for in the way, by certain Spanish
Soldiers (upon hatred which in times past they had borne unto the Earl his
Father, and yet had revenged it at their pleasures,) upon the way as he went by
Wesel, with fourteen horsemen, the Spaniards met him, first taking his
Secretary who road before, and him they stabd with Bodkins, to make him tell
them the truth of his Lord; who being thus

The 7. of February Cont Henry assembling a good number of horsemen of the
united Provinces, and certain footmen (which he set upon peasants horses) he
thought therewith to charge two regiments of Spinolaes horsemen, lying
dispersed in the country Erckelens taken and spoiled by Henrick Earl of
Nassaw.
that enterprise was disapointed. Whereupon Cont Henrick returning back
again, fell upon a small town called Erckenlens, wherein Frederick Vanden
Berghe lay.

And upon the eleventh of February in the morning, by the means of a Petrad,
he entered it, and took the Earl of Berghe prisoner, and about fifty of his
horsemen; the rest being out of the town: and for that the Burgers of the said
town during the time of their ne^tralitie, had used much cruelty and hard
dealing against the soldiers which served the united Provinces, as also being
then strengthened with a garrison of their enemies, he suffered it to be
spoiled, and after burnt it, and so they departed with

As the King of Spain had prepared a great fleet of ships, of all sorts,
well manned The King of Spain and the Estates prepare to war at sea.
with Soldiers, and furnished with all things necessary, meaning to annoy the
united Provinces all he could. So likewise the united Provinces being duly
informed thereof, they for their parts did also arm to sea twenty seven
ships of war and four for 1607.
James Hemskerke of Amsterdam Admiral, whose wisdom, courage and experience,
together with his loyallty and love to his country, was wellknowne to all the
world by his many good services.

Upon the twenty five of March having all things ready, he sailed out of Texel
with The Estates ships sally toward Spain.
sixteen ships of war and one pinace, with whom there joined the four
victuallers, there came three also from Enchuysen, and three from Horn making
twenty two ships of War: upon the twenty seven day they came under the I Will
of Wight, where they found three ships more of Zeeland, and five of
Rotterdamme with an other pinace of Amsterdam. There was a forth ship of
Zeland run on ground, so as they took the men and munition out of it, and
put them into other ships. Hemskerke (having all his fleet together) went on
with an Easterly wind toward Portugal and Spain, so as on the tenth of
April they came unto the height of thirty six degrees near unto the river of
Lisbone. There the Admiral called his They resolve to enter into the river of
Lisbon.
captains and council aboard, where they resolved to enter into that river
with their whole fleet, and to set upon the carraques and gallions which they
should find there. But the Admiral being certainly advertised by his spies
(which he had sent into Lisbon in an English ship) that the carraques were
most of them gone forth, and that there remained but eight or nine, not half
furnished and without artillery. Moreover having intelligence from certain
French ships coming from Saint Lucars Cape Saint Vincent, where they turned
on the left hand, and lost sight of one of their company: there they met with a
ship of Flushing, which came through the straights on the twenty day, telling
him that he past through the Spanish army in the night, and being out of the
Straight, they seemed to him in the morning as if they would take their course
toward Cadiz, for that they could notly within the straight, the wind being
Easterly.

The Admiral hearing this, continued his course, and on the twenty four of
April they past close by the river of Saint Lucars, and the Baye of Cadiz but
they could not learn that any ships were entered, where the Admiral had
fully resolved to charge them, were it in the river of S. Lucars or in the Bay.
The same day he had certain intelligence The Estates ships go to seek the
Spanish fleet.
of the Spanish fleet, by a Frenchman which came out of the road of Gibraltar,
who duly informd him of the strength and Estate of the Spanish army. At night
(for that the wind was westerly) thy bent their course southward, toward the
coast of Barbary, from whence in the morning they turned again toward Spain:
when the Admiral came into the narrowest part of the straight, he called all
his Captains aboard, etting them understand what the French man had said unto
him, where they did Hemskerke with Captain Moye Lambert should charge the
Admiral, the Vice Admiral Alteras with captain Bras should undertake the
Spanish Vice Admiral, and so every two ships of war should take'a galleoun
to task, the two Pinaces and a barge were appointed to lie out at sea, to
charge any ship or gallioun that should offer to fly, but the four victualers
should lie a loose. The Admiral having set all things in good order, he
incorraged the Captains, recommending unto them the honor and profit which
this victory would bring unto their country, telling them that he would be
the first, shot of the town and Castle. 1607, The number of the Spanish fleet.


They were in all twenty one, that is nine great galliouns and four ships of
war, with a great ship of Lubecke of four hundred lasts, who was come into
the road, to stay for a wind to go to Cadiz, their were four French
ships, and three prizes, two of Enchuysen and one of Rotterdam; all which
ships they had manned with soldiars, to attend the Estates army; for the Duke
of Medina Sidonia hearing that they had past before his river and before Cadiz,
he presently dispacht a post to Gibraltar, to advertise the Spanish fleet of
the coming of the Estates men, wishing them to stand upon their guard: They had
the like aduertisment sent from Cadiz, so as the same day they did ^ortefie
their army with three hundred men, of the which there were a hundred caualiers,
which came voluntarily to serve the Admiral, so as the Admiral had about
seven hundred men abord his ship, and the Viceadmirall some four Don Iuan
Aluares d' Auila, borne at Esturges, an ancient knight, who had long served the
King of Spain at sea, even all the time of Don John of Austria, his ship was
the Saint Augustine, of eigh hundred tonne: the Admiralls son (bearing his
own name) was Captain of that galleoun; the names of the other Galeouns Iomit
for breuity sake, the repetition being not greatly necessary.

The Admiral Hemskerke having the Spanish fleet in sight, having prayed unto

The Spanish Admiral having in like manner descouered the States fleet, he
called for the Master of a ship of Rotterdam, a prisoner whom he set at
liberty, and Hemskerk perceiving, he went on his course, leaving the
Viceadmirall and the galleouns on his left hand, causing an anchor to be set on
the top of his prowe, ready to let down: commanding they should not let it
slip before that he was grappeled to Hemskerke answered him with two pieces
from before, and presently grapled with the Spaniard, letting slip his anchor.

The Spaniard with the second shot he made slew a young Gentleman, and the
boullet passing on by misfortune struck of the Admiral Hemskerkes left thigh
close to his body, wherewith he fell, and the same boullet carried away a
gonners The Admiral Hemskerke slain.
hand, wherewith he was ready to give fire. This valiant Admiral fealing
death approaching, encouraged them that were about him all he could, entreating
them to proceed

In the mean space they shot so furiously of either side, both with their
Canon and 1607.
Lambert, who had charge to second his Admiral (whose death was not known
unto the rest, until the victory was assured) charged the Spanish Admiral
first in poupe, making a great spoil of his men, then he came in flank
behind the Admiral Hemskerke; annoying the Spaniard all he could with his
Ordinance. It is a hard matter to describe how furiously they did fight on both
sides. For although the Estates ships were not half so well manned as their
enemies, yet hoping of victory they did fight like Lions, and partly to be
revenged of that which the Spaniards had made them suffer, as well in prison,
as in their Galleys, and other-wise.

When as the Admiral Hemskerke went on first to charge the Spanish Admiral,
The Spanish Vize-admirall burnt.


A Galleon which lay behind the Spanish Vize-admirall was also in fight with
three A Galleon burnt.
of the Estates ships, after some fight Lange Hendricke one of the Estates
Captains was slain with a Musket shot. They of the Gallion seeing their
Vize-admirals Flagge down, they presently planted one upon their missen Mast,
but it was soon pulled away by a Hollander, and the Galleon fired, which burnt
even unto the water: an other Galleon was so plied with the Canon, as it was
soon sunk.

The rest of the Spanish Fleet being retired more into the Baye with their
Admiral, seeing how the game went, plied the Hollanders with their Canon, who
answered them in like manner, but yet they never came to handie blows, nor to
graple, but in the end one of the Spaniards with much shooting, and
inconsideratly, set fire of his own ship, which driving down, fired an
other that was before him;

All this time the Spanish Admiral was in fight with two ships, which did so
plye him with their Ordinance, as he left shooting, putting forth a white The
Spanish Admiral offers to yield.
Flagge in sign of a parlee, the which stayed not the battery. In the mean
time, another Galleon being in fight, was set on fire, the men thinking to fly
in their boats to their Admiral, who made no more resistance, came unto the
Admiral of Holland. One of the Estates Trumpeters went up and pulled away the
Spanish Admiralls Flagge, for the which he had a hundred ryalls of eight as
the Admiral Hemskerke had promised. The Spanish Admiral being thus
vanquished, having lost many men, they threw themselves by ten or twelve at a
time into the sea seeking their safety by swimming, but the Hollanders being in
their boats slew all they met withal in their fury, so as the dead carcases
did lie floating in the Baye, as if it had been in a champian field. This
battle began about three of the clock in the after noone, and ended four
hours after in the evening, when as the Estates had a full and absolute
victory. The Estates win the battle.
This hardy and dangerous battle was attempted by the valor and great
resolution of the Admiral Hemskerke, and happily ended by ten or twelve
ships at the most. The next day morning the Spanish Admiral being run a
ground upon the

It was an admirable and fearful thing to see these Gallions and ships
burn, especially when the fire came to the poulder, then it was like unto a
horrible thunder. The Sea and land were covered with smoke for a long time,
like thick clouds which 1607.


Besides the Admiralls Gallion there were five others burnt, with an other
great ship of war which the Spaniards had taken at Sea, and that of
Lubecke: There was an other Gallion sunk, the other two ran a ground, the
which were so battered Their loss of ships.
and torn as they were not fit for any more service. There was also run a
shore a French ship, that of Roterdam, and one of Enchusen, and all the rest
of the Spaniards ships of war were run a ground here and there near unto the
shore.

There were not above fifty Spaniards prisoners, who confessed that there were
4000. men in their army, of the which there were 2000. lost at the battle,
among the which Their loss of men.
was their Admiral, and many other Captains and Gentlemen, whose names could
Don John Aluarez D'Auila the Admirals son who was carried into Holland. Of
the Hollanders side, the Admiral Hemskerke was slain at the first charge,
with some 100. men, and about 60. hurt.

On the 26. day the Estates ships withdrew themselves a little from the town
and Castle, and dressed their hurt men, as well as they could: during their abode
there, they might see many soldiers both horse and foot upon the sands,
running toward Gibraltar, for they did confidently believe that the Estates
men would make an attempt to spoil the town, where they were in such fear,
as they began to pack up their baggage, and to fly away.

On the seven and twentieth day the Estates army past over to the Coast of
Barbary,

Their ships being well repaired, and all things in good order, the
Vice Admiral Alteras was made Admiral, and Peter Werhoef was Vice Admiral:
then they took council which way they might annoy the enemy more: in the end
they concluded The resolutiof the Estates ships after the battle.
that the Vice Admiral with part of the Fleet should go to the Islands to
seek their adventure, and the Admiral with the rest should lie upon the
Coasts of Spain and Portugal, and two of their victuallers with a ship of
war, should carry back the Admiral Hemskerkes body imbalmed into Holland,
who arrived at Amsterdam the fifth of June, where three days after he was
interred with an honorable Military The Admiral Hemskerke buried at Amsterdam.
body was carried by twelve Captains, being accompanied with all rites and
Ceremonies belonging unto such a Commander, and followed by the Council of the
Admiraltie, Magistrates of the towns, Colonels, Council at war, Captains,
Officers, Gentlemen, Merchants adventurers to the East Indies, with all the
chief Burgers of the town, in very good order.

The general Estates for a perpetual memory of his services, caused a goodly
tomb to be built up for him, with his arms over it, and on the West side
there was a fair table of Iette, in the which were graven in golden letters,
the painful voyages and virtuous acts done by him in his life time. Mounsier
Hurst and master John Geuarts make an offer of peace or truce (...) Holland.


It had long been sought and practiced in the Netherlands how to attain unto
a Truce or surceance from arms, but the United Provinces remembering what
happened to Sextus Pompeius, son to Pompeius the great upon his Treaty with
the Emperor Augustus, they always feared it, yet at the last it brake forth
after a strange manner. In May 1606. Monsieur Walraue van Wittenhorst, 1607.
John Geuart Licenciate in the laws, and Secretary of Tournhout, making
known to some of the Estates that they had instructions dated In May,
containing that the Archdukes were wholly addicted, to cease the long continued
bloody wars, and to reduce the country unto a good peace, upon such
reasonable conditions, as the Provinces should be well content therewith,
which was, that they knew the uprightness of their intents, and that they
desired nothing else but that which was their own, and that therefore they
were content that the Estates themselves should ask what they

Besides this the Archdukes had written a letter of the 12. of December 1606.
that they had once again sent the Gentlemen aforesaid into Holland, to make an
offer of a treaty of peace, and that if they were more addicted to a truce
then to a peace, they should certify their minds therein. The Archdukes (in
regard of their great affection and desire to peace) might willingly hearken
thereunto. Wher-vpon they began to deal Geuarts went in all have to Brussels,
and from thence brought a Commission from the Archdukes, bearing date the third
of January 1607. containing a charge imposed upon the said Monsieur Van Horst,
and Secretary Geuarts, that they at the first assembly of the Estates, should
in their behalf signify unto them, that they were ready to hearken unto a
peace, and for the treating thereof, were content to appoint Commissioners, and
to give the Estates all reasonable contentment, or that if they would rather
hearken unto a truce, that the Archdukes were also content to do it, for such
time as should be agreed The States answer to the Archdukes Commissioners
touching peace.
they presently began to crave audience for the same of the general Estates,
and upon the tenth of January they spoke with Prince Maurice: and after that
upon the thirteenth of January, they had audience given them by the general
Estates, where they declared the effect of their charge and commission,
desiring the Estates withal to remember and call to mind the doubtful events
of war, and there-vpon to dispose themselves to a good peace or truce,
thereby to reduce the countries unto quietness and to their ancient
prosperity, etc.

Whereunto, upon the seven and twenty of January, answer was made them,
(after some rehearsal of that which had past in former times) that the Estates
perceived endeavor with all the force and power they could make, to recover the
same, and that 1607.
van Horst wrote a letter unto the Estates to certefie the^ that the meaning and
intent of the Archdukes was not by that treaty to get or pretend any advantage
John Neyen Prouincial for the Franciscan John Neyen ^vinciall of the Friars
sent into Holland to treat of a pea^e in the Arch dukes ^ehalfe.
Friars (son to M^rten Neyen who had bin well acquainted with William Prince of
Ora^ge) came from Brussels into Holland, as Deputy from the Archdukes; who at
his first coming staid very quietly at Ryswicke, from whence he certefied the
reason of his coming; which was to know the cause why the proceedings of
Mounsieur van Horst took no effect, and after that he had particularly spoken
with Prince Maurice, he had license to come to the H^ge, where he had
conference with diverse persons, and also had audience of Prince Maurice, to
whom he said that the Archdukes meaning was not by the John Neyen took upon
him to bring the Arch dukes thereunto, thereby to shun al further bloodshed
etc. And to that end upon the 9. of March he departed in Prince Maurices
Pinnace, and went to the Scheld and so to Antwerp. A fit man to deal with a
free nation, being eloquent and well spoken, and (in outward appearance) simple
and without deceit.

By the mediation of this Deputy employed by the Archdukes (who upon the 17.
of March returned to the Hage again) it was so wrought on both sides, as they
resolved

The Archdukes have thought it convenient to certefie the general Estates of
the The Archdukes declaration touching the freedoms of the united Provinces
and their desire to enter into a treaty of peace.
united Provinces, of their offer, which is, that they (desiring nothing more,
then to see the Netherlands together with the good inhabitants of the same,
free from the miseries of these bloody wars) upon good deliberation declare by
these presents, that they are content to t^eat with the general Estates of the
united Provinces, in quality, and holding them for free countries, Provinces
and States, whereunto they pretend not any title: whether it be by way of
perpetual peace, or truce, and abstinance from arms for 12. 15. or 2^ ye^res,
at the choice of the said Estates; al upon reasonable conditions. In the which
conditions, whether it be by conclusion of a general peace, or a truce and be a
truce and abstinance from all beseegings or surprizings of towns and fortes,
invasions 1607*


Whereunto the General Estates made answer by an other declaration as
follows.

The general Estates as States of free Countries and Provinces, (whereunto the
Archdukes pretend no title at all) desiring also nothing more, then to settle
a christian, honorable and an assured end and release of the miseries of this
war, upon John Neyen Commissarie general have signed these presents, and I
C. Aertsens, as Deputy for the general Estates of the united Provinces. This
was done upon the 10. 11. 12. of April, but so that upon the 24. of April,
letters of assurance were to be delivered on both sides, under their great
Seals, the co^tents, words, sil^ables and distinctions agreeing with the Act
aforesaid; they were so dared as aforesaid, that they might both agree, and
there with the Monk upon the 13. of April went to Brusselles, and was by
Prince Maurices Pinnace brought to Delfs Haven. This agreement was with all
speed first certefied unto Dericke vander Does, there to deliver it upon the
receipt of the like commission sent from the Archdukes, to which end also the
Friar came to Lillo, having set down the same agreement under the act of
commission: but for that Vander Does made some doubt to receive the same in
that manner, the Friar rode in all have to Brussels, to have it made in the same
order as the Estates had done theirs and therein used Verdoes had a chain of
gold given him for a reward from the Arch dukes, but for that the said Friar
John Nayen had commission to make some further explication of the said treaty
and truce 1607.
Verdoes had no commission, but finding that he had no answer of his letters
sent unto the Estates, he took the said Friar John Nayen to the Hage with him,
where (after some consultation) upon the eighth day of May, he had audience
of the Estates, and had further conference with them about the interpretation
of the truce, and there-vppon they concluded upon an other Act, bearing date
the first of June, declaring thereby that the truce concluded for eight months
should also hold good in the North Seas, and in the Channel between France and
England, to the Sorlinghs, which should begin the fourteenth of June, from the
which time all prizes (not being ships of war) should be restored again:
That after that the King of Spaines agreation should be Viz. the Emes,
Dullaret, the country of Wedde, Drente, Couoerden, the River Vande-vechte to
Becumund bridge, the Newe-vecht to Swoll, from Swoll to Koten, from Koten down
the I sell to Isleoort, and the countries North and Westward lying behind
them, from Isleoort to the Rhyne as far as Grauen-weert and the Country
lying on that side Westward from the said town of Grauenweert along the wall
to Gorcum, and the countries lying North and West, the Meuse from the Town of
Grave to Gheertrudenbergh Artesens a good present, but he would not accept
thereof, unless he had license so to do from the Estates and Prince Maurice.

Heere-vppon throughout all the whole Netherlands there was great joy, every
man hoping, wishing and praying, to be once released from these long and
bloody wars: the report thereof being spread abroad in the neighbor
countries, it moved great admiration at such a sudden truce, and bred much
suspicion, all men wondering much what might be the cause that moved them
thereunto: Men could not be persuaded that the Archdukes would so much
imbase themselves, neither yet Spinola, the President Richardot and Vereycken
the Secretary, and some few others knew thereof. Whereupon the Nobility and
the Councels of particular Provinces complained much that they were not made
acquainted therewith. The like also was done in the Netherlands, where it was
said that the French King sought to agree with the Estates concerning the
taking of the Sovereignty of the united Provinces into his hands, which the
united Provinces would not yield unto, only they thought it The French King
sent Ambassadors into the united provinces.


For this cause the French King sent the President Ianin, Mounsier de Roussy,
and Mounsier Buzenuall as Ambassadors into the united Provinces, who arrived
there upon the four and twenty day of May, and upon the eight and twenty of
the same 1607.
Barneuelt, for Zeland Mounsieur de Maeldere, and so of other Provinces, who
upon the 29. of May with Mounsieur de Beye, the treasorer (having full
instruction) they began to confer with the French ambassadors, and concluded
that they should stay there, in the Kings behalf to aid them in the treaty of
peace, and to further the same. The like aid and assistance they desired of
the King of England, who willed them first to send certain deputies unto him
to give him full The States of the united Provinces sent ambasadors into
England.
instructions of their Estate, and means, to which end in July they sent John
Berck counselor, and pentionar of the town of Dort for Holland, and for Zeland
Sir Jacob van Maldere knight, into England, accompanied with their ordinary
ambasador Sir Noel Caron who upon the 16. day of July had private audience of
the King, and after that several Richard Spencer and Sir Raphe Winwood
ambassadors into the united Provinces, and so the ambassadors (having either of
them a chain of gold given them, one

I showed before that within three months, the King of Spaines agreation of
the truce made for eight months was to be brought unto the Estates out of
Spain: and to that end the Archdukes used all the diligence they could, to
procure the same; which at the last was obtained, and upon the sixteen day of
July Spinola wrote unto the Estates of the united Provinces to certify them
that his Secretary Birago had brought the said agreation out of Spain,
desiring a pasport for Mounsieur Vereycken to come into Holland, to deliver the
said agreations, and withal to proceed to some points touching the treaty in
hand: which letter upon the eight day of Iulie was by Spinolaes Vereycken upon
the four and twenty day of Iulie came to the Hage, and that day had audience
of the general Estates, where he showed them the King of Spaines agreation,
placed under the acts made the four and twenty day of April and the first of
June, written in Spanish, bearing date the last of June: the contents thereof
being that his Majesty having seen, the contents of those acts, sent him by
his dear The King of Spaines agreation sent unto the united Provinces.
brother and sister, the Archdukes Albertus and the Infanta Clara Eugenia,
Princes and sovereign Lords of the Netherlands, touching the truce and
abstinance from arms for the space of eight months, with ceasing from
surprising of all towns and sorts, inuading of countries, and making of new
forts, during the said time, as also of an intent ways to hinder the good that
is to be expected thereby, he not only has commended 1607.
verbatim, as near as might be, but both the acts under the which those
agreations stood, were written in French, wherein (especially in the act of
the four and twenty of April) in the chiefest and most substanciall clause,
there was forgotten or left out these words. Vni^s en qualite, et comme les
tenans pour pais, provinces etc. The aforesaid agreation being also written in
paper, sealed with the small seal, and signed Io el Rey: and to avoid all
further difficulties, a motion was made that the Estates would countermaund and
call home all their ships of war from the coast of Spain. The Estates for
their parts disl^ked much, that by the said agreation the Archdukes should
be termed Sovereign Lords of all the Netherlands, and withal they found out
the aforesaid error, not knowing whether ignorantly or of purpose it had been
so omitted; and there-vpon they showed him with what abuse such a fault had
been committed in the principal act, which he confessed to have been
perceived and

Here-vpon certain days were spent in consultation, and diverse conferences
were had with the said Veryken, and at the last upon the eight of August, an
answer was given him by word of mouth, and afterward delivered him in writing,
containing, that the Estates declared and held the respective agreation to be
imperfect and defecti^e, not only in quality and form, but also in the
substance thereof, for that so many words were left out, that it was not
written in French, the which answer the said Vereycken upon the twelfth day of
August went to 1607.


The truce continewing for eight months aforesaid both by sea and by land,
both for Spain and the Netherlands, it gave a great hope to all the country
people, that the matter would in the end be brought to a peace or a long
truce, but some men of good judgment held it to be a matter of greater
difficulty, and that it was so ernestly followed on either side, that so they
might get some advantage, and thereby advance their own cause, and that it
would not so lightly, nor without more rumor be ended on either side.

Whilst this business about peace, or truce was in hand, and that the
Neighbor Kings and Princes, with the countries of Iuilliers, Cleave, Leege,
and East Freeseland The opinions of the Net^s, touching the ^ty of peace.


They said moreover that it was wisely, scircumspectly and necessarily done of
the King and the Archdukes, willingly to give over and yield up their
soueraignite, (as it was given forth) to the united Provinces, finding that
they were not by any other means of persuasions, practices, or power to be
brought to any treaty, for that their weakness, or any greater disgrace or
loss, which they might chance to have, might force them to seek to be
protected by France, in which protection there was great danger, that at the
last they should be driven out of all the Provinces, and therefore they
thought it* best, to seek to possess the better part quietly, with a
neighbourly peace, at the least till a more convenient time, rather then to
suffer the French King to enrich himself with the Netherlands, which would
deprive Spain of

The Netherlanders for their parts, (as there are many deep witted, and
provident Considerations of the Netherlanders touching a peace.
men amongst them) could not believe, that it was done bona fide, and therefore
that proceeding was clean against their minds, doubting that in the end they
should be forced to fall again under the subjection of the Spaniard, under
the name of the house of Burgondie, imagining that the ground thereof had been
laid long since, and that the truce or peace was but a breathing unto them.
They could not likewise conceive, how they should preserve their estate;
maintain the grouernment of the Provinces in unity, withstand all difficulties
that might arise: neither yet how to continewe go thither, where they were
least burdened with exactions: neither how they should 1607


In the mean time the Netherland fleet was still upon the coast of Spain,
which men sought to comprehend in the treaty of agreement, that they might be
called home; Great^ preparation of ships of war in Spain.
the ten great ships, (part of the thirty which they had undertaken to make,)
whereon they set five hundred men on work, being Spaniards, Italians and
Netherlanders, each man his several work, some of them being of 200. tonne,
the least was of a hundred and fifty tonnes, but by the answer of the eight
day of August, it was consented, to

The mutinous soldiers under the Archdukes made many incursions in the
country, the Archduke seeking all the means he could to pacefie them, and in
August he got grant of six hundred thousand ducats, to be paid by a hundred
thousand ducats a month for the space of six months, (which had long been
promised) to pay the soldiers withal the Archduke also sought to discharge
all his unnecessary troops, as Wallons and others. The Spaniards and Italians
were put in garrison in several places, and a great part of them at Dornick,
where they were some what strictly looked unto, and might not increase their
numbers, for that when they were desirous to

This year many ships sailed out of Embden to Italy and Spain, which in
Spain The ships of Emden arested in Spain.
and Portingall were most stayed and arested, under some pretense, either that
they were partners with the Hollanders or else rebels against their Earl, from
whom notwithstanding which (were many for one town) were hardly entreated, and
the men put into the galleys, 1607.
Christopher and Earl John being both with him, with the garrison of Linphen,
whereupon the united Provinces sent about two thousand men thither, the which
were lodged in the suburbs of Emden and there abouts, and withal they sent a
trumpet to the Earl, with a letter as follows.

Right Honorable; our actions have given a sufficient testimony, with what a
sincere intention, we have ever labored (to our great trouble and charge) and
do still continue, to reconcile all controversies and dislike betwixt your
honorable father Earl Edsard, your self, and the Estates of East-Friseland:
when as in the year 1595. by the contract made in Delfzile, at the request of
your said father, your self, and the Estates of East-Friseland, we had
undertaken and bound our selves to be Vmpiers therein, your Lordshippe knows
that in the year of our Lord 1603. at the making of the contract at the Hage,
at the instant request of the Deputies of the town of Emden, by your
Lordshipps consent, and good liking, we once again bound our selves to
maintain the same, and to oppose our selves against all Ralfe Winwood
Ambassador for the King of England, and our Deputies, in the behalf of the
said Kings Majesty and us, it was agreed that if any thing were done contrary
unto the same, that some order should presently be taken therein.

Know ye therefore my Lord, that we being certainly informed that by your
honors means and directions, not one penny of money will be had toward the
payment of the garrison within the Town of Embden, that through want of pay,
the garrison might be brought into a mutine, and so the Town of Embden fall
into a tumult: besides that by your Lordshippes means, the contributions which
endeavor, for the discharging of the Ships, Sailors, and other persons of
Embden, 1607.


Hereupon ensued no great effects, but that the Earl of East-Freezeland sent
Hans Hendricke St^mler, to make complaint thereof unto the King of England, and
to crave his intercession unto the Estates of the united provinces, to stay
them from any forceable proceedings, from whom he received a favorable
answer: and to the Hage he sent Doctor Dothia Wyarda, sometimes Sindick of
the town of Embden; Monsieur van Kinphausen, and Doctor Thomas Francius, who
excused the Earl, and said, that he desired to observe the contracts and
agreements made, and had given no cause to the contrary unto them of Embden,
but that they had conceived a needless fear, which proceeded from their own
guilty consciences, which had made them to send for soldiers; with some other
frivolous allegations. The town of Embden (for the Vbbo Reinets their
Burgomaister and Sindick, Samuel van Winghene councellor, and Daniell Althingh
Secretary, in regard they found that the Earl intended to keep them in
continual alarm, and to put them unto great charges, and by that means to
bring them into debt, and so to draw the Burgers unto him: With them they
brought diverse Letters of license, given by the Earl unto the Sailors of
Embden bearing da^e in Esens the sixth, and the thirteenth of February; one
contradicting another, and some being of no force, unless they showed other
particular letters: but at the last every thing was ended and ordered by the
general Estates, with admonition

Upon the twelfe of May, in the year of our Lord one thousand six hundred and
seven, when Friar John Nayen the Commissioner for the King of Spain, was
Presents offered unto Artsens by Friar John Nayen.
upon his return toward Brussels, before his departure out of Holland, he
wrote a letter secretly unto Cornelis Artesens Secretary to the general
Estates of the united Provinces, desiring to speak with him, his wife, or
son, before he went out of Holland, and withal appointed him a secret place
of meeting: Artesens upon the receite of this Letter (suspecting they would
seek to corrupt him with some presents) Mau^ice, and others of the chief of
the Estates, showing them this Letter, with the circumstances and contents
thereof; assuring them that the Friar intended thereby to win him by some
offers and gifts, asking their advice how he should carry him self therein;
and whether he should go himself, or that he should send any other (the
messenger in the mean time staying for his answer.)

Whereupon Prince Maurice and the Estates thought it very fit and available
for the service and good of the country, to discover the adversaries desseigne
in this action, that he should go secretly thither, to hear what he would
propound unto him, and that if he o^ered any gratuitie, he should accept it,
if it were given whereby he should do the country great service, with these
directions Artesens upon 1607.
the fourteen day of May went unto the place appointed by the letter; and was
secretly brought to Friar John Nayen in Saint Agathes Cloister in Delfe. Where
Friar Nayen^ perswations used to Artesens.
he entertained him very kindly, giving him thanks for the great service
he had done unto the Archdukes, for that the first motion of the treaty of
peace was beg^nne by him, whereby they found, that it had brought him into a
great suspicion, and dislike, amongst the common people, and that for the same
cause he was hardly censured by them.

In regard whereof he said that the Archdukes thought themselves engaged in
their honors to be thankful unto him, being of themselves so nobly minded,
as they would not fail to show their bounty unto all those that should do
them Spinola (in regard that he favored the cause) held himself very much
beholding unto him, for which consideration he had sent him an obligation
under his hand, whereby he promised that if a truce were concluded, for above
nine years, or a general peace, to give him fifty thousand crowns whereof
he should receive fifteen thousand crowns in ready money, to be paid

And for his own particular he said, that seeing it had pleased the Archdukes
and the Marquis to honor him so much, as to think him fit to be employed
therein: and for that the matter had proceeded so far that he for his part,
and in his own behalf, would give some particular testymonie of his love
toward the said Artesens, and to that end, would bestow upon his wife a Ring
of Gold with a Diamont therein: protesting and assuring him of the scincerity,
uprightness, and worthiness of the said Archduke, and the Marquis, as also of
his own; the which notwithstanding was otherwise censured by many.

Whereunto Artesens made answer, that he most humbly thanked the said
Artesens answer to the Friar and his excuses.
Archdukes, for their great favor showed him; and especially for the
restitution of his house and patrimoniall lands, in regard that at the
reduction of the town of Brussels under the King of Spaines obedience, he had
great wrong offered unto him, in this point, for that he was debarred the
benefit of the contract, which was granted unto all the Burgers of the town,
whereby they were enabled for to enjoy their lands and goods, notwithstanding
that he at the same time was employed about some service that then was to be
done for the Estates, for the assembling of the General Estates: and that
touching their further bounty, he said, that he had done no more in that
action then he was bound unto in love and

Whereunto the Friar replied; that the presents aforesaid, could not be any
Spinola, and himself, who affected nothing more, then sincerely and without
any fraud to bring the wars unto an end; with many other good words to
persuade him to be a furtherer unto the 1607.


Whereupon, at last he accepted of the restitution of his house and lands,
together with the obligation; making much difficulty to receive the Ring with
the Diamont for his wife; but being much urged and entreated thereunto, he
took it, with promise to give the best direction therein that he could, his
oath and credit always preserved, and therewith they departed.

The same day, Artesens made report unto Prince Maurice and to the Estates
Artesens report made to Prince Maurice and his opinion therein.
of all that had past betwixt them, offering to deliver them the obligation and
the Diamont, but Prince Maurice would not receive them; nevertheless he
advised them to take some course for the receipt of the money, and withal that
the matter should be kept very close and secret. But Artesens did often
solicit the Prince

This business passing over for certain days together without any further
resolution, from the foureteenth to the twelfth day of May, there was an other
letter sent from the Friar John Nayen, unto the said Artesens, whereby he
wondered very much that he heard not from him, nor had any assignement to
whom the fifteen thousand crowns should be paid, Artesens having received
this letter, went unto the Estates again to acquaint them therewith, but for
that Prince Maurice had the second time refused to receive the obligation and
the Ring, being still of opinion (if they thought good to keep the matter
secret) that it was best for them to receive the money; it was resolved amongst
them, to make both the general Estates acquainted therewith, and the
ambasadors of France and England, by which means the matter was divulged unto
the common Artesens understanding that he was charged and taxed to have been
corrupted by the enemy, he desired the general Estates that he might be
discharged of the obligation and the Ring of Gold, and upon his request so made
unto them they took order, that the treasuror general should keep the said
obligation and the Ring, with the Diamond, which was taken out of the gold, and
valued, till further order should be taken therein, and that the said Artesens
should have an act made in his behalf and for his justification, the which was
published accordingly, bearing date the seventh day of Iulie in the year of
our Lord and Savior. 1607.

Notwithstanding all this, Artesens fell into great suspicion, and it was given
out that he had been corrupted by the enemy, for the which cause, and to free
himself from all imputation and blame, he caused an appologie to be printed
in his name, whereby he excused himself unto all the common people, and
thereunto he joined a coppie of the act aforesaid, made by the general
Estates in his behalf, his apology bearing date the twenty day of Iulie in
the year of our Lord and Savior. 1607. When as Mounsieur Vereycken came last
unto the Hage with the act of agreation, Mounsieur Barn^uelt Councellor for
Holland, let him Present^ given by John Nayen delivered back again.
understand, what presents had been given by John Nayen the Friar, as is
before mentioned, which were delivered to Mounsieur Vereycken by the Estates,
who saying, that the general Estates, and the Counsel of Estate of the united
Provinces did 1607.
Vereycken excused the Archdukes, and laid the blame thereof upon the Friar
John Nayen, saying, that it proceeded from himself; and that their highnesses
were not acquainted therewith, imputing it unto the covetousness of the
spirituallty, who judge of other men's humors by their own, with such like
words.

In the month of September, the Netherland ships of war which had lain upon
the coast of Spain, according to the contract, came all home with their
prises, and so the contract for truce at sea, was on both sides agreed and
concluded, and Prince Doria

In this month the governor of Grave called Mounsieur Silendsky was taken
prisoner as he past along by the Meuse, to go to Vorne, relying to much upon
the truce, Mounsier Sidlens^e governor of Grave taken prisoner.
the which notwithstanding could not help him: he was brought prisoner to
Boisleduc, where he has continued long for that they demand to great a
ransom.

The three and twenty day of September colonel Warnart du Bois president of
the counsel of war, a valiant soldier ryding with his wife to the Fair at
^heldermaetsen Mounsieur du Bois slain by the enemy.
and having there made good cheer, in the evening being not far from Est by
Tielerweert was set upon by certain of the enemies, as he was in his Wagon,
and for that he would not yield himself prisoner, they shot him into the
body,

The Spaniards and other mutinous soldiers in Die, for that they were not
paid, did much harm in Brabant and other places, and sent a protestation into
Brabant, The mutinus soldiers of Die in Brabant.
that if they were not satisfied within certain days, they would set the
gates of Die open, to entertain all such soldiers as were unpaid, and so
make a general mutenie, which they had bound themselves unto the Archduke not
to do: within Herentales they were most horsemen, whereof a great part
mutined in the month of October, but they were kept from any attempt by
certain Irish soldiers which

About this time it was reported that the Archduke Alberus made great means to
be made King of Romans by the aid and procurement of the Electors the
Archbishoppes of Cologne and Liege, with whom he had many The Archduke
Albertus se^kes to be King of Romans.
conferences sent to him by messengers, and in the month of October the
Archdukes went to Bins, to hunt and take their pleasures, but it seems that
being there they had some certain conference about the matter aforesaid with
the Electors of Ments and Trier also, but it is said that the King of Spain is
much against him, and Ferdinand of St^ria thereunto.

The fourteen day of October the Estates of the united Provinces received a
letter from the Marquisse Spinola, certifying them that the agrecation from
Spain 1607.
was come, desiring passe-port for Friar John Nayen, and for Monsieur
Verreyken, to come into Holland to deliver the same, which passe-port being
sent upon the four and twenty of October they arrived at the Hage, and upon
the five and twentieth day had audience of the general Estates, where they
presented the The second agreation made by the king of Spain touching the peace.
new ratification or agreeation made by the King of Spain, dated in Madrill
the eighteen of September, written in Paper, and in the Spanish tongue, signed
Io el Rey, sealed with a seal like unto a Proclamation, and underneath signed
Andreas de Prada, containing an insertion of the Declaration made by the
Archdukes in Spanish, also ill fauouredly written, and under that was written
as follows.

That where-as in the aforesaid Treaty, the Archdukes had promised unto the
Estates to deliver them their letters of ratification and agreation like unto
theirs, with all general and particular renunciations and obligations: he
therefore upon due deliberation and advise, of his own certain knowledge, and
absolute kingly power and authority, for the effecting of the said promise,
and for the assurance of the principal treaty of peace, or long truce, had
made unto the said Estates, and by these presents did make the like
declaration, which the Archdukes had formerly made, as much as in him lay, and
that he declared himself to be content, that in his name, and in his
behalf, the said Estates should be treated withal, in quality, and as
holding them at this present for free Countries, Provinces,

But with-all he declared, that if the chief treaty of peace, or of long
truce, there to be treated of and handled, should not take effect, concerning
the matters in controversy between both parts, as well touching religion as
otherwise, that then his aforesaid declaration and agreeation should be of no
force, but remain as if it had never been made, and that by virtue thereof it
should not be understood nor interpreted, that he had or would loose any of
his right or title, nor the Estates thereby to have any advantage, but that all
things should remain in the same state they were, and every man to have his
due, and that

With this agreation (having delivered a copy thereof in Spanish, French,
Friar John Nayens speech upon the delivery of this apro bation.
and Dutch,) Friar John Nayen made a long discourse of the sincerity and
uprightness of the King of Spain in that respect, and that he had caused the
same to pass through the hands of his council, that it might be the freer
and more assured to take effect, although he should dye: wherein he said, he
was much to be commended, in that he expressed the true and upright intent
and meaning of his direct dealing therein, promising no more, nor binding
himself no further, then he meant to perform, and cause to be effected,
whereas other-wise if he had meant to deal deceitfully, he would not have

Mounsieure Verreyken also made a very long speech touching the sincerity
1607. Auditor Verrikens d^la ration touching the dukes proceedings.


The general Estates having received the copy of the said agreation, and
perused the same, they found it to be very badly and negligently written, by
leaving out of many words, and some defects to be in the writing of many
words, which were not placed as they ought to be; and also in the form, not
being signed with the Kings name nor written in French. And after they had
imparted the same unto the Ambassadors of The states resolution upon the
agreeation.
France and England, upon the seventeenth day they had further conference
John Nayen and Verreyken, to acquaint them with the said defects, and to know
if there were no other agreation to be expected; who letting them understand
that there was no other agreation to be had from Spaigne; but that in the
proceedings with the principal points of the treaty, all doubts and
difficulties might be better seen into, and prevented upon good deliberation,
and after diverse consultations had with his Excellency and the Ambassadors
aforesaid.

Upon the second of November, they resolved to give the Deputies an answer;
which The States answer vqon the approbation.
was that the said letters of agreation (according to the declaration of the
Deputies) John Nayen) there might be pretended a disanulling of the sollemne
promises thereby made, it being not to be contradicted: That the said King, and
the Archdukes with their Councels know well, that the general Estates of the
united Provinces, as being Estates of free countries and Provinces (whereunto
the aforesaid King and Archdukes pretend no sovereignty) by the grace of God
almighty, and the said assistance of such Princes as are allied unto them, can
find good means to maintain and uphold the welfare, estate and government
of the said countries, and the Inhabitants of the same, without making any
mention thereof in the

And although there might some question be made, whether upon the said letters
and propositions, they might proceed to a treaty; Nevertheless to the end
this work (begun for the freeing of those countries from these long continual
and bloody wars, and the settling of a godly, honorable, and an assured peace)
may not be hindered, they would show the said letters (as much as concerns the
approbation of the promises made by the Archdukes, and the like declaration of
the said King whereby he declares

And if it were found fit and convenient, upon the said agreation and
declaration (or upon any other that within the said time, acording to the
promises made, might be sent out of Spain and delivered unto the said
Estates) to enter into a treaty, the Estates were of opinion, that neither in
the said Kings behalf nor the Archdukes, there should be any thing propounded
or pretended that 1607.


And there-vppon to make a short and brief resolution, and that the Estates in
that respect would appoint certain Committies with the like authority to
treat with them. This answer being made it was given to the said Friar John
Nayen and to Vereyken upon the third of November, and there-withall, they were
demanded whether The Archdukes Committies makes a difficulty to deliver the
agreation i^ (...).
John Nayen might go to Brusselles, to fetch a further commission concerning
that point, which being granted them, the Friar went from the Hage upon the
fifth of November, and the fourteenth of the same month returned again, and
upon the fifthteenth having audience given unto him and to Verriken by the
Estates, they gave them to understand that they had commission to deliver the
said letters, taking a note from the Estates for the receipte thereof,
(declaring therewith, that the Archdukes had there-by performed their
promise) and with a promise of re-deliuering the said letters, John Nayen
touching the aforesaid presents, wherewith he had busied himself.

The general Estates or their ordinary Deputies upon the tenth of November
departed from the Hage, every man to make known in their several Provinces
the said last agreation sent by the King of Spain, and to assemble the Estates
of their particular Provinces, and to understand from them, whether they were
of opinion (upon Before their departure upon the tenth of October they had
received a letter from the Emperor, wherein he declared what charges and
pains his father the A letter sent by the Emperor to the States ^ouching a
peace.
Emperor Maximillian and himself had been at, and taken to bring the
affairs of the Netherlands to a good end, and final peace, wherefore he did
now wonder they would attempt to deal therein without his advice, or at the
least without making him acquainted therewith, as seeming to have a pretense
to make the United Provinces a free state, whereas notwithstanding the Estates
thereof knew well, that the said Netherlands, depended upon him and the holy
Empire, as by the ancient records to the contrary whereby the nature and
property of the members of the Empire 1697.
The King of Denmark sent Ambassadors into Holland to be of Council with the
Estates about a peace.


The third of December Jacob Vlefelt Councellor of the Empire, and Amptman of
the Castle of Hagens-kow, and Jonas Charasins Doctor of both the Laws,
Ambassadors for the King of Denmark, arrived at the Hage with a good train
of Gentlemen, who upon the sixth of December had conferenee with the general
Estates, showing the affection which their King bare to the United Provinces,
and that their commission was to aid and assist the Estates with their Council
in their treaty of peace.

The Archdukes having made a reconing with the mutinous soldiers of Die, and
there-vppon giving them satisfaction according to the contract made, he
divided them into diverse companies, and put them into several places: after
which having The letter of banishment being as follows.


It is manifestly known unto every man, how long the last mutenie in Die
has A letter of banishment made by the Archduke against the mutinous soldiers
of Die.
continued, and the great and inestimable sums of money it has cost us,
besides the troubles and insupportable burdens and wrongs that our poor
subjects have sustained thereby: Nevertheless we have indeauored so much as
at the last we have Ferdinando Boischot one of our also, upon the same pain
aforesaid, not to stay, dwell or remain in the countries, 1607.


By force of this proclamation, many of the said mutinous soldiers which could
not get presently out of the country, were in diverse places ^ain and hanged,
which although it were done by them for an example of punishment of the like
mutinies, yet it bred a jealousy in many men of judgment, that by the like
reasons of state, other proceedings and contracts might in the like sort be
broken and made void. The Ambassadors of Brandenbourgh come to Hage to and the
States in the treaty of peace.


The nineteenth of December Ieronimus van Diskow and Erbghehessen up Quees,
Ambassadors for the Elcteor of Brandembourgh came to the Hage to assist the
Estates in their treaty of peace, who in long time after made no motion, for
that their commission was restrained, to the coming of the Palsgraues
Ambassadors, and to deal with them and not without them, which Ambassadors
came not thither so soon.

The twentieth of December, the Deputies of the general Estates being for the
most part altogether, or else having sent their opinions touching the treaty
aforesaid, The general Estates consultation^ and resolutions about the treaty
of peace.
every man showed his authority and commission, which for the most part tended
to this end: that notwithstanding the defects of the aforesaid letters of
argreation, yet that they might enter into a treaty with the enemies Deputies
concerning a Maurice, William Earl of Nassau and the Council of Estate, as
also with the Ambassadors of France, England and Denmark, (for that the
Ambassadors of Brandenbourgh excused themselves for the reasons aforesaid) at
the last upon the four and twentieth day of December they wrotte unto the
Archdukes, that they (according to the protestations and declarations set
down in their answer made the second of November, from the which they meant not
to varrie) were content to enter into a treaty with their Deputies in the
Hage, and that to the same end they should send seven or eight persons, John
Nayen and Verr^yken, with request to deliver the original letters unto the
Arch-dukesand that if they would consent to send any Comissioners, that it
would please them to write their names, number, and the day of their departure
from Brusselles, to the end they might send them convenient passeports: and so
they sent the chief letters by Grave Maurices Trumpet by the way of
Seuenberghen, and an other Trumpet (by reason of the frost) with a copy thereof
over the Dussen, that if one failed the other might be delivered. The
Palsgraues Ambassadors come to the Hage to aid the States in their treaty.


The 29. of December Hippolitus de Coly Councellor to the Elector and chief
Judge of Heydelbergh, Ambassador for the Palsgraue of Rhyne came to the Hage,
to aid the Estates also in that treaty.

With these accidents, deliberations, difficulties and resolutions touching the
affairs of the Netherlands, this year of 1607. ended; leaving to the
beginning of 1607. The state of the Netherlands and the cause that moved the^
to the treaty of peace.


The United Provinces pretended by that treaty to be free States and
Provinces, wholly released and freed from the Sovereignty, claim and pretenses
of Spain, and consequently of the war begun to maintain the same, and that
they from henceforth (as a free common wealth, whereunto no man pretended any
right) would govern and rule themselves, according to their own pleasures,
freedoms and privileges, and the rather for that the enemy (having wholly
yielded up his right) should from thenceforth have no pretense nor coullor to
make any more war

We have formerly declared how that the Emperor wrotte a letter unto the
general The Estates answer to the Emperors letters. 1608.
Estates of the united Provinces, touching the treaty of peace; wherein he
seemed as if he had an intent to break it off, and by that means to disanull
all that the general Estates had done or should do concerning the same.
Whereupon the Estates made an answer unto the Emperor bearing date the second
of January 1608. Certefiing him that they held it very strange his imperial
Majesty had not been informed of their proceedings in that action, neither
from his Nephew the King of Spain, nor his brother the Archduke Albertus,
wherewith if they had been acquainted, they would not have been so
forgetful to certefie him thereof: saying Mathias, diverse petitions had been
exhibited unto the Emperor, Princes, and Estates of Germany, to crave his and
their protection against the violent oppressions of the Spaniards, and that to
their great hinderance no aid might be obtained either from the said Emperor
nor the Empire, being also well known that in Anno 1579. at the motion and
request of the Emperor, and the Deputies of the Empire, there was a treaty of
peace made at Collogne concerning the Netherlands, but they finding that their
enemy during that treaty of peace, drew down his greatest forces into the
said Netherlandes to their great hurt and prejudice, for which consideration,
as also in regard of the forepassed violation of their privileges, cruelties
and great (...) used against the decreed conditions Anno 1581. (lawfully
according to the laws and privileges of the Netherland Provinces, and for the
necessary defense of those Provinces, Towns and Inhabitants of the said
Netherlands which are united together) to undertake the uttermost and last
remedy for the freeing of the said Netherlandes by a sollemne decree, and so
to discharge and unburden the Inhabitants thereof of all bonds and oaths,
whereby they were bound to show obedience unto the King of Spain: Since which
time, the aforesaid United Provinces by all Neutrall parties and by many
Kings, Princes and common wealths, have been held and accounted for free
Estates, and such as had power to rule and govern amongst themselves as free
common wealths, aid of the said Kings, defended their Provinces from great
dangers both by sea and 1608.
by land, against all the power of their enemies, and yet notwithstanding they
had made

The seventh of January the trumpets sent by the Estates unto the Archdukes,
returned The Archdukes answer sent to the Estates touching the peace.
again to the Hage, with letters from the said Archdukes, bearing date the
last day of December before, written in French, certefying them that by their
letters bearing date the three and twenty day of December they understood their
resolution to confer and enter into treaty with their deputies, and to
continue the truce for a month or six weeks, and that thereby they desired to
know their wills and intents: whereunto they made answer, that they had
appointed the said persons that till then had been used in the said affairs
to be deputies for the said treaty of peace, and that they should depart from
Brussels upon the fifteen of January, that the same evening they might be at
Antwerp, if two days before they will send them pasports, John Nayen and
Vereycken, they should know the names and qualities of those that were
appointed to be joined with them in commission concerning the said peace, and
that touching the continuation of the truce, that they were content it should
be prolonged six weeks more, promising thereby, both in the King of Spaines
behalf, and their own, to cause it to be kept and maintained without any
contradiction. John Nayen the Friar and Vereycken also wrote letters to the
Estates of the same date, certefying them that the deputies named and
appointed, should be ready to depart from Brussels upon the fifteen of
January, so they might have their pasport two days before, and advice that
ships laid ready for them at The deputies names that were to treat of peace
for the Archdukes.
Spinola, president Richardot, Secretary Mancicidor, Friar John Nayen and
Vereycken.

These Deputies appointed to come to the Hage for the Archdukes, caused diverse
1608.
John Nayen and Vereyken, they had given a larger limitation therein, then
otherwise was intended, and for that the Archdukes themselves seemed to like
well thereof, after some conference had concerning the same, it was at last
agreed, that they would let such Committies come, as were then deputed, and
that convenient pasports to that end should be sent them, to the which purpose
diverse conferences were had by the States with the Ambassadors of foreign
Kings and Princes.

The States of the united Provinces being fully resolved to enter into treaty
of peace or long truce with the Archdukes Commissioners, upon the ninth of
January caused a A general fast in the united Provinces, to desire God t^
(...) their action of (...) peace, etc.


It was said before, that the Archdukes deputies desired to come into Holland,
rather by water then by land, but for that the frost was great they could not
do it, for which cause the States having dispatched their pasports for the
said Deputies, sent them by Pasports sent to the deputies of the Archduke to
come into Holland.
land to Antwerpe by certain Trumpeters, and with-all wrote their letters to
Justinius van Nassaw governor of Breda, and to Maasellus Bax governor of Bergen
up Zoome, Spinolaes liueries for his me^ were not yet ready the time was so
long protracted, as the said governor set not forward till the 24. of January,
and then they went toward Lire, for The entry of the Archdukes deputies into
Holland, and their entertainment in every place*
that the Deputies for the Archdukes took that way, whether it were for that
they would go right over the heath, or to divert the said governors from
coming to Antwerpe, which is a town full of inhabitants; desiring rather to
have them go to Lide, being a town of garrison, and so the said governors
went to Lire upon the 26. of January, where they were well entertained by Don
Alonso de Luna, governor of the town, Spinola for his own guard, having 180.
horsemen with him. The 29. of January they entered into Breda, where they were
honorably received, all the garrison standing in arms, and every man as well
prepared as they might be, the horsemen without the town and the footmen
within, Marquis Spinola, Richardot and Mancicidor were lodged in the castle,
and the rest in the town, and were well entertained and feasted The next day
being the last of January about noone they came to Gertrudenberge, where they
were also well entertained, and from thence Spinolaes horsemen returned: that
evening he and the rest of the Deputies past over the Ice from Beesbos and the
Merue in 190. Sleads to Maurice was coming to meet them, and therefore after
dinner they went toward the Hage, where Prince Maurice and his brother William
Earl of Nassaw, and diverse Lords and Gentlemen met them at Riswick with 8.
coaches* at their meeting between Riswicke and Horne-bridge, they all on both
sides went out of 1608.
their Coaches saluting each other, with indifferent pleasant countenances:
which Spinola went up into Prince Maurices Coache, and there satte down in the
hinder part thereof, and on the right hand of the Prince, and in the foreend
sat Mancicidor and Henry Earl of Nassau, and on the sides Richardot and
William Earl of Nassau, the rest with other Lords and Gentlemen went into the
other Coaches; Marquis Spinola having three Coaches and diverse other wagons
appointed for him and the ^est of the Deputies, at which time there was such a
concourse of people of all degrees and qualities both of the Hage and other
places as all the way both by water and land on both sides (the frost being
very great and the y^e able to bear them) was filled with the multitude, only
to see the Marquis Spinola, more for Spinola, Richardot and Mancicidor were
lodged in a fair house in the Hage, which stands by the Viuerbergh, (the
which belonged to a Soliciter for diverse companies of Soldiers, called Goswine
M^uerskens) and Friar John Nayen, and Vereicken In the house of Wasenare.

The names and titles of the Deputies were as follows. Don Ambrosio Spinola
Marquis of Benaffro, Knight of the order of the golden Fleece, Councellor The
names and titles of the Arch dukes Deputies.
for the King of Spain in his Privy Council and for the wars; and General
John Dedonsel otherwise called Richardot Knight, Seignior of Barley, Counselor
of Estate for the Archdukes, and President of their privy council: John de
Mancicidor, Councellor and Secretary of the wars for the said King: Friar
John Nayen general of the order of Saint Francis in the Netherlands, and Sir
Lois Vereicken Knight, Auditor to the Archdukes, and principal Secretary of
Estate for the said Archdukes. In this sort the Deputies were brought into
Holland even into the heart of the country, where they might have a 1000.
means to discover and learn the situation and humors of diverse particular
places and persons, and to be instructed therein; the which (as some men
thought) should always be a very great advantage for them, whether this
Treaty of peace took any

Many men here-vppon made diverse strange discourses, thinking it to be
contrary to the Estates former government to suffer an enemy, yea and a
Discourse touching their coming to the Hage.
chief Commander of the enemies sorces and Armies to enter in that sort into
the heart of the country, there to discover both the unity and dissension,
strength and weakness, the consent of the people to the government, and
their detraction from the same, and that thereby they had means given them to
incite diverse evil affected persons to revolt from them. Others were of
opinion that it was a great oversight committed by the Estates, to enter into a
treaty concerning so great and weighty a matter, with such Deputies as were
bound unto such instructions, great, as in regard thereof they should neglect
their duties for the defense of the 1608.


And to the end that the united Provinces might make the better use, and reap
the A league made by the general Estates with the French king.
more benefit by the said treaty, and thereby preserve their estate, long
before the coming of the said Deputies, they made diverse motions unto the
Ambassadors of France and England, to the end that their masters might enter
into an assured and firm defensive union, tending to the upholding and
maintenance of peace, (if it should so fall out that it were concluded and
agreed upon) and the freedom of the countries, and on the other side, to aid
and assist one another, if the said peace should not be observed, or that it
were broken by the Spaniards or the Archdukes means, which the said
Ambassadors certified unto their Princes: and to that end, upon the

The second of February Prince Maurice, with diverse Lords and Gentlemen, went
Several congratulations and welcomes given unto the Deputies of the Archdukes,
and the liked me by them to others.
to salute and welcome Marquis Spinola, and the rest of the Deputies, with many
complements: after that the general Estates of the united Provinces, went also
to congratulate their coming, at which time they only used a ceremonial
kind of welcomming them, and so departed presently again. After that the
French Ambassadors went to salute Marquis Spinola in his Chamber, at whose
coming to the said Chamber, the rest of the Deputies, went to the Chamber
door, to meet them, who

The third of February, the Archdukes Deputies invited Earnest, and John Earl
of Nassaw, the young Earl of Hohenloe, the Lord of Chastillion, Justinius of
Nassaw, Captain Bax, and diverse others, to dine with them, where they were
honorably entertained and feasted; and the same day after dinner, they went to
the Court to salute Prince Maurice and his brother, with William Earl of
Nassaw, where there past many congratulations and complements between hem,
from thence they went to see the French Ambassadors in the President Ianins
lodging, who received them at the door of their Chamber, and at their
departure conducted them to the door again, and from thence caused them to
be accompanied by Monsieur de Russy to the street door, where their Coaches
attended them: They also went to salute Richard Spencers lodging, who also in
like manner received them at the entery of his Chamber, and when they departed
brought them no further, as the French Ambassadors had done before, each
showing thereby that their Princes were of no less Majesty then the King of
Spain, to whose Deputies they were not to yield in any point of pre-eminence.

The fourth of February, John van Burgh, Landt-Vooght of Hessen, Ambassador for
the Lantgraue of Hessen, came to the Hage, to assist the Estates in their said
Treaty, with the rest of the Ambassadors, who with in few days after had
audience of the general Estates, to whom he delivered the great love and
affection which Spinolaes great magnificence during his abode in the Hage.
Spinola during the time of his aboade in the Hage, was most sumptouously
served and attended on in his house; In his dining chamber there stood two
stately great Candlesticks of silver, the which standing upon the flower
before the table which reached much higher then any 1608.


The general Estates of the united provinces, thinking it time to enter into
the The Estates sent to Marquis S^pinola to know when he would e^ter into
treaty with them.
treaty of peace or truce, which was intended upon the fourth of February,
they sent to Marquis Spinola and the rest of the Deputies to congratulate them,
and withal to ask them it they had any thing to propound unto them, or
whether they desired only to speak with their Deputies: whereunto they made
answer that they Maurice received them at their coming out of their Coaches,
and so conducted them to the Council Chamber, where when they should enter,
the Marquis showed great honor to Prince Maurice and would needs have him to
go first into the Chamber; at this Assembly there was nothing done but only
salutations and congratulations Richardot made answer that they were ready and
prepared to enter thereinto as soon as they pleased, and so for that time they
departed, being conducted out of the Council chamber by the Prince, William
Earl of Nassau, the Barro^ de Brederode and others, and when they came to the
door the prince caused the Marquis to go first out, and that day they dined
with the prince.

The Marquis Spinola being gone out of the Council chamber, the Estates
resolved The names of the Deputies nominated and appointed by the States to sit
upon the treaty of peace.
to determine upon the electing of their Deputies, which were to be chosen
amongst them to enter into the said treaty, and after some conference had
between them, at the last they nominated for the commonaltie in general of the
united Provinces, William Walraue Baron of Brederode, Vianen Ameyden etc. And
for every one of the seven Provinces one, as for Gelderland and Zutphen,
Cornelis van Ghenet Seignior of Koeuen and Meynerswicke, Vicont and Judge of
Nymeghen: for Holland and West-Freezeland Sir John van olden Barneuelet
Seignior van Timple, Advocate of Holland, Keeper of the Seal, and Recorder of
the said countries; for Zealand Sir Jacques de Mallidere knight, Seignior van
Heyes representing the Gentlemen of that Province: for Vtrecht Nicholas van
Berke, chief of the said Province in their Council; for Freezeland, Doctor
Gellius Helle^a, Councellor in their Court: for Ouerissell, John Sloeche
Seignior van Salicke, Abel Koenders Thoehelphen, and others that assistted
them, and at the same time they set down certain instructions concerning two
or three points onley whereon they should treat, and withal delivered them
a procuration to proceed therein, most by the counsel, and instructions to be
given 1608.
John van Olden Burneveldt, as being the wisest and most experienced amongst
them in matters of Estate.

The sixth day of February, the deputies for the Archdukes, and the general
Estates made their first assembly in the Hage, in a Chamber expressly
appointed for that The 1. assembly.
purpose, whereon each side having given several salutations, and showed their
procrations or commissions to enter into treaty, the Archdukes deputies showed
a procuration from the King of Spain, bearing date the tenth day of January,
and a procuration from the Archduke dated the twelfth' day of January, the
first made in Madrill, and the second in Brussells, which caused no small
suspicion to rise amongst the deputies for the Estates, that the said Spanish
procuration was made upon a blanke signed, and with all it was granted unto
the Archduke alone, and to such

The Archdukes procuration also was large enough, but in some places there were
certain prejudicial clauses inserted, as amongst the rest, that the King of
Spaines procuration was the same, and with the like declaration, as the Estates
themselves had desired it should be. Which neuer-the-lesse was not so, for that
the Estates expressly protested against it, as also that the same made no
mention of the aforesaid Spanish procuration dated the tenth day of January,
but of an other procuration dated the eighteenth day of September before,
whereof they showed no coppie, and that day there was nothing further done:
but only the viewing and delivering of their

Upon the eight day of February, the deputies on both sides met again, at
which The 2. assembly.
time the Archdukes deputies made some exception to the procuration given by
the Estates to their deputies, aleadging that it was not ample enough, but
restrained to an instruction, which they saw not, which in such treaties they
said was not usual, for that procurations made in that kind ought to be
ample and sufficient, but the deputies resolved them therein, and said that it
was made in that sort for that

The Estates deputies for their parts also showed what difficulties they found
in the Archdukes procurations, (which were such as are before declared) wherein
they were likewise satisfied, saying that they were fully authorized in all
points concerning the said treaty, and that they would show and deliver the
Estates a convenient act of substitution. And amongst other things spoken off,
the Estates deputies asked them, if they had full power and commission given
them to acknowledge the united Provinces to be free countries, and to treat
with them in that quality, whereunto they freely and flatly said, I; and that
therefore it was all one to arms of those Provinces in his coat armor?
whereunto they made answer, that, it was 1608.


The leauenth day of February, they assembled together again, wherein the
Estates The 3. assembly.
deputies propounded the first article concerning the freedom of their
Provinces, and that the King of Spain and the Archdukes should from
thence-forth leave off and wholly desist from all their pretenses to the
sovereignty of the united Provinces, as

The thirteen day of February after dinner, they met again in the Council
Chamber, The 4. assembly.
where they declared their consent and approbation as it was set down; with
this

The sixteen day of February, the deputies on both sides met in counsel
again, The 5. assembly.
and forgetting of al forepassed injuries, and that no reprisales nor arrests
should be made nor suffered to be made, but only for particular debts that
might be made on either side: the second for free trade and traficke in all
the Kingdoms, Havens, Towns, and Countries of both parties, with protection,
and no more nor further molestation to be used as if they were natural borne
subjects: But presently the Archdukes deputies, made answer, that they neither
meant nor understood, that under the title of free traficke, the trade into the
Indies, nor any part thereof was to be comprehended, but that to the contrary
the subjects of the united Provinces, should presently desist from the same,
which the Estates deputies would not yield perceived thereby that the Archdukes
deputies sought to take their traffic from 1608.
viz. That friendship, commerce, and traffic, Reasons aledged by the Indian
Merchants of the united Provinces why they should not leave off their trade.
are necessary consequences of peace, according to the laws of Nature, of all

So as never any example was found, where any peace was concluded and agreed
upon, with exception of commerce and traffic, the which should be no peace,
but a kind of banishment; which is never used but against enemies and
malefactors.

Furthermore, that we who must live by the Seas, and are the greatest
Merchants, and best Seafaring men in the world, should be forced to leave the
use of the greatest part of the Sea, and of the richest part of the whole
traffic of the world, were one of the greatest disgraces that could be given
us, and especially to (Iure gentium) is free and open for all men, and wherein
no man has any particular jurisdiction.

This without doubt would be a manifest subversion of our estate, which in
these chargeable and great wars, could not be maintained without free trade
and traffic at Sea, it being the only means which GOD has given unto us
for our maintenance, and so consequently, as much as our Seafaring and
traffic should deminish, so much in proportion would the power of these
Provinces decay; for that our towns and inhabitants cannot be maintained,
much less can we have

And for that it appears by many declarations made, that the trade to the
Indies exceeds all our other traffickes by sea, what-so-euer that is used by
us, both for the principal stock, number of good Sailors, and power of
Shipping, it follows consequently, that we leaving off our Indian trade,
should deminish more then half our traffic, not only by Sea, (without the
which we cannot maintain our estate,) but also by land, for that all our
power and welfare (for the reasons aforesaid) must come from the Seas, and
traffic.

Which being duly considered, it manifestly appears, that (although no
Merchants do trade and traffic, nor any man goes to Sea, but for his own
particular gain and commodity) the common wealth should be much more
hindered, and receive more prejudice thereby then the particular members
thereof, for that besides 1608.


Besides all this, it is to be considered that the sailors, which are employed
in the trade of Merchandise by certain private persons, are very many, that
without any charges or burden to the country are kept and maintained in
work, and daily at sea, very ready at all times to be employed about any
important affairs of the Countries good, without the which it is impossible to
maintain any power by sea, as by example we see, that the greatest Kingdoms
have no power at sea according to their great wealths, but only according to
the traficke which their countries use.

Our fore Fathers, in times past undertook diverse great quarrels to
mainetaine their seafaring and traficke, which as then was very small, for
that their

We should buy this title to dear, for that in steed that we should thereby
be honored, it would purchase us a great reproach and contempt, not only
amongst the inhabitants of the country, but also out of the land, both of our
friends and foes: our inhabitants might justly be offended therewith, when
they should see that we left of our trade, and that they were compelled to
depart out of the

Moreover finding us to be so much weakened of our power at sea, (which is the
especial thing whereby we might aid and assist them) they will make no
account of us: so as entering into this treaty of peace upon the confidence
we have of our friends, and such as are allied unto us, we shall find our
selves utterly deceived. To aleadge that we ought to content our selves with
the same traficke at sea which we had before the beginning of the wars, is
nothing else but that men

It is also against reason, that we should leave that trade* for although that
before the wars, we did neither adventure nor traficke into the Indies, yet,
we had both right and freedom to do it, Iure gentium, which was not taken
from us by any man, for the King of Spain was bound by oath to maintain these
countries and the inhabitants thereof in the freedom of their trade and
traficke, of the which without doubt the free use of the sea, are, and traficke
throughout the whole world was the maine point, and it was never brought in
question nor once spoken of, until and yet we remain as free as ever we were
before the wars; the free navigations and traffic 1608
force and violence: which being otherwise done, were contrary to the meaning
of the Estates, for that they being freely and resolutely determined, not to
enter into any treaty of peace, before they were assured of a full and
absolute grant of the freedom of these countries, under the king of Spain
and the archdukes hands and seals, the said king of Spain and the archdukes,
made promise by their several declarations, to treat with us, as with free
countries, whereunto they pretend no manner of sovereignty, and yet now by this
treaty they will cut off the greatest trade we have.

It is also expressly mentioned, That each party should hold that he presently
possesses, unless by the common consent of both parties, it were thought
good, and found requisite

To object, That in regard thereof they renounce and acquit unto us, all their
pretense of sovereignty unto these countries; they promised to do that by
their letters, and that they would not take any thing from us, but by
exchange, and wherein we should our selves give our consent.

To conclude, if we look into the ground of this matter, we shall find, that
it was in vain

The reasons and considerations that might yet be added hereunto, are
innumerable, but

These in effect are the principal reasons, alleged by the company of Indian
merchants,

But for that the government of the united provinces consists of many parts,
amongst the which there are many men, that esteem not much of foreign trade
and traffic, or Diverse men's opinions concerning the Indian trade.
at the least, not so much, but that they are of opinion, That the preservation
and maintenance of the tilling of the land, and the inhabitants of the Champian
country, concerned them more, they could not enter into so good consideration
touching the same, as was requisite and necessary to be had; wherefore the
wisest men, and such as were of greatest understanding, and of soundest
judgment, determining so to accommodat the matter, as both the one and the
other might receive some contentment thereby, for that cause had month of
February, and upon the fourth day of March: at the which assemblies nothing
1608
one unto the other, maintaining them with many arguments and reasons
concerning matter of state, and also with great resolution and earnest
pretenses; in such sort, as the Estates of the united provinces, who for the
most part were of opinion, That they ought not to yield unto the deputies of
the king and the archdukes in that point, nor in any wise to desist from the
same, at the last they resolved to propound three means unto the said deputies
of the said king and the archdukes, hoping by the one of them, to bring them to
consent and yield thereunto; which were, either by that treaty of peace wholly
to grant them their traffic to the Indies, and the dependances thereof, or
by way of truce to permit and suffer it for certain years; or to leave all
those countries lying beyond the Tropicke of Cancer in wars,

But the deputies on the contrary side, wholly refused those offers, first
alleging, That it was altogether contrary to their commission, which expressly
forbad them to yield unto the said trade and traffic to the Indies. Secondly*
That the king of Spain and the archdukes, were princes which were addicted
unto peace, and not to wars, and therefore know not how they should grant or
consent to so strange and monstrous a contract, whereby both wars and peace
should alike and at one time be concluded. And touching the mean or the
middle course, they say, they were of opinion, That something might

The Estates of the united provinces finding the obstinacy of the deputies of
the said king of Spain and the archdukes, made a show, as if they would make a
motion touching their trade into the West Indies, and to that end sent for the
merchants of the West Indian trade causing them to assemble together, to see
what difficulties might be propounded therein,

But the deputies for the king of Spain and the archdukes, made no account
thereof, esteeming it to be but a scarecrow, to put them in fear, and
therefore still they persisted in their first resolution, making their
complaints to the ambassadors of the neighbor princces then resident in the
Hage, holding that point to be as unjust and intolerable for the estate of
their princes, as if they had taken and held them prisoners, they could not
bind them to harder conditions.

The Estates also for their parts, made their complaints to the said
ambassadors, alleging, That they being by the said princes held and esteemed
for free countries, the said princes sought to impose many conditions upon
them, which the provinces under their own command,

In the end of February the princess of Orange came to the town of Hage in
Holland, by the procurement of the Estates of the united provinces, bringing
with her out of Franne, an hundred and twenty five thousand crowns in ready
money, where she was visited and welcomed by the most part of all the
ambassadors, and also by the deputies for the king of Spain and the archdukes.

The said deputies for the king of Spain and the archdukes, perceiving that
they could not bring that point touching the trade to the Indies, to any end,
or good conclusion, at the last they declared, That they would conclude upon a
truce to be made for certain years, and that to the same end and purpose
they were content to proceed to some other articles, and in the mean time to
be doing therewith, or with any of the other points. have all the points and
articles set down at one time, which on both sides might be propounded 1608
to be done, as also that they were neither warranted, willing, nor prepared
thereunto: and that some of them commended the making of peace with France and
England, which was not any part of their charge; but that they were ready to
deal with other points, and to treat of them one after another, as it is
usually done in all such treaties: and that following that order and common
rule, they were content to deal with the points of limitation of their borders
on either side, touching free commerce and traffic in the provinces of the
Netherlands, and for the restitution of goods and lands, seized upon on either
side: and those being determined, and dispatched, to proceed unto other
points. Whereunto answer was made them by the Estates deputies, That on the
Estates behalfes, there was nothing offered nor propounded, that was
unreasonable or inconvenient, concerning the delivering up

Whereupon the king and the archdukes deputies took time to consider thereof,
and for that day departed; seeking thereby (as it seemed) on both sides to get
some advantage one of the other, that the most politic might give better
instructions therein unto their fellow deputies: for that some of them were of
opinion, That it would be a great furtherance unto

The seventh of March the deputies met in counsel again, where, after many
protestations (that it should be no prejudice unto either party, touching any
thing that should be produced or found necessary to be propounded and
conferred of between them, but that either of them might notwithstanding
remain in the same estate they were) at the last the Estates deputies for
their parts, delivered eight and twenty points or articles, which they as then
propounded: and the deputies for the king of Spain and the archdukes, seven.
The articles propounded by the Estates, were set down as plainly as they
might be done, thereby declaring their intent, with upright and true
Netherlanders hearts, that their adverse parties Spinola and his fellow
deputies (who peradventure dealt more warily than the deputies for the Estates
of the united provinces) were obscure, general, short, and briefly set down,
so as they could hardly conceive what they meant thereby, or what they would
severally and particularly include, treat of, or desire of the Estates, in or
by the same, possibly esteeming it to be a point much tending unto their
honors, that they exceeded the Estates deputies in judgment concerning that
treaty, the said Estates deputies having given them all their meanings in
several and plain articles, and they to the contrary paying them with a
number of obscure terms, from whence few or no particularities might be
gathered.

And for that the reader may see what the articles on both sides were, and give
his judgment, I will insert them verbatim as they were given forth, and the
rather, for that I conjecture this treaty cannot be ended in any short time,
as men in the beginning did hope and expect: And for that this book cannot be
finished and concluded, with the desired, good, and honorable peace, that has
been so long attended, I will show what each party, under the pretense and
color of the said articles, produced and set down in the said treaty, and in
what manner, and how far forth they have disputed and proceeded therein.

The articles delivered by the deputies of the Estates of the united provinces,
were these hereafter following.

1 First, for traffic and trade of merchandise to be made on both sides, in
the Netherlands, The articles of peace delivered by the Estates,
indifferently.

2 Touching the assurance of trade and navigations, and the dependances thereof,
in the 1608


3 Renunciation of reprisals, with the dependances, and also for that which
shall be made reprisals hereafter.

4 Touching the limitation of the borders and frontiers of either side, with
that which depends thereon.

5 Whether it shall presently be agreed upon, about the exchanging or
demanteling and rasing of certain forts.

6 Touching the abandoning or ruining of the forts of Rodeort and Homburch, and
of the town of Berck, with the Weert, and the forts thereabouts, lying upon
the borders of the Rhine.

7 The disannulling of al sentences, decrees, proscriptions, and other acts
made against the lords and others, of all quarters whatsoever, in regard of any
confederations, unions, religion, wars, and other matters thereunto belonging.

8 Restitution of lordships, and other lands and tenements, belonging to the
prince of Orange (of famous memory) deceased, for the contentment and
satisfaction of the said princes heirs; not only for that which has been
done by the Estates of Brabant and Flanders, with the towns and members of the
same, but also for that which is further demanded by certain articles, which
prince Maurice has given unto the Estates in writing.

9 Restitution of all lordships, lands and tenements, belonging unto other
noblemen, gentlemen, and all manner of men of meaner quality, taken from them
by confiscation, for the

10 Touching order to be taken for the restitution of goods arrested either by
creditors or debtors, in regard of the causes aforesaid, and sold to the
prejudice of the said parties.

11 Touching the arrerages of the rents of the lands confiscated, and kept from
the right owners, during the wars.

12 Touching the disannulling of all gifts, testaments, and other such like
things, which in regard of confederation, religion, and wars, with the
dependances thereof, have been found

13 Concerning order to be taken for the payment of debts, and other charges,
made by the treaty of the old union.

14 The retyring of all foreine soldiers (being in service under the king of
Spain and the archdukes) out of all the said archdukes countries, for that
without their departure out of the country, the differences which then were to
be determined and debated, could not be ended.

15 That the laws of the Inquisition, and burthening of men's consciences,
shall not be used against sailors and merchants, that go into Spain, and
other the kings and the archdukes dominions, nor against any other of the
inhabitants of the united provinces, that

16 That the inheritances of such as are dead intestat, and such as hereafter
shall die, in the countries belonging to the king of Spain, the archdukes, and
the Estates, shall come and descend unto the right heirs, whether they have
continued, or shall continue on the one or the other side; and that every one
shall be held and accounted for legitimat heir, according to the customs of
the provinces, where the actions (that shall fall in question to be decided)
shall be tried.

17 The ancient privileges of towns, used therein before the wars, shall on
both sides

18 That if any new controversy should arise (which God forbid) the sailors,
merchants, and their factors, servants, and other inhabitants, shall on both
sides have six months time freely to withdraw themselves, with their ships,
goods, and satisfaction of their debts due unto 1608
given.

19 That if any thing (on both sides) be done or attempted against this
treaty, it shall be duly and fully satisfied and recompensed, and yet the
said treaty shall remain inviolable.

20 That all prisoners on both sides shall be set at liberty, without paying
any ransom.

21 All civil actions not publicly decided shall remain in full force, and
no prescription to be alleged nor allowed, notwithstanding the wars.

22 Assurance to be given for the particular treaties made, concerning the
general

23 A general and special renouncing, derogation, and assurance to be made,
for the keeping and holding of all and every point of the treaty.

24 A request to be made to the emperor and the princes of Germany, the
kings of France, England, and Denmark, to maintain that which shall be
agreed upon in this treaty.

25 The acknowledging of the potentates, princes, commonweals, and towns, to
be friends and allies, and to be included in the treaty.

26 Order to be taken about the prince of Portugals cause.

27 Approbation, publication, and registring, to be made of the treaty.

28 That all such things as may be propounded for the clear exposition of the
articles, on both sides, shall and may be produced and allowed of.

The articles propounded in the behalf of the king of Spain and the archdukes,
were seven, which were written in French, the contents being as follows. The
archdukes articles.


1 Concerning limits. 2 The restitution of lands and goods. 3 For traffic out
of the countries. 4 For uniformity in the moneys. 5 To keep a general
course on both sides, for privileges and freedoms given to the English
merchants, touching traffic and trade of merchandise, as otherwise. 6
Concerning religion. 7 Concerning the affairs of neighbor princes.
As soon as these articles were delivered on both sides, the king of Spain
and the archdukes deputies marking the number of the articles that were
presented unto them by the Estates deputies, said, That it would be so tedious
a work, as it could not be finished in a short time: and Richardot reading
the point concerning the payment of the debts of the union, said, We have no
money to pay debts; for all our money is consumed in the wars. The Estates
deputies for their parts also, finding that their adverse party made an
express article touching religion; and thereby remembering, that the same point
concerning religion, was particularly specified in the Spanish procuration, and
all the rest mentioned in general again, or some larger commission from
thence: and so for that time they brake up the 1608


The Spanish and the archdukes deputies, having in this manner gotten all the
Estates articles, as they were particularly set down, into their hands, sought
to respite and prolong the time for a while, that so they might fully advertise
their princes, not only what the Estates desire and intent was touching the
treaty, but also of the humors of the provinces, governments, and inhabitants
therereof, or as much as they had learned, and understood of such persons, of
diverse places, quarters, and qualities, as came unto them by means of the free
access that was permitted: which their intent was first discovered by certain
words and speeches cast forth by their followers and servants; and after that
plainly understood, at their meeting, made upon the eleventh and twelfth of
March, wherein much was spoken, protested, Spinola, and the rest of the deputies
on their side, desired the Estates deputies, to make an article apart,
concerning trade and traffic into Europe, and what assurance should be given
therein; and another article concerning traffic into the Indies, which they
said they would send into Spain and Brabant, that so they might get a further
and larger commission touching the same, with exception, that the said articles
should be so qualified, as they in Spain might like thereof, and not receive
more offense thereby, and that their princes reputations might not be thereby
impaired.

And for that they did not well understand the point propounded, touching
traffic to Antuerpe, and other towns and places under the archdukes
obedience, they desired the Estates, to permit Martin de la Faille, with two or
three other merchants of Antuerpe to have access unto the Hage, that they
might join with them in consultation about that point, that so it might be
fully resolved upon. Wherein the Estates deputies desired time to consider
thereon, and after much consultation had about the drawing of the said
articles, and the assurance to be made, they were of opinion, That their best
security was, to have ready money delivered into their hands: And after they
had well considered thereof, they caused two articles to be drawn, the one
for nine years trade into the Indies, and the other touching their trade and
traffic in Europe: and at last they concluded, to demand for their

The said articles being drawn and set down, upon the seventeenth of March,
in the afternoon, the deputies on both sides met together, whereas the
deputies for the Estates delivered the Spanish deputies the said two articles,
drawn by them; which they took, and said they would consider thereof, and for
their parts, they delivered a long discourse to the Estates deputies, touching
traffic to Antuerpe, and other places under the archdukes obedience, that
treaty, before they had sent into Spain, to have their commission amplified,
and for that 1608
same again for two months more, beginning upon the first of April; which
the Estates deputies consented unto, and thereupon prolonged the said truce
until the end of the month of May.

The 20 of March the said deputies assembled together again, where the
deputies for the king and the archdukes, moved many difficulties touching the
article concerning the time of nine years to be allowed for the Indian trade,
saying that they could not allow thereof, much less permit, that in the said
act any mention should be made of the tropicke of Cancer, which goes round
about the world, and which in that case would breed a canker in Spain; and
withal they delivered unto the Estates deputies a certain draught concerning
the same, made Richardot said, that the marquess had credit enough, if he
would become

The Estates finding that the article touching their trade into the Indies, was
not well liked of by the deputies for the king and archdukes, and having that
in their hands which they had delivered unto them, thought it not good to stand
too much upon their own opinions, neither yet in that respect to break the
treaty, begun with good hope and expectation of so many men; but rather to
yield somewhat in that respect, and to accomodate themselves nearer

The Estates deputies understanding better the Spanish deputies meaning, what
they chiefly 1608
said draught, which they restrained and limited, as near as the said article
might by any means be drawn and devised with least prejudice; and while they
were busied about it, Richardot (thereby to stir up and persuade such persons
as were against it, unto a better liking thereof, and to dispose their minds
thereunto) desired to speak with them (which they allowed him) who being
alone amongst them, began to complain of the Estates preciseness in that
point, saying that the marquess and he were much grieved, that they had been
employed in that matter concerning a treaty of peace, seeing they were like to
loose their labors, for that the Estates in those points sought only to have
their own wills, and thereby would be the cause to hinder and break off so
good an action, as the making of peace

And so upon the last day of March, in the afternoon, they met together on
both sides, where they sat long, and there the last draughts of the said
articles were read and delivered; and after many discourses had between them
touching the same, thereby to show the reasons thereof, the marquess
determined to send them into Spain by friar John Nayen, asking thirty eight
days time to effect the same; for that as he past through France he was to
stay there certain days, and hoped in that time to bring a final answer out
of Spain touching the same.

The substance of the article made concerning traffic to the Indies, whereon
the greatest disputation arose between them was, that the inhabitants of the
united provinces, The substance of the ^ct for (...) into India, whereon they
stood most.
de bona speranza, upon the first day of September, in the year 1608, and on
the other side of the said cape de bona speranza, upon the first day of
September, in the year 1609: and that they should traffic into all the
places, havens, towns, and forts of the Indies, which at the end of the
aforesaid truce, shall not absolutely be under the power of the king of Spain,
nor his lieutenants: and in those places, havens, towns, or forts, that are
belonging unto the said king of Spain, they shall neither enter nor traffic
into them, but by the license and consent of those that have authority and
shall command therein, for the said king of Spain, unless it be upon that
belong unto the said States: And that during the said nine years, all acts of
hostility 1608
and those of the Estates, as of all the kings, lords, towns and places, that
shall as then be in friendship and league with the one or the other party;
whose names shall within three years be certified by the king of Spain and
the archdukes unto the Estates in the Hage: and on the Estates behalf, the
said names shall also be certified unto the said king and archdukes within the
said time, in the town of Brussels, as it is inserted and set down in the
treaty: and that all wrongs and damages done, and suffered to be done, to
the contrary, shall be demanded, sued for, and repaired, in the places where
they were done and committed, or in the places where those that have done the
said wrongs and injuries, dwell and remain, without dealing or meddling therein
in any other places or forts, or by reprisals, than

Touching the article made concerning traffic in the Netherlands, there was
another Touching the article of truce in the Netherlands which also was so much
debated
draught made (but not agreed of, nor yet determined, for that the merchants
that were expected from Antuerp, were not come) serving for a more ample
interpretation of the article of free traffic, mentioned in the treaty, the
contents thereof being, That the inhabitants under the archdukes and the
Estates, should mutually traffic and trade together, after the manner of
merchants, in all their provinces, islands, towns, and places, with friendly
intertainment and protection; and to the same end all their ships shall be
admitted in every haven of the said

These and other articles which were made and drawn in this treaty, and
received by the John Nayen, I thought good to set down at this 1608
time, not to be esteemed as matters fteely past and agreed upon, but that
every man may thereby perceive, how little the estates are inclined to
ambition, in the articles propounded by them, and how willing and ready they
are to accommodate themselves in matters that do altogether concern their
estate, or that may serve to procure unto them an upright, reciprocal, and
free traffic in all places; and likewise to admit the same, that in time they
may show their affection, to the like and reciprocal trade and traffic: and
that they seek not to further themselves therein, more than other countries,
which are not so necessarily bound unto trade and traffic by sea, as these
provinces, but have other certain means to maintain their estates: And that
if the king of Spain should peradventure not like of, nor yield to the said

The Spanish deputies having received the aforesaid expositions, of the
articles before The States deputies invited to dine w^h the marquess Spinola.
propounded, marquess Spinola caused friar John Nayen, to inuit the eight
deputies (appointed John van Santen, who had been somewhat employed in the
same; and at other times (as it was reported) had been a student with friar
John Nayen: at which dinner they all drank hard, specially friar John Nayen,
whether it were to show himself to be upright and plain in his dealings, and
in the midst of his drink to uphold, that the king of Spain and the
archdukes proceeded uprightly in that treaty, without any intent to circumuent
them; or for that he would entertain the said deputies in friendly manner, and
make them good cheer, according to the manner of the Netherlands. After this
friar John Nayen, the next day, being the second of April, went to Brussels,
not respecting the weather, which as then was very stormy and windy.

This matter thus brought to this point, and being understood by diverse
persons, how much the deputies for the king of Spain and the archdukes,
labored to debar these provinces from the whole Indian traffic, with all
the dependances thereof, they made many books concerning the same, which were
printed and set forth, one under the title of an advertisement or forewarning,
another under the name of a dream, or conference, and diverse others; all for
the most part tending to forewarne such as were in authority, and were put in
^ust to deal in the said treaty, to take heed of corruption, and of division
and disorder in the country, as also from all the practices of Jesuits, and
others, that seek not the peace and quietness, but rather the disturbance of
the country: which books were the better to be borne withal, for that (in so
great and uncertain an alteration of an estate, as is now likely to happen

By means of friar John Nayens departure for Spain, many men began to find,
that the might not discover themselves, for that they were uncertain whether
their princes would accept 1608
to treat of so many articles, as the Estates had propounded and delivered unto
them, and that therefore they would so manage their business, either by
themselves, or by others, as that friar John Nayen should be returned back
again, before they would proceed any further in the treaty: and it fell out
well to the purpose for them, that in the beginning of April the Estates for
the most part repaired to their own provinces, and the Estates of Holland also
for a time, so as thereby it rather seemed to be delayed off, by the absence of
the Estates themselves, than by the deputies for Spain; for that they always
gave forth that they were ready to proceed in the treaty, although that in
long time they had not once sought to enter into any conference or meeting.

Mean time there came a flying news out of Brabant, that upon good Friday
there was a dispatch brought thither out of Spain, the contents thereof
being, That the king of Spain would not grant nor allow these countries any
traffic at all into the Indies, nor to any places thereof, and that the
Estates subjects were presently to desist and leave off the same; and secondly,
That the king would have his deputies insist and urge free exercise of
religion, and grant of churches for the papists, and those of the Romish
religion, that were in the united provinces, and that openly and in all places;
or otherwise that they should leave off and break up the said treaty. Which
news made many men (that were in good hope of the treaty of peace) to be much
disquieted in mind, perceiving that the proceedings and consequences thereof
were so dangerous, as without the hazarding of the whole state of the country,
they Spinola and the rest of the deputies were not much pleased, when they had
received the said answer, or were advertised thereof.

Many ambassadors of foreign princes, as those of Munster, Cleue, and
Cologne, when they perceived the long proceedings of the treaty, took their
leaves and departed from the Hage; the like did many earls and other noble
men, as the earl of Benthen, the earl of Hohenloo (cousin to that earl of
Hohenloo, which had done so great service to the Estates in formertimes) and
others.

We have showed before, that friar John Nayen was gonne into Spain, and that
he was to return again within forty days after; who not coming at the
day appointed, gave many men cause of great suspicion, and the rather, for that
it was given out by some of the king of Spaines ministers and servants, that
the king was not resolved to leave his sovereignty, but to hold it still, and
to further the Catholic religion: and how that in France the Spaniards
boasted what great advantage and profit they had gotten by the treaty of peace
late made, reporting the same to be much more than they expected, with such
like words: the friar coming not again, and Don Pedro de Toledo ambassador
for the king of Spain, being come into France, not only to make certain
propositions of marriage, but also to entreat of this peace. The Estates of the
united provinces attended the return of president Ianin ambassador Don Pedro
de Toledo, was stayed by the king in France: but the said king having given
audience to Dom Pedro de Toledo, he presently sent president Ianin back again
into Holland, with letters of credit, who upon the seventh of August arriving
in the Hage, the next day had audience of the general Estates; where he showed
them what great affection the king his master bare unto the preservation and
maintenance of their estate, as well in peace as wars, and how that Dom Pedro
de Toledo in the name of the king of Spain his master, had made complaint unto
the French king, touching the aid and assistance which the said king gave unto
the united provinces, contrary to the treaty of peace made at Veruins, and
what disliking the said king of Spain had thereof, offering all kindness and
friendship in the king his masters name, unto the the said treaty of peace
made at Veruins, alleging that the king of Spain for his part, had 1608
he declared unto them at large, saying also, that the king advised them to
make a peace, if it might be concluded upon reasonable conditions; and that to
the same end they should with all speed move the deputies for the king of
Spain and the archdukes, to proceed to a conclusion thereof, and that they
should not stay any longer for the return of friar John Nayen, for that there
was no appearance nor likelihood that they should get any further or other
commission, than they had already, but rather a worse: and for conclusion he
said, that the king (in the mean time to supply their necessities) had granted
to send them the sum of 100 thousand crowns.

Whereupon the Spanish deputies were moved by the Estates to come to a final
conclusion,

This resolution, protestation, and farewell being delivered unto the
archdukes deputies upon the 25 of August, they made complaint thereof unto the
ambassadors of foreign princes then resident in the Hage; whereupon the said
ambassadors consulted together, to see if they could bring both parties to
agree upon some truce for many years: and to that end about Ianin, in the name
of all the kings and princes ambassadors, made this proposition unto the
general Estates.

Your lordships may well suppose with what care, affection, and sincerity, the
kings and princes An admonition given (by all the ambassadors resident in the
Hage) unto the general Estates touching a truce for many years.
that sent us hither, have used all the means and furtherance they could to
aid you to attain unto an assured peace and tranquillity, and to obtain all
whatsoever they thought might tend to your good and benefit therein; which
notwithstanding our continual pains taken to stay here with you, and therein
to yield you our best aid and counsel, it has proved fruitless, to our
great grief and discontents, and likewise (as we are assured) of the princes
that sent us hither, who were always persuaded, that the issue of this treaty
would have proved more successful than it is found to be: and as their
chiefest intents were to aid you to make a peace that should be absolute and
effectual, judging the same not only to be profitable, but altogether
necessary for your estate; to the same end they gave us commission, that if at
the first it would not so fall out, that then we should propound a truce to be
made for many years, as soon as we should see the treaty of peace to be
broken of in regard that it will be much more profitable for you, than to
return to ruinous and bloody wars: and for that it is now time to propound
the same unto you, we have thought it good to counsel and advise you to
incline your selves thereunto, so as you may obtain such conditions, as may
procure profit and assurance unto your estate; without the which, our princes
desire not to move or counsel you thereunto: and to the same end we thought
good to set down these three articles.

1 That the truce shall be made with you, as with free countries, whereunto
neither the king of Spain, nor the archdukes pretend any sovereignty. 2 That
during this truce, you shall have and enjoy free traffic into the Indies, as
well as into Spain, and also in the Netherlands, and in every place under
their obedience. 1608
3 And that you may hold and enjoy that which at this present you possess, and
that so you proceed to the rest of the conditions, which with reason may be had
and granted.
We partly foresee and judge, that it will be hard to obtain these
conditions from those princes with whom you have to deal; for that seeing a
peace does not like them, it is to be thought, that a truce with the like
conditions will not please them: which if they reject and refuse, then will the
entering again into arms on your side be excusable, and the willingness and
endeauours of our princes, to cease this miserable war, shall be thereby well
known, so as they shall have a better subject and cause to employ their forces
and means for your maintenance and defense: but to the contrary, if they
seem willing thereunto, then we counsel you to embrace it, because your
refusal and denying thereof, would give them much cause

And in the mean time you shall have means to settle your affairs, to pay
your debts, and to reform and amend your government; and lastly, continuing
well united together, the truce will be as a full and an effectual peace, and
thereby in time you shall enjoy all the effects and furtherances, yea and many
more, than peace it self would have affoorded unto you: but to the contrary,
if you begin wars again, we see so many difficulties and dangers therein

We know well, that at this present you are much disquieted with the
proceedings of your adversaries, but this disquietnesse ought not so to divert
and alter you, as you should contrary to wisdom and reason leave and forsake
that counsel, which is most profitable and safest for you, and not suffer your
selves by any motion of choler to do that which should be hurtful and
prejudicial unto your estate.

This is the counsel my lords, that the princes your good friends give unto
you, who are ready to join with you, and to hazard themselves in your
affairs; but yet you must remember (that if you enter into arms again) that
they cannot aid you, unless they themselves fall into the hazard of wars;
which all wise princes desire to avoid as much as possibly they may, and never
desire to enter thereinto, unless by compulsion and great necessity they are
constrained, or that they expect some great benefit to be gotten thereby. It is
evident that this war is not necessarily to be undertaken by you, if by a
peace for many years you may free your selves thereof: and it is most
certain, that if you enter into wars, you shall be a means to put both
your selves and us to great charges, and be a cause of great hurt and spoil.
It is our intents and meanings to give the like advice unto the archdukes
deputies, and if they refuse to yield unto a truce, we will then tell them
plainly, that our princes for your good and

This being likewise imparted unto the archdukes deputies, Spinola and the rest
desired 4 days time to peruse their instructions, and thereupon to return an
answer: and after four days were expired, they made answer, That their
commission from the king of Spain contained no point nor article of truce,
upon any such conditions as were propounded, and that therefore they could not
deal therein, without express commission from Spain: and for that cause they
desired six weeks longer time to procure the same; but if in the mean time
the Estates would enter into treaty touching the same, they said they hoped
that for as much king of Spain shall grant them free traffic into Spain,
and that the said king of Spain 1608
the Indies within the truce or not, and if that the king of Spain were to be
joined in this action, they desired twenty days longer respite, and
continuance of the said treaty, and that the said kings and princes should be
aiders and assisters to keep and maintain the said truce, in like sort, as if
an absolute peace were made.

This dilatorie answer being received, the general Estates were of diverse
opinions amongst themselves: and for that president Ianin ambassador for France
thought it expedient to let them stay the propounded time that was set down by
them to expect an answer out of Spain; some of them resolved to grant so much
time, but they of Zeeland, and many others, were of another opinion, for that
they had not kept any time by them demanded and limited, and withal

The general Estates of the united provinces (having duly considered of that
which has been propounded in their full assembly, first upon the ninth, and
after that upon the 11 of September, by the ambassadors of France and
England, together with those of the princes electors, and others of Germany,
that they would grant unto the deputies for the archdukes

Whereupon the deputies for the king of Spain and the archdukes, having
received no other answer from their princes, and finding that their departure
was so absolutely and so resolutely determined and set down, they made
preparation to depart, complaining that they had so strict a day given them;
and withal protested, that they were sorry that a peace could Spinola and the
rest of the deputies were invited to dine with prince Maurice, whither they all
came, except auditor Vereicken, for that he was hurt in one of his legs, and
was carried in a coach from his lodging: after dinner, prince Maurice and the
rest of the lords went with them to Risewicke, and there taking his leave, he
left his brother Henry earl of Nassau to conduct them to Delft haven, where
the same evening they took shipping in Maurices pinnace, accompanied by diverse
gentlemen, as Emery van Liere governor of William Staet, Haultaine admiral of
Zeeland, and others, who brought them to Antuerpe, and returned back again;
from thence they went to Brussels, where they found the people in great
expectation and desire of peace; but all the comfort they could give them was,
that 1608


Thus ended this long and fruitless treaty of peace, betwixt the deputies for
the king of Spain and the archdukes, and the deputies for the general Estates
of the united provinces (the which had filled all Europe with expectation) to
the great amazement and grief of many good men, which did hope to have seen an
end of these long, ruinous, and bloody wars, and the conclusion of a good,
firm, and honorable peace, or long truce. But seeing the hearts of kings are
in the hands of God, who directs all their actions and resolutions as he
thinks best, let us Netherlanders (having compassion one of another
miseries) pray incessantly unto him to inspire these princes and Estates with
mild and peaceful spirits, for the finishing

FINIS.
A Table of all the memorable things contained in this History of the
Netherlands.
A.
ABot of Saint Vaast of Arras what he was. 798. Accord of the Lord of Montigny,
chief of the mutines with the Spaniards. 689. Accord betwixt John of Bauaria,
and the Duke of Brabant, 133 Abbay of Ouwerghem spoiled, and diversely censured,
391 Ad^ Countess of Holland, 45. marries with the Earl of Loos. ibid. Adolph
Prince of Gelders prisoner, 174 Accord made by the Spaniard with the town of
Gand, 862 Act of great resolution done by a Sea Captain, 661. Act of promise
of the confederate Noblemen to the Gouernesse, 407 Act like a Roman done by
Captain Bordet, 514. Act unworthy and cruel of Captain Pont, well revenged.
661 Admiral of Arragon sent Ambassador to the Emperor, 1148. he passes the
river of Meuze, and takes Orson, 1174. ransomes Wezel, 1182. takes many
neutrall places, 1191. and comes near unto Bomel, 1210. is taken prisoner,
1248 Advice of the Prince of Orange, for the making of a council of Estate,
712 Advocates in Arras executed wrongfully, 675 Albert of Bauaria, 16. Earl of
Holland, 105, subdues the Frisons, 111. his death, 116 Albert Duke of Saxony,
Governor of the Netherlands, 207, he gets the hereditarie government of
Friseland, 219. tyranizeth over the Frisons, 222. slain before Groaning, 294.
Alliance betwixt them of Ostergoe and Groaning, 213 Alcmar in trouble, 210.
besieged by the Duke of Alua, 519. endures three assaults, 524, the Duke forced
to raise his Camp, 527 Alexander Farnese Duke of Parma, succeeds Don John,
981. makes a Bridge to shut up the river of Antwerpe. 865 Alost sold by the
English to the Spaniard, 833. Alpen taken by Prince Maurice, 1129 Agent from
the great Commander into England, and to what end. 887 Albert Cardinal of
Austria, succeds his brother Ernestus, 1114. he takes Calais and Ardres, 1115.
excuses himself, and lays the fault upon the Admiral, 1202 Albert prepares
his army to go against Prince Maurice in Flanders, ibid. Alliance betwixt the
Flemings and Brabansons against the Duke of Saxony, 207 Allennes thinking to
surprise Courtray, he loses Menin, 716. afterward he surpriseth Courtray.
730 Allen a Cardinal writes against the Queen of England. 996 Ambassadors
from the Emperor to the united Provinces, touching a peace, 1051. from the King
of Poland to them, 1128. from the King of Denmark unto them, 1134. from the
Duke of Wirtemberg unto them, 1158 Ambrose le Duke, Sargent Mayor in Arras, how
he behaved himself, 673 Andrien van Assendolf, pentioner of Harlem, beheaded,
500 Amsterdam against Harlem, their skirmish at Sea, 503. in the end it yields
to the Estates, 655. Amiens surprised and spoiled by the Spaniard, 1126,
recovered by the French King, 1128. A^ne of Poelgeest mignion to the Earl of
Holland, murdered, 109 Anthony Perrenot Cardinal of Granuelle, called into
Spain, 349. he crosses the petition of the Estates of Brabant, 381. a legend
of his life, 344 Antwerpe perplexed for the new Bishops, 347. sends their
Deputies into Spain, 348* they intrenche themselves against the Castle, 595.
are spoiled by the Spaniards, 596. a tumult at a general Procession, 705.
Priests and Monks chased away, 706. are blockt up by the Prince of Parma, 863.
they compound and yield, 884 Answer from the general Estates, to them of
Lille, Douay, etc. 691 Appologie made by the Prince of Orange in answer of his
proscription, 764 Army of the Germans to succor Nuys, 174. of Duke
Cassimire to succor the States, 673. at Sea sent by the Spaniards in the year
1588. 998. of King Philip in Piccardie, 323. of the Duke of Parmaes to succor
the League, 1043. of the States upon the coast of Spain, and at the Islands,
1213 Arnold Earl of Holland, slain by the Frisons, 9. Arnold Duke of Gelders
offers the combat to Adolph his son. 174 Arnold of Groue-velt Governor of
Sluys, 957. Arnold resignes the Duchy of Geldres to the Duke of Bourgongne,
174 Arnhem assured for the Estates, 875 Articles of the privileges of Brabant.
1371 Articles set down by the Inquisition of Spain, against the Netherlands,
442. confirmed by the King of Spain, 443 Assembly of the Estates of
Friseland, 213 Assembly at Bolswaert, 214 Assembly of the chief of the
Nobility at Dendermond, 415. an other assemblye of the Nobles, 368 Articles of
peace betwixt France and Spain, 144. Audenarde abandoned by the Protestants,
who had surprised it, 496. besieged and yielded to the Duke of Parma, 8^2 Arras
the chief town in Arthois in great troubles. 673 Arschot in Brabant yielded
to Dom John, 654. Audience of the Deputies of the Estates with the French King,
860 Axel in Flanders taken by the Estates, 920 Attempts of them of Amsterdam
against them of Harlem. 504 Ambassadors from England and France to the Estates.
818 Appologie made by the Protestants, for their taking of arms, 428 Admiral
of Arragon set at liberty, 1259 Adolph Earl of Berghen taken prisoner, 1264.
Ambassadors from the united Provinces to the King of England, 1297 Ardenbourg
abandoned to Prince Maurice, 1307. Archduke Alberts men coming to relieve
Sluys, put to rout, 1309 Archduke Albert hinders the assembling of the general
Estates, 1320. he prepares for war, 1321 Admonition to the united Provinces
against a peace, 1328 Admiral of Dunkerke taken at sea, 1351 Archduke Albert
jealous of the Duke of Bouillon, 1354 Accord made betwixt the Earl of
East-Frise-land, and the Town of Embden, 1365.
B.
BAerle taken and recovered, 772 Baltazar Gerard killes the Prince of Orange,
832. is executed. ibid. Baron of Enghien beheaded in Henault, 107. Baron of
Battembourgh, Lieutenant to the Prince of Orange at the relief of Harlem, 513.
Baron of Montigny prisoner in Spain, and poisoned, 454 Baron of Selles sent
from the King to the Estates, 653 Barons of Batenbourg executed by the Duke of
Alua, 449 Baron of Anholt slain at the siege of Lochum, 808. Bastard putatiue
of the Emperor, beheaded in Holland, 824 Baron of Boxtell, Governor of
Boisleduc, 700. Backerzeell offers violence to them of the religion in the
Netherlands, 410 Bartel Entens makes a vain enterprise upon Tergoes, 479
Bastard of Rubempre prisoner in Holland, 152. Batenbourg surprised by Duke
Albert, 219. Battle of Verona, 75. of Marendyke, 93. betwixt the Liegeois,
and the Earl of Holland, 121. of Gorrichom, 130. Of Alphen, 138. at Sea 141.
betwixt Charles of Bourgongne and the Liegeois, 162. betwixt the Lords of
Amster and Woerden, against the Bishop of Vtrecht, 65. of Esquine-gate, 193. of
Hinges, 209. of Saquelets, 271. betwixt the Cleuois and Imperialists, 276. of
Saint Quintine, 322. of Grauelin, 326. betwixt the Earl of Hohenlo and Shenck,
738. betwixt the English and Spaniards at sea, 1002. of Tournhoult, 1126. of
Nieuport, 1247 Battenbourg taken by the Prince of Parma, 951. Balfour a
Scottish Collonell defeated and slain by the Spaniard, 769 Berghen Saint Wynox
taken and burnt by the French, 326. besieged by the Spaniard, 827. yielded with
honor and profit, 828 Bellieure treates with the Estates for the Duke of Aniou,
818 Berghen up Zoom besieged in vain by the Duke of Parma, 1006 Berghen
surprised by the Spaniards, 474 Blyenbeeke besieged. 716 Bernardin of Mendosa
treates with the French King touching the Netherlands. 870 Berlandt Governor of
Flussing poisoned. 511 Bins a town in Henault taken by the Duke of Anious men.
681 Bishop of Vtrecht defeated and taken prisoner by the Hollanders. 12.
slain in battle. 80 Bishops of Cologne and Liege defeated by the Earl of
Holland. 18 Bishop of Liege complains to the Estates for the taking of Huy.
1003 Borselle a house in Zeeland, their beginn ing. 5. Blommart a Captain of
the Protestants slain going out of Audenarde. 496. Bommel besieged by Philip
Archduke of Austria, 229. assured by Prince Maurice, 1213 Boisot made Governor
of Flushing, 512 Bommened a Forte in Zeland, taken by assault, 586. Bonne in
the Diocese of Cologne, yielded to the Spaniard, 990 Boisot Admiral to the
Prince, prepares to succor Leyden, 560. slain, 590 Boisleduc surprised by the
Protestants, and then abandoned. 417. after yields to the Estates, 646.
unwilling to enter into the union of Vtrecht, 700. is besieged in vain by
Prince Maurice, 1273 Borentange a Forte in Friseland, 1068 Bishops newly
created, refused in the Netherlands, a great cause of the troubles. 350 Bishops
of Ypre and Bruges prisoners at Gant, 649. Boncham in Henault besieged and
yielded to the Malcontents, 742 Bouines a Town in Namur yielded to the
Estates. 650 Bourse at Antwerpe burnt, 824 Brederode the noblest house in
Holland, and their beginning, 9. he presents the petition for the Nobility,
to the Duchess of Parma, 383. what he did at Amsterdam, 425, he retires out of
the Netherlands, and what he was, 427 Breda in Brabant yielded to the Estates,
648. delivered to the Spaniard by the means of the Siegnior of Fresin, 772.
surprised by Heranguere for the Estates, 1031 Brefort besieged and taken by
assault by Prince Maurice, 1132 Briaute enters combat unadvisedly, 1239
Bronkhorst yielded to the Estates, 808 Brussels opposes against the imposition
of the tenth penny, 465. they accord with the King of Spain, 875 Bruges in
trouble. 702. the Estates men succor it before the malcontents, 703 Bruges
and Gand reconciled to the Archduke Maximilian, 200 Bryele a town in the Isle
of Voorn, surprised by the Earl of Marcke, for the Prince of Orange, 472
Bravery of 30. soldiers, 916 Buren Town and Castle yielded to the Spaniard,
583 Bruges refuzed from the Hollanders, 845. yielded to the Spaniard, 846
Bishop of Cologne comes to succor the Duke of Alua, 492 Beckaff by Sluys taken
by Prince Maurice, 1309. Bossompiere slain before Ostend, 1310 Baron of Terms
a French man, comes with a troop of horse to Prince Maurice before Sluys, 1312
Berghen in danger to be surprised, 1349. attempted again by the Spaniard,
1350 Brefort surprised by the Spaniard, and abandoned again, 1354
C.
CAmbray victualed, 778 Cabillautins, a faction in Holland, restored in Horn,
98. take arms again, 134 Caius Ransou a Dane, taken prisoner by the Estates
men, and what followed, 942 Castles in Frisland razed, 731 Castles ruined in
the Netherlands, 647 Castle of Antwerpe built by the Duke of Alua 457. That of
Gant besieged and yielded to the Estates, 612. That of Vtrecht besieged and
yielded to the Estates, 624 Callais besieged, and yielded unto the French, 324.
Castle of Staueren yielded to the Estates 775. Castle floating at Antwerpe,
what it was, 877. Cambray surprised by the Earl of Rhomont, 193. besieged and
yielded to the Spaniard, 1110. Carlo slain. 513 Cassimire burns the Duke of
Aluaes poulder, 525. Carpen taken by the Spaniard, 682 Campen a town in
Oueryssell yielded to the Estates. 660 Charles of Bourgongne Earl of
Charalois, inherits the moytie of Aspren and Henkelom, 149. in disgrace with
his Father, 150. is reconciled, 151. succeeds his Father, 160. defeates the
Liegeois, 162. forces the French King to go with him to the siege of Liege,
166. seeks to rule absolutely over the Frisons, 171. he besieged Nuys, 174.
is defeated twice by the Suisses, 172. besieges Nancy, is defeated and slain,
179 Castle Cambresis yielded to the Spaniard, 809 Charles Duke of Geldres freed
from prison in France, 210. sentence given against him, 217. is reconciled to
the Archduke Philip, 231. Charles the fifth, Emperor, succeeds in the
Netherlands, 236. his departure out of the Netherlands, 315. his death, 328
Champignies regiment defeated by the Spaniard 650. imprisoned at Brussels, 677.
he is forced by the Duke of Parma to forsake the Netherlands, 1019 Change of
Magistrates in the Netherlands, 656 Charles of Croy Prince of Chymay, his
carriage in Flanders, 845 Charles Earl of Mansfeldt enters into the Island of
Bommel, 1024. he takes Seuenberghen, 1035. Charles of Lieuin Siegnior of
Famas, slain at Otmarsum, 942 Christopher Fabri a Minister put to death at
Antwerpe for religion. 350 Citadel of Cambray surprised for the general
Estates of the Country, 595 Commons in Holland rise against the Nobility. 62.
Coaes van Kniten a Giant, 75 Compromise of the Nobility of the Netherlands,
368 Complaint of the Netherlanders to the King of Spain, 418 Commission from
the Queen of England, to treat with the Duke of Parma, 986 Countess of
Flanders lays claim to the Isle of Walchren. 56 Convocation of the Nobility
at Duffel, 389 Conde a town in Henault surprised, 752 Confederation of the
French King, the Queen of England, and the Estates, against the Spaniards,
1124 Conference at Gheertruydenberg, betwixt the Deputies of Don John and the
Estates of the Netherlands, 627. Consultation of the Estates touching the
change of their Prince, 726 Conuoy of Brussels defeated, 867 Cocqueville
defeated and overcome at Saint Valery, 448 Coeuarden taken by the Spaniard,
74. besieged and yielded up unto Prince Maurice, 1060. Courtray in Flanders
surprised by the Spaniard. 730 Council of the troubles erected in the
Netherlands, with absolute authority, 435 Council of Estate at Brussels
committed to prison, 591 Counselors displaced in Frisland, 656 Crimpen a Forte
in Holland taken by the Protestants 589 Creuecaeur yielded to Prince Maurice,
1230 Cruelty of the Spaniards against the French at Mons, 490 Cruelties of the
Spaniards in Neutrall countries of Germany, under the Admiral of Arragon,
1174 Cruelties of the Liegeois, 164 Confirmation of the Baron of Montignies
accord with the Spaniard, 689 Cloet Governor of Nuys cruelly executed, 920.
Conuoy of three thousand going to Cologne defeated by their own party. 952
Conditions whereby the Estates did yield unto the tenth penny, 467 Conuoy of
the Spaniards defeated by the Lord Willobies troops, 952 Conuoy from Bruges to
Ypre defeated, 830 Castle of Gand besieged by the general Estates, 612 Castle
of Huede treacherously delivered to the Prince of Parma, 660 Collenborch taken
by the Estates, 1047. Crapoll Castle surprised by the Estates, 1261 Cracowe
taken for the Estates, 1262. Catris General of the Spaniards slain before
Ostend, 1270 Cornets eight of the Archdukes horse defeated, 1290 Cruelty of
the Earl of Embden, 1293 Cruelty of the Spaniards, 1301 Cadsandt taken by
Prince Maurice, 1306 Coxie taken by Prince Maurice, ibid. Conuoy going to
victual Sluys, put to route, 1311. Considerations concerning a peace in the
Netherlands, 1322
D.
DAniel vanden Meulen sent for to Brussels, and why, 1171 Death of the Emperor
Charles the fifth, his qualities, 528 Death of the Princess of Orange, 803
Death of the Duke of Parma, 1061 Defeat of the succors of Harlem, and of the
Prince of Oranges Army, 510. of the Princes ships before Harlem, 513. of the
Protestants at Austerwele, 422. of the Protestants of Amerongen, 422. of the
Estates at Gemblours, 654. of the Estates men at Costeyns-dyke, 879. of the
Spaniards at Tournhout, 1126. of the Marquis of Warembom by the Estates, 1024
Delivery monstrous of 365. children at one birthe. 52 Deputies from the Queen
of England to the Estates, and from them to her, 984. from Brusselles to the
Estates of A^thois, 695. from Antwerpe to the Gouernesse, 423. from the
Nobility to an Imperial Diet, 372. from the Estates to the French King, 868.
from Groaning to the Emperor, 1055. from the Queen of England to treat with
the King of Spaines deputies at Bourbrough in Flanders, 995. from the Duke of
Cleues to Prince Maurice, 1185 Denremonde, Nihouen, and Audenarde, surprised
for the Archduke Philip, 200 Denremonde redeemes it self from spoil, 860.
Dearth extraordinary of corn in the Netherlands, 931 De^cription of Groaning,
1087 Delf rebels, besieged and yielded to Cont Albert, 106 Delfois do great
service in Friseland to Cont Albert. 112 Disunion among the Provinces of the
Netherlands, 708 Description of the Duke of Aluas Image. 461. Deuenter in
Ouerissel besieged by the Estates. 687. sold to the Spaniard by Stanley. 942.
beseeged and yielded to Prince Maurice. 1048. Deutecom taken by the Admiral.
1186 Division in Holland during their Earls absence. 72 Disgrace done to the
Earl of Osteruant at the French Kings table. 110 Discourse of Master Francis
Baldwins, showing the true means how to pacify the troubles. 356.
Dissimulation of the Duchess of Parma with the Nobles. 421 Discourse of advice
to the Earl of Leicester. 932. Division among the Nobility of the
Netherlands. 349 Dislike betwixt the Duke of Parma and Champigny. 1019 Dinant
beseeged by the Earl of Charalois, taken and razed. 157 Dinandois brake the
peace with the Earl of Charolois. ibid. Double practice at Bryele. 730
Dousbourg yielded to the Spaniard, 874. besieged and yielded to the Earl of
Leicester, 924. Dourlans in Picardie taken by assault by the Spaniard. 1106.
Dordrecht surprised by the young Earl of Egmont. 195. Dix Muyden taken from the
Ganthois, 210 Duke of Lorraine inuades Holland for the Bishop of Vtrecht, and
defeates Robert the Frison. 24 Duke of Saxony ruins the faction in Holland
and Zeland. 211 Duchess of Parma writes to the King, and delays the Estates
of Brabant under a project of moderation of the bloody Edict, 373. she
entertaines them with policy, 385. she plays her part. 421 Duke of Alua sent
Governor into the Netherlands, 431. seeks a quarrel against the Queen of
England, 460. thinking to assure Flushing, he loses it, 473. he spoils
Macklin, 495, he labors to be called home, 532. Duke of Medina Celi sent to
govern the Netherlands, 479 Duke John Cassimire succors the Estates, 673. he
comes to Gand. 676. he retires with his army. 686 Duke of Parma Governor of
the Netherlands, 681. he passes the Meuse, 682. comes before Antwerpe, 863.
and takes it, 884. he goes to the Spawe, 1019. his death, 1061. Duke of
Bouillon marries the Prince of Oranges daughter, 1102 Dunkerke taken and burnt
by the French, 326. recovered by the Bourguignons, basely yielded up by the
French, 827 Dyest yielded to Don Iuan, 654. is surprised by the Estates, 746.
beseeged and yielded to the Spaniard, 825 Deane of Emmerics speech unto the
Admiral of Arragon. 1186 Duchess of Parma departs out of the Netherlands, 444
Disposition of Prince Maurice Camp before Sluys, 1310 Death of Peter Ernest
Earl of Mansfeldt, his life, 1319 Demands of the Council of Estate of the
united Provinces touching the war, 1321.
E.
EDward Duke of Gelders takes his brother prisoner, and defies the Earl of
Holland, 107. Earl of Benthen slain, 34 Earl of Loos defeates the Earl of
Holland in Zeland, 46 Earls of Holland and Geldres make war against the
Bishop of Vtrecht. 42 Earl of Saint Pol made Reuward of Brabant, 135. Earl of
Enghien beheaded in Henault, 106 Earl of Embden made Protector of Groaning,
230. buildes a Cittadell there. ibid. Earl of Meghen at Vtrecht, 421 Earl of
Arembergh defeated and slain in Friseland by Cont Lodowicke of Nassau, 449.
Earl Adolph of Nassau slain in Friseland with Arembergh, 449 Earl of Meurs
leuies Reysters for the Estates which mutine, 931. his death, 1025 Earl of
Hochstrate adiorned by the Duke of Alua, iustifies himself by writing, 445.
he hurts himself by chance, whereof he dies, 458 Earl of Bossu chased away
from Bryel, 472. Earl Lodowicke of Nassau, brother to the Prince of Orange,
enters Friseland with an army, 449. beseegeth Groaning, 455. defeated through
the mutiny of his Germans, 456. surprizeth Mons, 477. comes to succor the
Protestants of the Netherlands, is defeated and slain with his brother and
Duke Christopher. 545 Earl of Lodron taken prisoner by his soldiars, 460.
intreates them cruelly in Antwerpe, 462. Earl of Ouerstein drowned at
Antwerpe, 597. Earl of Bossu intreates them of Rotterdam in Holland ill. 473.
he is taken prisoner by the Hollanders, and carried to Horn, 528. he is
General of the Estates Army, his death. 687 Earl of Mark Lieutenant to the
Prince of Orange surprizeth Bryele, 472. he becomes master of a great part of
Holland for the Prince, 488. accused to the Estates for his cruelty. 515 Earl
Uanden Berghe takes Zutphen and other towns in Gelderland for the Prince of
Orange, 488 Earl of Solms makes war for the Estates in Flanders, 1073. he
marries the daughter of the Earl of Egmont, 1103 Earl of Horn put to death
by the Duke of Alua, 451 Earl of Rheneberg falls from the Estates, and
delivers Groaning to the Spaniard, 734. his death, 776. Earl of Warax defeated
and slain at Tournhout, 1126 Earl of Hohenlo, vide Philip. Earl of Egmont,
vide Lamoral. Earl of Egmont, vide Philip. Edict against them of the religion,
253. A second against them, 257. the third, 267. a forth, 273 Edict perpetual,
and accord made by Dom Iuan, and sent to the Estates of Holland and Zeland,
624. Edict of Proscription against the Prince of Orange. 763 Edict made by the
general Estates of the united Provinces against the King of Spain, 782.
Effigies of the Duke of Alua in the Citadell of Antwerpe, 437 Eindouen in
Brabant wunne by the Spaniard, 773. taken for the Duke of Aniou, 810. yielded
again to the Spaniard, 824. Emanuell Philibert Duke of Sauoy made Governor of
the Netherlands, 320 Emenesse reuolts from the Bishop of Vtrecht, 102. burnt by
the Hollanders, 196. spoiled by the Spaniard. Emperor sends succors to the
Earl of Holland, to subdue Friseland, 14 Enterprise to take the Duke of Alua,
445 Enchuysen the first town in Holland which refused the tenth penie, 480
Enterprise of the Duke of Parma upon Cambray, 1024. upon Dyest, 803. of the
Zelanders upon Tertolen, 508. of the Estates upon Bourbrouc, 791. of Philip
Earl of Egmont upon Brusselles, dishonorable, 706. upon Arschor, 803. of the
malcontents upon Gand, 743. of the Estates upon Lille, 771. of Prince Maurice
upon Mastricht, 1056. of the Spania^ds upon Steenwyke, 1126. of the Groningers
upon Delfzyel, 1076. of the Duke of Aniou upon Antwerpe, 812. of La Motte upon
Ostend, 876. upon Zibrick, 915 Ernest Archduke of Austria, Governor of the
Netherlands for the King, 1076. he seeks to purge himself for Renichons
attempt, 1079. his death, 1102 Earnest Earl of Solms, prisoner, wounded and
dies, 1104 Escouedo the Secretary animates Dom Iuan, 641. Estates of all the
Provinces seek to assure themselves of Antwerpe, 595. they Print their
Iustifications against Dom John, 647. they seek succors, 648. they have three
several Camps, 650. their Army defeated near Gemblours, 654. their great
Army at Remenant, 662 Estates of the united Provinces resolve for their
preservation, 587. they demand succors in England, 588, they begin to distrust
Dom John, 644. they declare the King of Spain fallen from the Sovereignty of
those Provinces, and take upon them the government, 782 Extract of the life of
Cardinal Granuelle, 344. Execution of rigorous Edicts in the Netherlands, 353
Extract of the King of Spaines Letters to the Duchess of Parma, 408 Executions
done by the Duke of Alua, 449. Enschede yields to Prince Maurice, 1132 Elector
of Mentz answer to Cardinal Andrew, 1205 Enterprise upon the town of Flushing
discovered, 1262 Enterprise to sack and overrun Antwerpe. 1264. Estates
troops made an Incursion into Luxemborg, 1292 Embden demands aid of the
united Provinces against their Earl, 1294 Erkelens taken and spoiled by Cont
Henry of Nassaw, 1366 Emperor writes to the united Estates touching the
borders, 1303 Estates of the united Provinces prepare for war, 1321
Enterprise made by Prince Maurice upon the river of Scheld, which proved
unfortunate, 1341. Emperor sends to the Hage for a Pasport for his Ambassadors
to treat of a league or peace, 1343 Estates refuse and deny the Emperors
request, 1343. Earl of Hertford sent Ambassador from England to the Archdukes,
1349 Enterprise by the Spaniards upon Berghen, 1348. Enterprise upon Grave
quickly discovered, 1349. Enterprise upon Sluys ill performed by the Spaniards,
1355 Estates persuade Prince Maurice to relieve Rhinberck. 1363 Enterprise upon
Venlo. ibid. Earls of Brouck murdered by the Spaniards. 1366
F
FAction of Schieringers and Vetcoopers in Frisland, long and dangerous. 75
Faction of Hoockins and Cabillaux in Holland. 98 Factions revive in Holland.
146 Factions in Frisland demand succors for the Duke of Saxony. 218 Factions
in the Religion at Vtrecht. 1057 Faction barbarous of the Admiral of Arragon,
to summon a neutrall place. 1174 Flemings chased out of the I Will of Walchren.
56, defeated with bloodshed. Put to rout by the Earl of Holland. 66 Flemings
more severely entreated for matters of Religion then any other. 382 Fleet sent
from Antwerp to victual Middelbourg, defeated. 542 Floris the first, the sixth
Earl of Holland assailed by the bishops of Liege and Collogne. 18
Floris the third, the thirteen Earl taken prisoner by the Earl of Flanders.
38. his death. 939 Floris the fourth, the seauenteene Earl slain at a Torney
in Clermont. 52 Floris the fifth, the ninteene Earl subdues the Frisons. 53.
he forces a Lady basely. 67. the cause of his death. 68 Fort floting at
Antwerp called the end of the wars. 877 Flemings put Philip of Austria in
possession of the Earldome. 199 Floris of Holland trecherously slain by the
Earl of Cuyck. 34 Frederick the third Emperor comes into the Netherlands with
his son Maximilian 204. he dislikes the peace made by his son with the
Flemings. ibid. Francis of Valois Duke of Alanson comes with an army to succor
Cambray. 778. he is invested Duke of Brabant. 796. and Earl of Flanders. 804.
fails to surprise Antwerp. 812. he seeks to excuse it. 815. what chief men
of his army were slain and taken there. 814 Fort of Sas by Gant taken by the
Spaniardes. 827 Fort of the Hage in the country of Liege yielded to the
Estates. 1045 Fort of Zutphen surprised by the Estates. 1047. Fort of Delfzyel
yielded to the Estates. 1049 Fort of Patience sold by certain French men to
the Spaniard. 1154 Frisons subdued by the Earl of Holland. 7. they rebel. 27.
are reconciled to the Earl. 73 Frisons impatient, of great exactions, take
arms. 222. they complain. 228. and refuse Albert Duke of Saxony for their
Governor. 229 Flanders punished with three plagues together 932 Fight at sea
betwixt the Zeelanders and Spaniards. 509 Fight at Coesteyn-dike. 878 Fight at
sea betwixt the Zeelanders and Spaniards. 519 Friars burnt at Bruges. 657
Furnes and Dixmuiden yielded to the Spaniard. 827 Fort at the Sluice of
Outdwater basely abandoned. 583 Fort built at Burcht by the Spaniard. 598 Fight
at sea betwixt six galleys and certain English and Holland ships. 1290
Frederick Spinola general of the galleis, defeated, flies. 1292. slain in an
other fight at sea. 296 Fort of the Spaniards taken with great slaughter of
their men. 136 Forts taken by P. Maurice nere the I Will of Cadsandt. 1307
G
GAnthois abandon their Duke before Calais. 147. are defeated by the Hollanders
rebel against Charles of Bourgongne. 161. entreat Marie their Princess ill.
187. put her Counselors to death, being reconciled they mutine against the
Archduke. 203 Ganthois being in mutiny take the Duke of Arschot and others
prisoners 649. they leauie men. 676. are defeated by the Malcontents. 681.
Articles offered them by the Estates. 684. being in mutiny they seek to
deliver Alost to the Spaniard. 683. they yield to the Spaniard. 862. their
Cittadell built again. ibid. Gaspar of Robles Lord of Billy, his behavior in
Groaning. 614 Gaspar of Anastro a Bankeroat Merchant undertakes to kill the
Prince of Orange. 799 Geldrois in war against the Hollanders. 169. they
revolt from the house of Bougongne. 193. Geldres sold to the Spaniard by Patton
a Scottishman. 958 George Duke of Saxony succeeds Duke Henry his bro^her in
Frisland. 225. he resignes it to Prince Chaerles. 241 Gaesbeck surprised by
the Spaniard. 803 Gerard van Velsen a knight of Holland kills Floris Earl of
Holland. 68. is besieged, taken and executed. 69 Gheertruyde widow to Cont
Floris 1. tutrix to her son Floris Earl of Holland, marries with Robert the
Frison. ibid. George of Lalaine Earl of Rheneberg yields Groaning trecherously
to the Spaniard. 734. Genles and the French coming to relieve Mons, defeated
by the Duke of Alua. 489 Gheertruydenberg surprised by the Prince of Orange.
528. the soldiers mutyning it is besieged by Prince Maurice 1016. sold to the
Duke of Parma. 1017. besieged and taken by Prince Maurice. 1^61 Ghisbrecht of
Brederow chosen bishop of Vtrecht. 148. he compounds with the Duke of
Bourgongne and resignes his Bishopric. ibid. Governors and Knights of the
Order assembled in the Netherlands touching the new bishops. 348 Grave in
Brabant besieged by the Spaniard and yielded. 950. taken again by Prince
Maurice. 1280 Groll besieged and yielded to Prince Maurice 1131. recovered by
the Marquis Spinola. 1360 Groningers offer to acknowledge the Earl of Holland.
113 Groaning besieged by the duke of Saxony. 229. treates with the Earl of
Embden, yeeldes unto the Estates and their governor prisoner 614. a tumult in
the town and some of the Clergy prisoners. 649. they are forced to enter into
the union of Vtrecht. 701. delivered up to the Spaniard. 734. besieged and
yielded to Prince Maurice. 1091 Groenevelt, governor of Sluis. 909 Gorrichom
taken. 130 Guy of Dompierre Earl of Flanders makes war in Holland. 66
Groningers send to the Emperor. 213 Guisnes taken by assault from the French.
625 Gramberghe yielded to Cont William of Nassau. 1068 Goor abandoned to the
Estates. 1133 Ghistelles governor of Ostend. 1302. slain there. 1305 Groaning
Castle beaten down. 1366
H
HArlem besieged by Contesse Iaqueline. 139. punished by the duke of Saxony.
210 Harlem besieged by the duke of Alua, defends it self valiantly. 491.
yields to the Dukes mercy. 514. redeemes it self from spoil. ibid.
Haultepenne and Cont Hohenlo make hot wars. 907 Haultepenne defeated and
slain. 950 Henry Duke of Saxony leaves Frisland to his brother George. 225
Herentalls in Brabant abandoned to the Spaniard by the Colonels of Antwerp.
851 Heraugier surprizeth Breda and is made governor. 1035 Hemert governor of
Grave executed at Vtrecht. 951 Hollanders rebel against Thierry of Aquitane
their first Earl. 3. defeated in Frisland and their revenge. 63. twice
defeated by the Flemings in Walchren. 81. in war with them of Vtrecht. 134.
they take arms to succor the bishop of of Vtrecht, 196. defeated by them of
Vtrecht. ibid. Hookins chased out of Leyden by the Cabillautins. 195. they
recover the town. ibid. Humbercourt wyns great honor at the yielding up of
Liege. 162 Hulst surprised by the Ganthois 209. besieged and taken by Prince
Maurice. 1051. along and dear siege to Cardinal Albert, which in the end
yields. 1117 Horsemen of the Duke of Parmas defeated by Prince Manrice in the
Betuwe. 1050 Huy in the Country of Liege surprised by Herauguiere and
recovered presently by the Spaniard. 1103
I
IAqueline or Iacoba Countess of Holland, 128. made sure to John Duke of
Brabant, 129. defeates the Lord of Arckel, and marries with Duke John. 130.
leaves the Duke her husband. 135. marries with the Duke of Gloucester, 137.
besieged by the Duke of Brabant in Mons: delivered to the Duke of Bourgongne,
and escapes, 138 abandoned by the Duke of Gloucester, 139. is victorious at
Alpen, 140. she makes an accord with the Duke of Bourgongne, 141. marries with
Franc of Borselle 142. her death, 143 James Heesel a Councellor hanged at Gand,
682. Jealousy betwixt the Nobility of the Netherlands, for the Lieutenancie
of the Archduke Mathias. 654 Jealousy in the German Princes Camp, 1219.
Ieronimo Rhoda a Priest, chief of the Spanish mutines. 595 John Earl of
Henaut, succeeds in the County of Holland, 78. defeates the Flemings, 83. his
death, 85 John de Renesse a knight of Zeland wrongfully accused and banished.
74. he prouokes the Earl of Flanders against the Earl of Holland. 79. his
death. ibid. John Lord of Arckel and his children make war against the Earl
of Holland. 118 John van Vlyet beheaded at the Hage. 137 John of Koestein
undertakes to poison the Earl of Charolois. 150. is beheaded. ibid. John of
Bauaria bishop of Liege, carries himself as Tutor of Holland. 13^. he
obtaines the Earldome of the Emperor from his Niece Iaqueline. Leyden yielded
to him. 134. his death. 137 John Earl of Nassau brings Jewels out of Spain
to King Philip. 233 John of Imbise and his actions at Gant. 714. his return
out of Germany. 827. for his treachery he is executed at Gant. 859 John of
Austria bastard to the Emperor Charles the fifth Governor in the Netherlands.
600. he confirms the pacification of Gant. 623. he grows hateful to the
Estates, 635. his dissembling. 636. thinking to assure Antwerp he loses it.
638. he seizes upon the Castle of Namur. 640, his letters intercepted. 646,
he seeks to justify himself. ibid. the reasons of his retreat. he sends
to succor Ruremonde. 651, he raises an army. 653. publishes his
justification, 649. defeates the Estates at Gemblours. 654, he recouers many
towns in Henault, 656. his death. 677 Inundation voluntarily made by Delf to
relecue Leyden, 567 Iarres betwixt the English and Zeelanders. 592 Images
beaten down in Flanders. 409 Inglemuster besieged by La Noue. 774 English and
Scots defeated by the Duke of Parma at Rosendael. 826 Infanta of Spain given
in marriageto Albertus Archduke of Austria. 1160. is acknowledged by virtue of
her procuration Duchess of Brabant. 1169 Inondation in the Netherlands. 463
Inquisition of Spain cunningly brought into the Netherlands. 342 Institution
of new bishops. 343 Instruction given by the King of Spain to the Prince his
son before his death. 1178 English men disloyal, rewarded for their
treachery. 358 Englishmen seize upon the Abbot of Michels within Antwerp, for
their pay 688 Instructions given by the Prince of Orange to General Norris,
going into England. 835. Island Del Principe taken by Moucheron. 1156
Justification sent by the Commons of Antwerp to the Prince of Orange. 400
Justification of the Protestant Ministers of Antwerp. 409 Justin Nassau made
Admiral of Zeeland upon the displacing of Treslon. 875 Iuw Decama chosen
Popestate of Frisleland. 213. Iunius writes to Champigny. 556. John Bouvier
Master of the fire-workes to Prince Maurice slain by mischance. 1152 Isendyke
besieged and yielded to Prince Maurice. 1307 Encounter at Mulhem. 1352
K
KAsenbroot Volck were certain poor peasants in Holland which did rise and
went toward Leyden. 210. they sue for mercy. ibid. Koppel yielded to the
Estates. 808 Koestein seeking to poison the Earl of Charolois, is beheaded.
150 Knotsenbourg a fort right against Nymegen. 1036. besieged by the Duke of
Parma in vain. 1049
L
LAmoral Earl of Egmont sent into Spain and to what end. 351 he seeks to
pacefie the troubles in Flanders. 400. his blindness 434. he is put in prison
by the Duke of Alua. 437. and executed. 451 Laten Governor of Middelborge
slain. 512 Leerdam taken by the Spaniard. 573 Leyden besieged, by the
Spaniard. 541. the resolution of the besieged. 560. a brave answer of the
besieged. 565, a courragious speech of a Bourguemaster. 567. succors from God
not expected, their full delivery. 570. a general collection for the poor of
the town. 572 Leyden surprised by the Hoekins. 195. besieged by the Lord of
Montigny, the Governor. ibid. Lembourg besieged and yielded to Don John. 659
Lens in Arthois surprised and spoiled by the Duke of Anious men. 801 Letters
from the Nobility of the Netherlands to the King of Spain, touching the
troubles, the Kings answer and their reply, 348. from the King to the
Netherlands, otherwise then they expected. 351. from the Prince of Orange to
the Duchess of Parma. 353. her answer. 354. from the Duchess of Parma to
the towns of the Netherlands 398. from her to the confederate Noblemen. 405.
from the King of Spain to the P. of Orange. 412. from Francisco De Alana to
the Duchess of Parma. 413. From the Earl of Horn to the King of Spain.
346. From the Prince of Orange to the general Estates. 601. From the Estates
of Brabant to the other Provinces against the Spaniard. 561, from the Estates
of Lille, Douay and Orchies to the general Estates. 690. from the Prince of
Orange to Cont John his brother. 840, from Saint Aldegonde to the signeurie of
Metkerke touching a peace. 897. from the Queen of England to the Duke of Parma
and to the Estates. 923, from Waremond Stochelen touching the betraying of
Deuenter, 945, from the Estates to the Queen of England. 952. of Donation of
the Netherlands to the Infanta of Spain. 1160, of the King of Spaines
intercepted, 1172. from Prince Maurice to the Circles. 1184. From the Emperor
to Cardinal Andrew of Austria. 1193. and to the united Estates. ibid.
Letters from the Duke of Aniou to them of Antwerp. 816 Leoninus speech to the
general Estates for the Earl of Leicester. 959 Liegeois chase way their
bishop brother to the Earl of Holland, and are defeated in battle, 121.
they take arms against the Duke of Bourgongne, 156. they sue for peace and
obtain it. 157. they help the Spaniards at the siege of Mastricht. 707 Liege
taken and miserably burnt by Charles Duke of Bourgongne. 167 Leire in Brabant
assured for the Estates. 645, delivered by treason to the Spaniard. 805. taken
by the Estates and presently lost again, 1111 Lillo besieged by the Spaniard,
raises his siege with shame. 850 Liefkens Hoeck and Doel taken by the Estates.
876 Linghen besieged and taken by Prince Maurice, 1134, besieged and taken
again by the Marquis Spinola. 1348 Lochum besieged by the Spaniard. 808. the
Camp rises. ibid. Lord of Berghen slain in the Duke of Brabants chamber. 135
Lord of Brederode defeated and taken prisoner. 141 Lord of Arckel taken
prisoner. 123 Louvaine yielded to Don John. 654 Lewis Duke of Bauaria husband
to Marguerite of Holland Emperor. 97 Lewis de Requesens great Commander of
Castille, succeedes the Duke of Alua in the government of the Netherlands. 539.
his army at sea defeated. 544. three several designs at one instant. 551.
having propounded unreasonable conditions of peace, he resolves to war, 583,
his death. ibid. Lord of Froment forsakes don Ihon. 646 Lembourg besieged and
taken by the Prince of Parma. 660 Loopers of Ostend. 1299 Lewis de Valasco
beaten from his fort by Dam with loss of men. 1309 Loss in the Archdukes
army before Ostend. 1318 Lodowicke Earl of Nassau dies in Sluis. 1318
M
MAgistrates and Bourge^s in Harlem agree together. 498 Marguerite Empress,
Countess of Holland. 97. in war against her son, and ouercomes him. 99. is
defeated by her son. 100. her death. ibid. Mary Duchess of Bourgongne,
Countess of Holland. 181, restrained by the Ganthois: 187. their insolences
toward her, she marries with Maximilian of Austria. 191. her death and her
Children. 197 Maximilian of Austria marries the Princess of Bourgongne. 191,
he comes into Holland to pacefie the factions. 194 he carries himself as
tutor of his wives Children, after her death. 197. is created King of Romans.
201, comes into Holland. 207. succeedes in the Empire. 212 Macklin surprised by
the Estates. 742. yielded to the Spaniard. 882 Malcontents and their beginning
in the Netherlands. 664. their colored reasons to fall from the Estates. 688
Marriage of Cont William of Nassau. 980 Mathias Archduke of Austria called to
the Government of the Netherlands. 657. resignes his Government. 749. his
departure out of the Netherlands. 789 Mastricht besieged. 703. the Estates make
a show to relieve it. 704. the Spaniard takes it by assault. 708 Martin Schenck
a Colonel follows the States party. 878. he makes a road into the Diocese
of Cologne. 917. builds the Fort of Sgrauen-weert. 951. surpriseth Bonne, 983.
goes to an Imperial Diet. 990. victualeth Berke. 1020. his unfortunate
enterprise upon Nymeghen and his death. 1021 Marguerite of Austria bastard to
the Emperors Charles the fifth, Gouernesse of the Netherlands. 335 Marshall
Biron disswades the Duke of Aniou from the enterprise of Antwerp. 812. he
retires with the Dukes troops into France. 829 Mary Millet reuengeth her self
of captain Pont, who had forced her, she kills him, and is murdered. 661
Macklin summoned by the Estates will stand neuter. 715 Marquis of Warenbon
prisoner to the French. 1123. defeated by the Estates. 1024 Marquis Spinola
comes to relieve Sluis. 1313. his men ran from him. 1314. he offers to force
the Princes trenches. ibid. he retiers not able to relieve it. ibid. he
seeks to enter into Cadsandt, and is repulst. 1315. Marquis of Roubay slain
at the Stocadoe before Antwerp. 875 Maurice of Nassau borne Prince of Orange,
Marquis of Camphere, succeeds his father in the Government of Holland. 859.
makes a road into Brabant to draw the Spaniard from Sluis. 959. comes into
Zeeland and writes to the Queen of England. 992. enters into the Government
after the Earl of Liecester. 1026. pursues Uerdugoes troops. 1061. his care
to succor Hulst. 1117. attends to fight with the Admiral of Arragon. 1187.
intrencheth himself at Harwarden. 1213. prepares for the wars in Flanders.
1240. Lands with his army at Philippine. 1241. besieged Nieuport. 1243
Maurice intrencheth himself at Watervlyet. 1346. Maurice of Nassau prepares to
besiege Sluis. 1305. he camped before it. 1309 Menin a town in Flanders taken
by the Malcontents. 664. recovered by the Estates. 716. abandoned to the
Spaniard by them of Bruges. 831 Megen surprised by them of Bommel. 503. won
by the Estates. 810. abandoned to the Spaniard. 951 Meppel surprised for the
Estates. 979 Messenger flying at Leyden. 567 Maeurs town and Castle yielded to
the Estates. 1130 Maeurs fired by treason. 1347 Means wrought to break the
Stocadoe before Antwerp. 875 Medenblicke besieged by the Estates. 988 Mary of
Austria Queen Douager of Hungary, Gouernesse of the Netherlandes. 267 Michel
Renichon a Priest attempts to kill Prince Maurice. 1077 Middelbourg besieged
and yielded to the protestants. 544 Montgomery the younger comes to serve the
Prince of Orange. 512 Monks in the Abbaies in Frisland turn to the factions.
203 Montfort besieged by the Duke of Saxony. 220 Money made of paper at Leyden
during the seege. 559 Money of the Duke of Aluas intercepted in Germany. 447
Montigny brother to the Earl of Horn, sent into Spain. 340. poisoned there.
454 Mons in Henault surprised by Cont Lodowike of Nassau. 475. is besieged.
489. the great endeavors of the besieged 490. yielded. 495 Montdagon Governor
of Middelbourg yeeldes the town to the Prince of Orange. 544. forbid the
contribution. 1026. seeks in vain to recover Hulst. 1051 Montpensier blames
the duke of Aniou for the enterprise of Antwerp. 815 Mortaigne and Saint Amand
taken by the Spaniard. 715 La Motte of Graueling lays a plot, to surprise the
English. 920. he is slain before Dourlans, his life and qualities. 1106
Murder of a kinsman most cruel. 218 Murry Colonel of the Scottishmen slain
at Bommel. 1210 Murmuring in the Netherlands for the bringing in of new Bishops
346 Mutynie of the Spaniards in Antwerp called Fuora Veillacos. 547. at
Xiricxee. 573. at Mastricht pacefied and punished by the Estates. 657. at
Bruges. 208. at Gant. 272. at Medemblick. 987. in Gheertruydenbergh. 990. An
other mutynie there. 1016. At Sgrauen-weerd. 1022. of the Spaniards a Courtray.
1030. At Saint Paul. 1065. of Wallons and Italiens in Henault. ibid. of
Italiens at Sichem. 1097. At Hochstrate. 1281. at Dyest. 1229. in Isabellas
fort. 1263. Maeurs taken by Prince Maurice. 1268. Mutiners at Hochstraten
protected by the united Provinces. 1289 Mutiners of Hochstraten reconciled to
the Archduke. 1310. they serve the Archduke at the relief of Sluis. 1313
N
NAerden a town in Holland sacked and burnt by the Spaniard. 406. Neutralitie
in Religion propounded. 356. Nienhoven a town in Flanders surprised. 200
Nithard Fockes a German Colonel in Frislland. 218 Nicholas Salcedo attempts
to kill the Duke of Aniou and the Prince of Orange. 804. Nieuport yielded to
the Spaniard. 827. besieged by Prince Maurice. 1243 Nymeghen yielded to the
Spaniard. 874. Schenck fails to surprise it. 1021. besieged and yielded to
Prince Maurice. 1052 Niuel^e in Brabant besieged and yielded to Don John. 656.
surprised by the Estates. 715 Nieuvenort seizes upon Otterdam. 868 Nobility
of the Netherlands being confederate, send the Duchess of Parma, an act of
their promise. 407 Noircames besieged Valenciennes which being yielded he
breaks his faith. 417 Nuys in the Diocese of Cologne surprised, spoiled and
put to ransom. 877. besieged by the Spaniard. 917. taken by force. 919. La
Noue in Mons during the siege. 490. he makes the war in Flanders for the
general Estates of the union. 695. makes the Spaniards to abandon the Fort of
Villebrooke. 715. is taken prisoner by the Spaniards. 745 Nobility of the
Netherlands assemble at Trudon. 368
O
OLdenziel besieged and yielded to Prince Maurice. 1133 Oliver the French Kings
Barber sent to Gant, and what he did 182 Otto van Langen Comissarie for the
Emperor in Frisland, and what he did. 220 Otmarsom besieged and yielded to
Prince Maurice. 1133. taken again by the Spaniard. 1073 Oudwater besieged by
the Spaniard, 583. bravely defended. 584. taken by assault. 585. Order of the
Golden Fleece given at Gant. 336 the new Knights. ibid. Oath propounded by the
Duchess of Parma, to the Nobility of the Netherlands. 421 Oath commanded by
the Estates at the abiuration of the King of Spain. 789 Oath propounded by the
Estates unto their Catholics. 801 Orders made by the Estates for martial
discipline. 751 Oxlagh taken by the Spaniard. 740 Opinions of the enterprise of
Antwerp. 817 Orders made by the Estates for their horse and foot. 1199 Ostend
besieged by the Spaniard. 1262. in danger to be taken. 1275. they offer to
parle. 1276. a general assault given and repulst. 1277. they yield upon
composition. 1317. Oldenziell yielded to Spinola. 1348
P
PAcification of Gant and the declaration thereof. 604. misconstred by Don John
of Austria. 636 Paul Buys Advocate for the Estates of Holland, prisoner at
Vtrecht. 921. escapes. 922. Pardon general offered by the Duke of Alua, with
many restraints. 462 Pardon offered by Don Lewis of Requesens. 552 Pardon
general offered by Don John of Austria. 656 Passage free to the sea not going
by Antwerp. ibid. Patton a Scottishman sells the town of Geldre to the
Spaniard. 958 Peace, Betwixt the French and the Bourguignons. 198. Betwixt the
King of Romans and the Flemings. 207. betwixt the houses of Bourgougne and
Geldres. 207. betwixt the Emperor and the protestants of Germany. 268. betwixt
the Emperor and the French King. 279. betwixt France and Spain. 330. betwixt
France and Spain. 1141. betwixt England and Spain. 1318 Peter of Melun Prince
of Espinoy, Governor of Tournay, tempted by the Malcontents to forsake the
general union, but continues constant. 695 Peter Lanchals Thresorer to the
King of Romans beheaded at Bruges. 203 Peter Pan sent to kill Prince
Maurice executed. 1153 Peter de Four sent to kill Prince Maurice, executed.
1095 Peter Ernest Earl of Mansfeldt, made Lieutenant by provision after the
Duke of Parma. 1063 Pedro Derdego pretending to kill the Prince of Orange is
executed at Antwerp. 799 People of the Netherlands complain to the King of
Spain and make him great offers. 418. they protest against the Nobility.
ibid. Persecution in Antwerp of Christopher Fabri. 350. Petition, made by the
Netherlanders unto the King for the retyring of the Spaniards. 336. made by the
Estates of Brabant to the King of Spain, 373. made by the Nobility of the
Netherlands to the Duchess of Parma. 383 made by the protestants of the
Netherlands to the Confederate Noblemen. 389. made by the reformed Churches to
the Magistrate of Antwerp. 392. by them of Antwerp to the Duchess of Parma.
426. by the Estates of Holland to the King of Spain, 554. by them of Flanders
against the Inquisition. 382. by the confederate Gentlemen. 419. against the
religious peace. 672 Peace propounded to Dom John by diverse Princes, 665
Philip Duke of Bourgongne, his first practices to seize upon Holland, Zeland,
and Henault, 138. he defeates the English and Zelanders at Brouwers-hauen,
139. makes warreaginst them of Vtrecht, 140. buys the County of Namur, 141.
succeeds to the Duchy of Brabant, 142. and to the Earledomes of Holland,
Zeland and Henault, 143. he brings his bastard, David Bishop of Teroane, into
the Bishopric of Vtrecht by force, 148 Philip of Austria, son to the Emperor
Maximilian, 193. takes possession of the Netherlands, 217. goes with his wife
into Spain, 226. is crowned King of Castille in the right of his wife, 228.
his death, 232. Philip Earl of Hohenlo presses the Spaniard in the Isle of
Bommel, 1024. marries the Prince of Oranges daughter, 1012. comes to the
battle of Tournhout, and gives the first charge, 1126. his death, 1355.
Philip the second King of Spain, 317. his last departure out of the
Netherlands, 337. seeks peace with France, 1141. he gives his daughter the
Infanta in marriage to the Archduke Albert, 1160 Philip-ville yielded to Dom
John, 659 Philip of Montmorencie Earl of Horn, imprisoned by the Duke of
Alua, 437. executed at Brussels, 451 Philip Earl of Egmont makes an attempt
upon Brussels to his great dishonor, 706. is taken prisoner in his town of
Nyenhouen, 730. is delivered for Monsieur la Noue, 883 Philip of Marnix,
Signior of Saint Aldegond, prisoner to the Spaniards, 530. his speech to them
of Antwerpe during the siege, 868. his death, 1205 Philip Earl of Nassau makes
a road into Luxembourg for the Estates, 1063. he charge the Spaniards, is
wounded, taken prisoner and dies, 1104 President appointed in the Provincial
council in Holland, Zeeland and West-friseland, 146 Preaching forborne in
Antwerp, 400 Prince of Spaines speech to the Duke of Alua, 415. Princes of the
Empire in Arms against the Admiral of Arragon, 1209 Ponthus of Noielle
Siegnior of Bours, procures the Castle of Antwerpe to be delivered to the
Estates, 645 Proclamation of the Estates for the observing of the pacification
of Gand, 604 Proclamation of the Duke of Parma, against the town of Aix. 1027
Proclamation of the King of Spain, dispensing with the payment of his debts,
1123 Protestants of Amsterdam propound five articles to their Magistrate, 425
Pedro Dordoigno sent to kill the Prince of Orange, executed. 824 Protestants
defeated at Austerweel, 422 Protestants of the Netherlands make war at Sea
under the Prince of Orange, 463. Proceeding upon the petition of the Nobles in
the Netherlands. 390 Practices of Charles Duke of Bourgongne, to ruin the
house of Brederode, 169 Protestants request for a religious peace, 666.
Proscription against the Prince of Orange, 763. Preparation of the Spanish
army at Sea, in the year 1588. 998 Preacher murdered at Deutecome, 1200
Protestation of the Prince of Orange, for his taking arms, 491 Prince of
Iuilliers and Cleues unfortunately married, 880 Practice to betraye
Gheertruydenberg discovered. 1259
Q.
QVarrell betwixt them of Bruges and Antwerpe. 200 Question among the Clergy
of the Netherlands, for incorporating of spiritual living to the new
Bishoprics, 347 Question in Spain about the choosing of a General to subdue
the Netherlands, 415 Queen of England offers succors to the Estates, 890. she
publishes the reasons that mooues her thereunto. 894
R.
RAmeken a Forte in Zeland besieged and yielded to the Protestants, 518
Reconciliation of Arthois, Henault, etc. to the Spaniard, 708 Refusal to
surpresse the new Bishops, augments the troubles in the Netherlands, 351.
Remedy to stanche the blood in the Prince of Oranges wound 801 Religious peace
made, 669 Resolution of the Estates of Holland, 557 Renold Lord of Brederode
and his brother, imprisoned by the Bishop of Vtrecht, 169. his process being
referred to the Knights of the Order, he is absolved, 170 Retreat of the
Spaniards out of the Netherlands. 625 Retreat of the ministers out of Antwerp.
426. Retreat of many Protestants out of the Netherlands. 410 Relation of the
enterprise at Antwerp. 812 Return of the Spaniards into the Netherlands. 809
Re^er van Bron chuysen captain for them of Vtrecht. 196 River cut from Vtrecht
to Leck. 107 Rhinberk besieged in vain by the Spaniard. 924. taken by Cont
Charles of Mansfeldt. 1025. besieged and won by Prince Maurice. 1129.
recovered again by the Admiral of Arragon. 1284. taken again by Prince
Maurice. 1286. and last of all by the Marquis Spinola. 1364. Richardot sent
into Spain by the Duke of Parma. 1020 Rob^rt Dudley Earl of Leicester
General for the Queen of England. 910. discontented with the Estates. 921. at
his going into England he appoints a Council of Estate. 930. prepares to
raise the siege of Sluis. 961. he excuses himself unto the Estates for not
doing it. 964. he fails to surprise Leyden. 979. is called home into England
and resignes his Government unto the Estates. 982 Romerswall yielded to the
Spaniard. 53 Rotterdam yielded to the King of the Romaines' 207 Rouard of
Brabant, what Office it is. 1^6 Rowland York made Governor of the Fort at
Zutphen. 928. sells it to the Spaniard. 943. Ryperdas speech to them of Harlem.
497 Roeroort surprised by Schenck. 991
S
SAint Quintin besieged and taken by the King of Spain. 323 Saint From in
Liege yielded to duke Cha^ls of Bourgongne. 162 Sarras Governor of Flussing
unfortunate. 477. is charged by the Spaniards and repulseth them at Sooteland.
478 Saint Guislaine a town in Henault assured for the Estates. 655 Saint
Andrews Fort besieged by Prince Maurice and yielded. 1230 Sanchio de Auila
sent to succor Ter-goes, and performs it happily. 479 Scandal, how
interpreted. 883 Sanchio de Auila sent to besiege Flussing. 477 Sas by Gant
seized on by the Spaniard. 827 Sentence for the razing of Culembeurgs house.
444 Schonhoven surprised by the Countess Iaqueline. 134. yielded to the
Spaniard by composition. 586 Sentence of the Inquisition against the
Netherlands. 443 Separation of the confederate nobles of the Netherlands. 410
Separation of the three jurisdictions of Holland cut to relieve Leyden. 560
Sevenberghe taken and the Lord of it driven away. 139. taken by the Earl of
Mansfeldt for the Spaniard. 1035 Schulenbourg taken by the Spaniard. 877. Seege
of the Protestants of Zeeland before Ter-goes, their army flies away amazed.
478 Sichen in Brabant yeeldes to the Spaniard. 654. recovered for the Estates
and after yielded to the Spaniard. 826 Slyckembourg taken for the Estates. 877
Sluis besieged by the Duke of Saxony ^11. besieged and taken by the Spaniard.
961 Ships and men coming out of Spain defeated by the Estates ships. 1347
Spinola marches with his army toward Frisland. 1347 Spaniards repulst at an
enterprise upon Berghen. 1349 Spinola goes into Spain. 1353 Sentence
pronounced against the Governor and Captains which yielded Linghen to Spinola.
1354 Spinola seeks to enter into the Suider Sea. 1359. Ships of Holland
taken by the Danes. 251 Skyrmish at Rymenant Leguer. 662 Spel a Provost
Marshall hanged at Brussells. 462 Specification of the oppressions done by the
Admiral of Arragons men in a neutrall Country. 1190 Soubourg a Fort in Zeeland
besieged by the Flussingers and yielded. 508 Spaniard beaten at the Bryele.
472. they surprise Berghen up Zome. 474. they fail to surprise Camphere. 475.
they quit the siege of Leyden and fly. 570. they mutine and fail to surprise
Vtrecht. 573. they surprise Alost in Flanders. 590. they assemble in the Castle
of Antwerp. 596. they depart by accord. 626. they are chased out of the I Will of
Bommel. 1024. they mutine and surprise Courtraye. 1030. they attempt Lochen in
vain. 1046. they ouerrunne the neutrall Countries. 1174. they mutine, and
seize upon Hochstrate. 1281. a sentence of proscription against them, and their
answer, 1282. Staueren a town in Friseland, their prosperity and declining,
30 Stanley an English Colonel sels Deuenter to the Spaniard, 942 Steenwicke a
town in Oueryssell besieged by the Spaniard, 752. victualed, 761. freed from
siege, 762. surprised by the Spaniard, 810. besieged and yielded to Prince
Maurice. 1059 Steward a Scottish Collonell entertained into the Estates
service, 656 Submission of the West-Frisons to the Earl of Holland, 94
Substance of the Deputies Letters assembled at Dortmont, and of the Prince
Electors to the Emperor, 1187 Sparendam taken by the Spaniard, 498 Supplies of
men and munition sent to Sluys, 958. Swol in an uproar, 737 Success of the
Estates army at the Canaries 1213. Sluys sommoned by Prince Maurice, 1310. in
extremity for victuals, 1312. they desire a parle, 1315. yielded to Prince
Maurice, 1316. Ships and men coming out of Spain defeated by the Estates
ships, 1347 Spinola marches with his army toward Frizeland. 1347 Spaniards
repulst at an enterprise upon Berghen 1349 Spinola goes into Spain, 1353
Sentence pronounced against the Governor and Captains, which yielded Linghen
to Spinola, 1354. Spinola seeks to enter into the Suider sea, 1359.
T.
TEmples built for the Protestants in Antwerpe. 409 Temples granted for the
Protestants in diverse places of the Netherlands, 665 Testimony of the
providence of God at the ^iege of Leyden. 567 Teligny taken prisoner upon the
river of Antwerpe. 866 Tenth penny imposed by the Duke of Alua, 465. Tergoes
besieged by the Protestants, 478. Thierry of Aquitaine the first Earl of
Holland. 3. his genealogy, 5. Thi^rry the second Earl, subdues the Frisons.
7. Thierry the third, the fourth Earl, defeates the Frisons, and reuengeth his
fathers death. 14 Thierry the fourth, the fifth Earl of Holland, slain in
Dordrecht. 16 Thierry the fifth, the tenth Earl of Holland, defeated the
Frisons twice, 27 Thierry the seventh, the fourteen Earl of Holland, 41. in
quarrel with his brother William, 42. his death, 43. Tillemont a town in
Brabant, yields to Don John. 654 Tongres a town in Liege, yielded to Charles
Duke of Bourgongne, 532 Tournay besieged and yielded to the Archduke
Maximilian, 193. besieged by the Duke of Parma, and taken. 790 Treaty of peace
betwixt John of Baua^a, and the Countess of Holland his Niece, 133. betwixt
the Earl of C^arolois and the Liegeois, 155. in Frisland betwixt the
Scheringers and Vetcoopers, 27^. at Vtrecht for the union, 700. at Breda in
vain, 574. at Cologne fruitless, 713. at the Hage. ibid. Transactions of the
Abbays in Brabant to free themselves from incorporations, 350. Treslon prisoner
in the Castle of Antwerpe. 645. Treslon Admiral of Zeeland, imprisoned by the
Estates, 875. Tournay and Tournesis refuse to enter into the reconciliation
with Arthois, etc. 695. Troubles in Antwerpe, 394. other troubles for the
hurting of the Prince of Orange, 800. Troubles at Embden, 1154 Truchses Elector
of Cologne, allies himself unto the Estates. 831 Tumult of the Commons in
Amsterdam, 146. at Leyden among the factions. 147. at Macklyn. 161. at B^uges
for their Coins, 208. In West-Friseland for the Impositions, 221. at Brussels,
276. at Gand, 834. at Vtrecht, ibid. at Leeuwarden in Friseland, 647. At Vtecht
by the Clergy against the Magistrates, 1007. at Bruges for the Union, 702.
Tournhout surprised by the Estates, 1407 Traffic into Spain for the
Netherlanders, forbidden by the Infanta. 1197 Truce in Arthois and Henault with
Cambray, 868 Theodore Triuulce Lieutenant of all the Archdukes light horsemen,
slain at Mulhem, 1353
V.
VAlenciennes zealous to the religion, ref^ garrison, 446. is besieged and
yielded 417. and surprised by the Protestants, 476, a tumult in the town. 663
Venlo a town in Gelders yielded to the Spaniard, 951. they chase away their
garrison and Governor. 1^45 Verdugo seeks to force Prince Maurice his trenches
in vain, 1064 Vetcoopers in Freezeland cause of great troubles, 221 Vicont of
Leyden opposes himself to Cont Thierry. 2 Vicont of Leyden and their
descendents, 134. Villevorde a town in Brabant surprised by the Estates, 984
Uillers defeated near unto Dalem, 448 Villars and the French defeated near
unto Do^lans, 1106 Lord of Vere put from his government in Holland. 194 Vianen
abandoned to the Spaniard, 428 Victory of Prince Maurice against the Archduke
Albert near unto Nieuport, 1247. Vicont of Turene prisoner to the Spaniard,
778. Union general of the Estates of the Netherlands, 615 Union made by the
Provinces, which continued in the first confederation at Vtrecht, 700 Vlricke
first Earl of Embden of East-freezland. 220 University erected at Leyden in
Holland, 583. Vtrecht besieged by the Earl of Holland, 34. Vander Aa, Captain
of Prince Maurice gards slain by Sluys. 1309
W.
Waginengen a town in Geldres besieged and taken. 194 Walger Earl of
Teysterbaut Brother to Thierry of Aquitaine first Earl of Holland. 2. Walchren
an Island of Zeeland against the Spaniard, all but Middelbourg. 475 Wachtendone
a Town in Geldres besieged and yielded to the Spaniard, 510. recovered again
by Prince Maurice. 1128. Land of Wa^s yielded to the Spaniard by Seruaes van
Stelandt. 833 Wandrichom taken by the Spaniard, 551 War proclaimed betwixt
the French king and Spain, 1101. War betwixt the Duke of Bourgongne and the
Ganthois. 147 Weertdenbras a Fort in Friseland, 230 Weed yielded to Cont
William of Nassau, 1068. Weerd a town in Brabant taken by the Spaniard, 682.
recovered and spoiled by the Estates men, 828 Wyricke of Daun Earl Vanden
brouck murdered by the Admiral of Arragons men, 1182. Wynschoten yielded to
Cont William of Nassau, 1068 War betwixt the Earl of Holland and the Lord of
Arckel, 118. betwixt the Bishop and the town of Vtrecht, 19. betwixt the
Archduke Philip and the Geldrois, 227. betwixt the Esterlings and the
Netherlanders, 246 Walrauen Lord of Brederode Lieutenant to Countess Iaqueline
in Holland, slain in Gorrichom, 130 Westerlo yielded to the Spaniard. 826
William the sixteen Earl of Holland, enters Holland and disposesseth his
Niece. 45. conquers Zeeland, 46 William the eighteen Earl of Holland, chosen
King of the Romans, 55. wounded traitorously with a stone in Vtrecht, 59.
slain in West-Freezland. ibid. William called the good the two and twenty
Earl of Holland, 87. does Justice upon a Bayliffe of South-Holland for a Cow,
89. his death, 90 William the fourth, the three and twentieth Earl of Holland,
91. makes war against the Russian Infidels, 93. makes war against the
Frisons, and is slain in battle. 94 William of East-Friseland Brother to
Thierry the seventh Earl of Holland, escapes out of prison, 42. is called by
the Nobles of Holland, 45. is made the six and twenty Earl of Holland, 49.
heir to the Crown of Scotland, the which he neglects. ibid. William of
Bauaria, the five and twenty Earl of Holland, 102. spoils the country of
Vtrecht, 103. is distracted. ibid. William Earl of Osteruant, son to Cont
Albert of Bauaria, 110 William the seven and twenty Earl of Holland, invested
in the Signiorie of Arckel, besieges Gorrichom, 119. his death, 125. William
of Nassau Prince of Orange seeks to pacify the troubles in Antw^rpe, 394, he
retires out of the Netherlands, bids the Earl of Egmont farewell, and
forewarnes him, 417. the Duke of Alua gives Commission to apprehend him, 438.
he makes his answer, and publishes his justification, 439. he enters into
the Netherlands with an army, 457. it mutines and breaks, ibid. he returns
with a small train and great danger into Germany, 4^8. prepares to succor his
Brother within Mons, 490. marching thither he takes diverse Towns, ibid. he
offers battle to the Duke of Alua, and he refuses it, 492. he dismisseth
his army and goes into Holland, 493. comes into Zeeland, 531. comes to Leyden
after the siege, 572. He is made Rouard of Brabant, 648. and Governor of
Flanders, 714. his oration to the Estates of Holland, 718. his answer to the
King of Spaines proscription. 764. entreated to continue his government, and
his speech to the Estates, 792. wounded in the face by a Biscain. 801. his
advice upon the reconciliation of the Duke of Aniou 818. retires from Antwerpe,
and comes into Zeeland, 828. he is murdered, 853 Woeden surprised by the
Siegnior of Montfort. 207 Woude Castle yielded to the Estates, 825. sold by a
French Captain to the Spaniard. 945. taken again by Prince Maurice 1342.
Wachtendone taken by the Spaniard. 1351 Women found living in the Sea in
Holland. 116. Women murdered by a Spaniard. 1358
Y.
YSelstein a town in Holland given to the Lord of ^ere, 75 Ypre a Town in
Flan^rs blockt up by the Spaniards and yielded, 835
Z.
ZElanders with their Army a^ Sea, do wisely forbear to fight w^ the
Spaniards, 519. they take the s^ of war before Antwerpe, 351 Zelanders
attempt Dunkerke in vanie, 1046 Ziricxee besieged by Guy Earl of Flanders. 83.
surprised by Albert Duke of Saxony, 200. besieged by the Spaniards, 587.
yielded to the Council of Estate at Brussels, 590 Zutphen a Town in Oueryssel
sacked by the Spaniard, 496. afterward the Estates holding it, the Spaniards
surprise it. 831. besieged in vain by the Earl of Leicester. 926. besieged
and yielded to Prince Maurice. 1048 Zichem yielded to the Spaniard. 826.
ERRATA.
Page 149. line 18. for have make read have made. page, 210. line, 2. for want
succors want of succors, ibid line 27, for Abert read Albert, p. 230, l, 12 for
except read accept, p, 277. line 32, for 4000, Stephanos read 4000. Spaniards,
p, 335. l. 47. for Bunen, Brunen. ibid. l. 48, for Daurst, Ernestus, p, 360. l,
51. for statutes, statues. p. 370. l. 4^ for refuse to his duty, refuse to do
his duty, p, 381. l. 49. for salus spirans minarum, saulus spirans minarum page,
390 l. 37, for that had not bin the presentation of our petition, had not the
presentation of our petition bin, p. 308, l. ^1. for apostume impostume, page,
418, li, (...), for what wrong was, what wrong was done, page, 421, lin, 53,
for into the river, to the river, page, 42^, l. 27, for saying said, page, 456.
l. 52, for and had written, and having written, p, 462, l. 20. for oppress to
read to oppress, p, 474, li 29, for slaied him slain him, page, 410, l. 24. of
the Audenarde Dele the, p, 532. l, 23, norishing, for norisher, p, 535. l. 13,
Valencia, for valenciennes, p, 540, line 24. landed for laden, p. 542, l. there
wants, (the air and sea were so full of fire, flame,) and smoke, p, 543, lin.
8, the for they, ibid. l, (...). they for the. p, 545, l. 28, and busied, for
being busied, ibid. l. 31. newly, for lately, ibid. 50 there for three. p, 546
l. 46 sails for sailors. p, 5^7, l 24. to of the town, for out of the town,
ibid. line 29, heads for hearts. p, 550, l (...), well found, for were found,
p, 55^. l, 35. yet for yea. p. 555. l. 46, points, for parts ibid, li. 55. at
were, for as it were, p, 562, l. 48, have spent, for have been spent, p, 563
lin 9, wonderful there, for wonderful thing there ibi^. l. 20 and to, for or
to, p, 568. l. 14, about for above. p, 572, l, 7. paria for parui, p, 576. l.
37. D' Alua, for D' Ala^. p. 582 l. 17, garden or parlor of Holland, for garden
or park etc. pa. 790, l. 14, for Bugucy read Bu^quoy. p, 798. l. 46. for, 200.
re. 200 thousand, pa 801. li. 29. for the Esclarte of the Cautere, read the
orifice or mouth of the wound p, 830 l. 46, for dissuading, persuading, p, 834.
l. 9, for that charge, that had charge, p, 844. l. 19. for, excelled, exceeded,
ibid. l. 23, for affected inc^nsed, p, 845. lin. 55. for Bloyde Boyde, p, 847.
for no less no m^re, p, 85^, l. 1^. for franck country, franch county. p,
862. l. 15 for they conform they would, p, 895. l. 13. for Zeland, Holland,
ibid. 46. for honorable, excellent. p, 91, l. 13. for letter better, ibi. 21,
for gotten by an, gotten an ibid. 39, for the noble council re. the council, p,
914. l 3, for Menes, Meurs, p, 923. l. 10. for by her, to her. p, 937 line 49,
for (...) prossit, never bring profsit, p, 5^, for we, who draw. p, 943. l. 52,
for battered, betrayed ibid. p, 252. l. 1 points for po^nts, ibid. 12, for as
hereafter we shall show, re. as we have shown. p, 962, l 7, for though. to,
re. though good to. ibid l 34 for Jacob re. James. pa, ^64. l. 4, for with the
los^e, re. without the loss. p: 969. l. 1^, law for love, page, 970. line 16,
leave for law, and lymit him. page. 971. line 15. sufficient, for suffici^ntly.
page 974 line ^2. that is, for that it is. pa, 976. line 22. misliked, for
misled, ibid line 38. the for their. ibid. line 35 then it, for then if. p.
986. l, 45, in his h^nds, for in her. pa. 988. l. 30. himself for herself, p,
989l. l. 45 preventing for pretending. p. 990. l. 55, Scotland for Soeteland p.
991. l. 3. make for made. p. 904. li. 22. for 1588 re 1586, p. 995 li. ^9.
review for renew. 998, l 30. 2000. sailors for souldiars. p, 1001. l. 46. they
cheefee. for their chiefee. ibid. 2^, suspecting and to be left out. p, 1002.
l. 17. same vice. ad. for same day the Vice Admiral 1005 l. 1. so kept, for
and so kept p. 1046. l. 23. boat for beat. p. 1175. l. 39. entering any part,
for into any part. ibid l. 47. with danger of the Spaniards, for without
danger, page 1176. l. 31. being to anotomy, for being consumed to a^. pa,
1308, l. 35. Ibanna for I^arra. p, 1319. l. 49, Iocoy, for Iuoy, ibid. Ayda for
Ayala, p, 1337. line 16, it is not, for is it not, p, 1346, l, 14, Solme for
Solue.

The exposition of some words used throughout the whole course of the History.
Drossart. A Deputy lieutenant for a Province. Escoutete. A Baylife for the
leauying of fines. Schepen. A Judge in civil and criminal causes. Scating.
Scotting or taxing. Rouard. Governor of a Province.


