The true and perfect News of the worthy and valiant exploytes, performed
and done by that valiant Knight Sir Frauncis Drake: Not only at Sancto
Domingo, and Carthagena, but also now at Cales, and upon the Coast of Spain.
1587.



Printed at London by I. Charlewood, for Thomas Hackett.

To the Right Honorable and his singular good Lord, George Clifford, Earl of
Cumberland: Thomas Greepe wysheth long life, increase of honor, with happy and
eternal felicity.
RIght Honorable, reverently regarding your most worthy and condign^ fame,
together with your most rare virtues, and finding such correspondence in both,
as seems inseparable, I could not choose but in all humility to offer to the
hands of so noble a person, (being a lover of all virtuous attempts) this
rude vnpublished work, more true in effect then fine in form, and better for
example (though rudely written) then to be obscured, if penned by the best.
The work is a true brief discourse of the most rare and worthy exploytes,
performed by the right worshipful Sir Frauncis Drake Knight, and his consortes
in the fortunate Isles, which although the truth thereof be not unknown to
your Honor, yet the vulgar sort of people in the Realm having heard, and yet
wanting the verity of the fame, ^ay by the pamphlet be the better advertised.
The which by how much the playner it is written by me, the better it is to be
understood of the simplest, who in this case I seek most to pl^^se, (...) my
self a rude Countriman, brought up ^^nie years in Husbandry, and more
knowledge in Culturing of land, then in descriptions of conquestes of
Countries: Notwithstanding, weighing your honorable Lordships affability and
courtesy in nature, to take well in worth the meanest things (extending to
the encouragement of virtue and valor, whereof you are patron) I presume the
more to press your Honor, to vouchsafe the acceptance and patronising of
this small work of so great worth, in respect of the honorable action of so
vvorthie men. Who neither number could daunt, nor force of wall and shot keep
out, whereby it may be seen unto the world, that God which has alvvayes
defended his servant in former ages* has not let to show a miracle by these
in our latter days. And so humbly craving pardon of your honor for this
presumption ministered, I rest a continual beseecher of the almighty for your
Lord^hips most happy health with increase of honor in this life, and in the
other everlasting felicity. Amen.

Your Honors for ever at commandment in the Lord, Thomas Greepe.

To the Reader.
Here have thou gentle Reader set forth unto thee, the most worthy and
valiant exploytes and enterpryses, lately atchiued and done by that valiant
Knight, Sir Frauncis Drake and others, not pend in lofty verse, nor curiously
handled, but plainly and truly, so that it may be well understood of the
Reader, for there is nothing can more profitte thy posterity hereafter, then
the leaving in memory so worthy a thing, for how should we know the worthy
deeds of our Elders, if those learned Poets and Historiographers had not set
them down in writing, as Josephus for the state of the Jews: Homer and
Euripides for the Grecians: Titus Liuius for the Romans: Quintus Curtius for
the life of Alexander the great, and so of all others. At what time heretofore
was there ever any English manne that did the like. as well for his Navigations
and long travel, and GOD be praised for his good success, to the great
terror and fear of the enemy, he being a man of mean calling, to deal with
so mighty a Monarke.

But now may the enemy see what would come to pass, if our gracious Queen
would bend her whole force against them, therefore great cause have we to be
thankful to God for so gracious a Princess, and so prosperous and flourishing
a commonwealth as this is, wherein we enjoy, peace, wealth, and tranquillity,
more abundantly then any other Nation under the Sun at this day. The Lord
long continue it for his names sake, and thus I end, by dding thee farewell in
the Lord.

The true and perfect News of the worthy and valiant exploytes atchiued and
done by that valiant Knight, Sir Frauncis Drake.
Triumph O England and rejoice,
And praise thy God incessantly
For this thy Queen that pearl of choice
Which God does bless with victory.
In Countries strange both far and near,
All raging foes her force does fear.
Ye worthy wights that do delighte,
To hear of Nouels strange and rare,
What (...) by a famous Knight
May please you mark I shall declare.
Such rare exploytes performde and done
As none the like has ever woone.
First call to mind how Gedeon, Joshua cap. 3.

But with three hundred fighting men
The Medians host he overcame
A thousand to each one of them.
He did suppress Idolatry
The Lord gave him the victory.
So likewise by Gods mighty hand
Sir Frauncis Drake by dreadful sword
Did foil his foes in foreign land,
Which did contemn Christ's holy word.
And many Captives did set free
Which erst were long in misery.
Twenty five Ships were then preparde,
Fifteen Pinnasses brave and fine
Well furnished for his safegarde
Preventing foes that would him tyne.
With Masters good and Mariners (...)
As ever took charge I dare compare.
The best Nauigators in this land
Conferde with him unto this end.
By this famous knight to understand
Their valors to atchieue and wend
In Countries strange beyond the sea,
If God permit who can say nay.
The Bonauenture a ship royal
Chief Admiral then of the fleet
Sir Frauncis Drake chief General
As by deserts he was most meet.
Most worthy Captains of hand and heart
In this boon voyage then took his part.
The Primrose next, Uize-Admirall
Appointed by their best devise
Captain Frobisher Uize General
A valiant Captain ware and wise.
Captain Carelell they did ordain,
Liefetenant General on the main.
The Aid a royal ship and hot
The Gallien will convict her foes,
The Sea-Dragon she spares no shot
The Talbott barks where ere she goes
The White Lion her foes will smart
And all the rest will take her part.
At Plimmouth they remained a space,
Till all their Ships were furnished:
Their government, good fame and grace,
Throughout the Realm is published.
Their sails displaide the Seas t'atchiue.
September, Anno eighty five.
Before which month was fully done,
At Bayon first they did ariue:
The Town perforce they might have won,
But they pretended not to strive,
By Parlee then they did agree:
The General used them courteously.
The men of Vigo in raging ire,
Then made great bragges them to molest:
Yet in the end at their desire,
He granted them their own request.
For he was loath these Towns to invade:
For hindering of our Merchants trade.
Then setting sail from thence in have,
To the Canaries swift they fly:
Three hundred Leagues by count were past,
Ere they the Town of Palm came nie.
These proud Townsmen envying their fleet,
Th^^ shot at them in great despite.
Let not these Townsmen be to bold,
I wish them not to brag or vaunt:
It Was not their Gunnes nor force that could,
Once make our English hearts to daunt.
If wind and waves had not so wrought:
Full dearly they their pride had bought.
This famous fleet sails on their way,
To Sancto Yuago they were bent:
Short of this Town three leagues I say,
Twelve hundred men on shore were sent.
On November the seauenteene day,
With Captains stout to keep the way.
Their noble General sails about,
But all the fleet rode near the ^owne:
Most valiant Captains with soldiers stout,
Then marching forth through vale and down.
To meet their General in the morn
As it was pointed erst beforne.
Their foes having intelligence
They were beset by sea and land:
They dare not prove experience,
The Drake by force for to withstand.
They fled that night and durst not stay
Preventing so their Enemies pray.
Then in the morn rathe as the sun,
The town they entered valiantly:
From place to place the Soldiers run,
Seeking to find commodity.
Both coin and plate some chaunst to find
Which they had hid and left behind.
Of victualles there they found good store,
With wine and sugar of the best:
Then quietly praise God therefore,
They made a worthy victors feast,
Their Masking robes of costly price
Our men for breeches did devise.
Fourteen days they kept this town,
With honor, fame, and victory:
Their Idol gods each where pulled down,
With all their fond Idolatry.
With brass Ordenaunce of good weight:
They ballast their ships which were light.
Two little towns in the same I Will,
The One Domingo, the other Pray:
These men their Friars did beguile
They left their Towns and ran away.
The Friars thought they would have fought
To hold their Mass, as they them taught.
For they had promised them before
If that they wo^ld fight for their mass:
For all their sins they had in store,
They should be pardoned more and less.
But they so sore did fear the Drake
They let their Friars stand to stake.
The Mariners this while provide,
For victuals and fresh water store:
All things were brought aboorde that tide
As their Masters wild them before.
To Parlee then they did refuse,
Whereby they wrought their own abuse:
The General minding to depart
Commaundes his men in have aboorde
Then lifting up both hands and heart,
Most thankfully they praise the Lord.
For giving them such victory:
Without bloodshed or ieoperdie.
A long course then from thence they run,
Nine hundredth Leagues or they did stay:
To one strange I Will at length they come,
Where sauadge people bare the sway.
Though wyld and nakte, yet nothing strange:
Their trifles for nifles feign would change.
In fifty leagues sailing from thence,
Strange Islands more they did descry:
Then Hispaniola came in presence,
With Sancto Domingo presently.
The chief City for their behooue:
Where they their valor meant to prove.
Their General then prudently,
Preventing the perrill of his men:
The gaynest way for their safety,
With discreet heads concluding then
One thousand men should martch by land
With Captains stout to guide their band.
Taking leave of their General,
After the court'sey of merry England:
On Gods most holy name they call,
To strength them with his mighty hand.
They martched forth then in their way
Their General sails about by Sea.
When near this Town our men were seen
A troop of Horsemen issued out:
And vaunted bravely on the green,
Minding to compass them about.
Our fore wings help with their small shot:
Made them retire to save their coat.
Their Ordenaunce plast amid their gate,
Whereas they thought our men would venture:
Though dangerous, no way save that,
So easy was for them to enter.
Their foes discharge a piece or twain:
Yet as God would but two were slain.
Courage, courage, our Captains cry,
Good Soldiers now lets fight like men:
Then all at once ran valiantly,
Their shot discharged, with weapons then,
They lay one load on either side:
Though five to one* yet durst not bide.
Their Gunner priming of his piece,
Saw them come running in a rage.
Let Linstocke fall, away he flees,
And all the rest as for a wage,
To save their lives if it might be:
Our English Soldiers made them flee.
Their General busied all this while,
His ships ancoring before the Town:
His Gunners and their mates likewise,
With thundering shot then made them frown.
They battered both at Town and fort:
And in the field none dared to sport.
Then for their Ladies help they pray,
Miserecordia how chances this:
Our Friars said no Mass to day,
For want of leisure they did miss.
Their Gods likewise they did desire:
But Saint Domingo could not hear.
Then sore afraid they began to trudge,
Some with fardle and some with pack:
Unto the Woods for their refuge,
To shroud themselves they did not slack.
The General lands without annoy:
His Captains then met him with joy.
They entered the Town then valiantly,
And took possession of the same:
And spread their Ensigns triumphantly,
Great valors they atchiue by fame*
The town won on New years Day.
Then trumpets sound the Soldiers shift:
They praise God for their New years gift.
Their enemies fled with such great have,
They left their rostmeate on the spit:
Hens and Chickins well crombd and baste,
Tables covered ready to sit.
Wine and sugar they found good store:
Their guests were come unlooked for.
Their beds were made their Chambers dressed,
The Curtines drawn brave and fine
Their parrell brusht and finely pressed
Sir you shall choose but this is mine.
Some Jewels were hid in walls and chest,
Then some they found and some they mist.
By good advise and government,
This town one month they then possessed
Their famous dames by Rulers sent,
With costly presents of the best
Praying the General courteously
He would vouchsafe spare their City.
The Mariners the while provide,
For victualles and fresh water sweet:
With other commodities beside,
Which was conuaide aboard the fleet.
Commandment then was given straight way:
All men aboorde without delay.
Then presently they sailed thence,
To one rich Island they were bent:
But wind and storm turned their pretense,
And other course then they invent.
With Carthagena they set at last:
Where all their fleet their Anchors cast.
This town was strong, well fenst about,
Four hundred soldiers under pay:
Four hundred Indians in a scoute,
Besides their townsmen in array.
For they had news the Drake would come:
And they thought sure to be his doom.
Their forte well mande and fortressed,
Five Sconces wherein good Ordenaunce was:
Three Galleys then were amplified,
With fifteen pieces of good Brass.
Full little then they feared the Drake:
For they thought sure to make him quake.
One mischief more they do devise,
Whereby they thought to spoil our men:
Many poisoned pricks in sundry wise,
Amidst their way they fastened then.
To prick their shinnes they did purpose:
But the Lord God did that disclose.
Nine hundred men were set one land,
And marching forth then all by night:
Until they came unto the strande,
Where pricks with poisoned heads were dight.
The water low as Gods will was:
Twixt strand and seas they safely pass.
Then in the morn before daylight.
They came full in their Enemies face:
Then all at once with force and might,
They ran upon them in a race.
For all their force and thundering shot:
One of their Sconces soon they got.
As God shut up the Lions Jaws,
From noying his Prophet Daniell:
And eke preserved from tyrants paws,
The three children of Israel.
And saved them in the Oven so hot:
So he conuayd away their shot.
Our Captains then most valiantly.
To courage their Soldiers for to fight:
Did ieoperd themselves then formostlie,
Which made their enemies dread their might.
Boldned soldiers, put foes to shame:
To win their country honor and fame.
From Sconce to Sconce then they retire.
Their lofty hearts right soon were quailde:
They left their holds and fled for fear,
Then with their heels they best prevail.
And as they fled straung news they tell:
These be no men but feendes of hell.
Their Ordenaunce and artillery,
Which in their holds did then remain
Our men atchiue with victory
The Town like c^se they won certain.
Their Ensigns then they did display:
Upon their walls none ^urst say nay.
The Soldiers then seek for their pray,
Some for their bellyes likewise did care:
Though breakefast sharp now care away,
Their dinners sweet and wholesome fare.
Bread and victuals they found good store:
With wine and sugar as erst before.
They made a Sconce amidst the street,
And plast great Ordenaunce in the fame
To charge the watch when it came to night,
To daunt their foes their rage to (...).
Being shot o^ their thundering ^ound*
So shook their Church, the roof fell d^wne.
This Town also they kept a space,
And eke the Fryery there beside:
These Townsmen then with humble grace,
Besought the General at that tide.
To release their town he would vouchsaue
And they would give what he would have.
All things provided orderly,
And brought unto the waters side
Munitions and artillery,
Was all embarked at that tide,
The Mariners without delay:
These things aboorde with speed convey.
The General with his company,
Then in a Frigate ^^tlie plaste:
And all his Soldiers in a route,
In Pinnasses with him then past.
The Castle which first did them annoy:
As they past by they did destroy.
Then when aboard their ships they come,
They were received joyfully:
A peale of Gunnes with thundering soun^,
For one hour space even pearst the sky.
Their Drumes struck up their Trumpets sound
Their victories which do abound.
Their yardes a cross hoyst at the top,
Their Anchors wayde then presently:
Their sails displayed, their good ships loppe,
The Mariners stands their tackling by.
Each Helm belayd with good respect:
As skillful Masters did direct.
Recording then their victories,
Which they had won by Gods great might:
And eke the sundry ieoperdies:
They had escaped day and night.
They yield God thanks most heartily:
Both for his aid and victory.
Then homeward as their course did lie,
At sundry Isles they put a shore:
Their former wantes for to supply,
With victuales and fresh water store.
At Florida they did ariue:
Saint Augustine for to atchiue.
These townsmen trusting in their strength,
Then fiercely set against the Drake:
Yet he and's men prevail at length,
When they were feign their town forsake,
Which when he had possessed with fame:
Upon humble suit releast the same.
This town they wan most valiantly,
As they did all the rest before:
The Lord was still their victory,
Whose name be praised evermore.
And yield to Drake his due and right:
Let fame extol this noble knight.
His rare attempts performed and done,
With honor, fame and victory:
The like before who ever won,
That you can call to memory.
Therefore I pray for Englandes sake:
The Lord preserve the noble Drake.
When siedge is laid to town or forte,
And then the same be yielded straight:
The valor's then of small report,
And the exploites of no great weight.
But where with force they bide the brunt:
Their conquestes are of great account.
Ulysses with his Navy great,
In ten years space great valor won:
Yet all his time did no such feate,
As Drake within one year has done.
Both Turk and Pope and all our foes:
Do dread this ^rake where ere he goes.
After he had such ^alours won,
And overcame the enemy:
To merry England he wo^ld return,
The pleasants land in, Christientie.
At Portesmouth then by Gods good grace:
With all his fleet (...) in short space.
When tidinges came unto the Court,
Sir Frauncis Drake was new came home:
Her highness hearin^ this report,
Her grace was glad that he was come.
And all her Lords with one accord
For his safe return praised the Lord.
To Portesmouth then there did resort,
Right worshipful from City and town:
This Knight to welcome to the port,
With honor, fame and great renown.
His valiant Captains and gentles blood,
They welcomed home with joyful mood.
His entertainment at the Court,
With his Captains of worthy fame:
I need not stand to make report,
Since brute each where has spread the same.
Yet once again for Englands sake:
Pray God speed well the noble Drake.
His valiant mind, his secret skill,
By flying Fame each where is spread:
His loyal love his mere good will,
To Queen and Realm both seen and read.
Since God is dooer of the same:
Let us all praise his holy name.
Through him he got great victories,
Through him he did his foes dismay:
Through him he escaped great ieoperdies,
And perrill both by Land and Sea.
Who has preserved by his great might:
Our Queen and realm years twenty eight.
God save our Queen of merry England,
His sacred word long to maintain:
Her Graces Navy and royal band,
Through his good grace may long remain.
Lord bless her counsel and keep them aye:
With all true Subjects night and day.
Finis
quoth Thomas Greepe.

To the right reverend, godly learned Father, my very good friend, M. John
Fox, preacher of the word of GOD.
Master Fox, whereas we have had of late such happy success against the
Spanyardes, I do assure my self that you have faithfully remembered us in your
good prayers, and therefore I have not forgotten, breef^ly to make you pertaker
thereof. The 19. of April we arrived within the Rode of Calls where we found
very many shipping, but amongst the rest 32. of exceeding burden, lade, and
to be laden with provision, and prepared to furnish the Kings Navy, intended
with all speed against England, the which when we had boorded, and also
furnished our several Ships with provision as we thought sufficient, we
burnt: And although by the space of two days and two nights that we continued
there, we were still endaungered, both with thundering shot from the Town, and
assailed with the roaring Cannons of twelve Gallyes: yet we suncke two of
them, and one great Argosey, and still avoided them with very small hurt, and
so at our departure we brought away four ships of provision, to the great
terror of our enemies, and honor to our selves, as it may appear by a most
courteous Letter written unto me with a Flagge of truce, by Duke Petro, General
of the Gallyes. But where as it is most certain, that the king does not only
make speedy preparation in Spain, but likewise expected a very great Fleet
from the Straytes, and diverse other places, that should join with his forces to
invade England: We purpose to set apart all fear of danger, and by Gods
furtheraunce to proceed by all the good means we can devise to prevent their
coming, wherefore I shall desire you to continue faithful in remembrance of
us in your prayers, that our purpose may take that good effect, as God may be
glorified, his Church, our Queen and Country preserved, and these Enemies of
the truth utterly vanquished, that we may have continual peace in Israel.
From aboard her Majesty's good Ship the Elizabeth Bonauenture.

Your loving freende, and faithful Son in Christ Jesus. Frauncis Drake.
Our enemies are many, but our protector commands the whole world, let us
all pray continually, and our Lord Jesus will hear us in good time mercifully.

Frauncis Drake.
Written by the hands of M. Pynner.



