THE GREAT DAY, OR, A SERMON, SETTING forth the desperate estate and condition
of the wicked at the day of Judgment.

Preached at Saint Andrews in Holborne at London.

By Nathaniel Grenfeild, Master of Arts, and Preacher of the Word of God at
Whit-feild in Oxfordshire.

LONDON, Printed by W. Stansby for Josias Harrison, and are to be sold at the
Golden Anchor in Paternoster row. 1615.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL SIR GEORGE SPEAK, Knight, N. G. wishes heartily all
happiness.
SIR,
THe Wise man's censure concerning the many Booke-makers of his time, Morbus
insanabilie scribendi cacoethes, Iuuenal. Quod de scriptis sacris authore
spiritu sanct^dici non potest, veru^ de illis, quae vanitas humana exculpit
quotidie, Fayius. Traditiones, decreta Pontificum, Canones generalium
consiliorum, quoad obsequij and fidei necessitatem praesertim refelluntur.
me thinks, as much taxes this Writing world of ours, wherein men are almost
no men, unless they be men in print; all is but a Co^mentarie upon the
Preachers words; Of making many books there is no end, Eccl. 12.12. I wish to
God that there were once an end (which I fear me, will not be until the
world ends) of making such books, as serve to no end, but to the corrupting of
manners, infecting the heart, weakening zeal; and that some good Augustus would
banish them, (as he did fleshly Amatoriae Nafonis, in quibus non est tutum
rudem exerceri, Erasmus.
Ovid) out of our Bethel, Christian England, into some Bethauen, into some
Idolatrous, Superstitious, and Heathenish Nation, that worship the Sun and
the Moon, Castor and Pollux, Rats and Mice, in stead of the true God of
Heaven; or sent back for Vagrants into Italy, or the Stews of Rome, where,
like an adulterous brood, they were first borne and bred; or that they were
all served with the same sauce, Stapleton. Praefat. Moral.
as (by Stapletons report) Saint Ephraim wittily used two books of
Apollinaris, who finding them in a woman's keeping, borrowed them of her, and
glued the leaves so hard together, as the book could never after be opened.
For (as one says well) ten Sermons at Paul's Cross do not so much good for
moving men to true doctrine, as one of these books do harm, with entising
men to ill living; and that more Papists are made by the merry books of Italy,
then by the earnest books of Louaine; so that they do not only win the wills
of the weak unto wantonness, but tend something to the corrupting of true
religion. Saint James reprooues very sharply those, that with the same tongue
bless God, and curse man, Iam. 3.9. why then should the same Caracters set
forth Machiauels works and Moses writings, Christ and Belial, the unchaste
love of wanton Heathens, and the chaste and reciprocal love of Christ and his
Church? But as for such books as have our Savior for their subject, the holy
Ghost for their Author, Gods glory for their end; that are like so many Cannons
planted against the Gates of hell, that tend wholly to the demolishing of Satan's
Kingdom, undermining the Bulwarks of Babylon, but building up the Walls of
Jerusalem, why should not the sound of such go forth into the ends of the
world? and when they sound forth, the end of the world? To which end, I have
preached pend, and through the importunity of others, contrary to mine own
mind and meaning when I preached, now imprinted this little Tract and
Treatise; how free I am from Salomons censure of such as print themselves, let
him that is wiser then Solomon be a witness: I am bold to fly unto your
Worship, and to entreat you, that you would vouchsafe to be called a Patron
unto it, as you are to learning, though far (I must confess) below your
worthiness: The many testimonies of your love from time to time toward my
eldest Brother and my self, do challenge more at our hands, then my pen can
express, or the weakness of our utmost power make the least requital. A
handful of water was fitter to be powered into a Beggars dish, then to be
presented unto a King: yet a King accepted of it, though a beggar gave it,
because he gave what he had, and had no better to give: nay, it is acceptable
to God (if we have no greater gift to offer) to cast a mite into the Lords
Treasury: whereby I am induced to conceive, that you will no less willingly
accept of this Paper gift of mine, a Scholars Mite, the truest testimonial of
mine intimate affections, and manifestation of my duty: what is wanting, shall
be supplied in praying for you unto God, for your preservation, and for an
increase in all spiritual graces, namely, of faith, which may keep you from
trembling at the day of your death, and in the day of Judgment. From
Whitfield, July the 10.

Your Worships to be commanded in the Lord, NATH. GRENFEILD.

THE GREAT DAY.
REVEL. 6.15.16.17.



For the great day of his wrath is come, and who can stand?


THis Chapter contains in it six parts, and every part the opening of a Seal
by the Lamb, and every seal a distinct mystery: the four first Seals being
opened, mention is made of four Riders, riding upon four horses, of four
different colors, a white, verse. 2. a red, verse. 4. a black, verse. 5. a pale,
verse 8. unto the beholding whereof, Saint John was invited.

The first Rider is described by two adjuncts, Adiunctis. Arcu. Corona.
Effectu. Fine.
a Bow and a Crown was given unto him, verse. 2. Secondly, by the effect,
conquering. Thirdly, by the end, to conquer, verse. 2.

The second Seal being opened, the second Rider, which Saint John was willed
for to come and see, is described: Potestate. Instrumento.
first, by his power, power was given unto him, etc. verse. 4. Secondly, by an
instrument; there was given unto him a great sword.

The third Rider is described by a pair of Balances, he that sat on this
horse, had a pair of Balances in his hand, verse. 5. the mystery whereof is
unfolded by a sounding voice, verse. 6.

The fourth Seal being opened, there came forth a Rider upon a pale horse,
and the Rider is described, first, by his name, death. Secondly, by a
companion, hell followed with him: and both are described by their power; power
was given unto them, etc. verse. 8. The interpretation of these four horses, is
as mystical as Nebuchadnezzars dream, and may very well bear the self same
interpretation, which Daniel gave of that great Image, whose head was of gold,
breast and arms of silver, belly and thighs of brass, legs of iron, Dan.
2.32.33. This Image was an Emblem, or representation of the four Monarchies of
the World; the Monarchy of the Assyrians, or Caldeans; the Monarchy of the
Medes and Persians; the Monarchy of the Grecians; the Monarchy of the Romans:
and as Gold, of all other metals is the best, and purest; and therefore it is
said, that Heavenly Jerusalem is a City of pure Gold, Apoc. 21.18. So White is
the best, and chiefest of all colors; and therefore it is said, that the
Saints were clothed with white Robes, verse. 11. Which color is consecrated to
innocence, purity, victory and felicity; and therefore it is said, that the
head of the Image was of fine Gold, Dan. 2.32. And that the first horse was
white, verse. 2. so the first Monarchy, viz. of the Caldeans (though full of
cruelty) was the best, and a golden Age, comparatively in respect of the rest:
but the last of all was the worst of all: the Roman Emperors outstripped all
the rest, in their bloody proiects, and unspeakable cruelties; for who can
reckon up all their expeditions of war, so many funerals of Citizens,
massacring of so many millions of men, depopulations and dispeopling of so many
Countries, burnings of so many Cities, such a prodigal profusion of blood when
this Roman horse rushed forth? in so much, that the fourth part of the Earth
was slain with the sword of this fierce Beast, as it is, verse. 8. The cruelty
of all preceding Emperors was clemency, being compared with these Romans,
whose Drums sounded nothing else but blood and death, and their little finger
was bigger, then the loins of all their predecessors.

The fifth Seal being opened, Saint John saw the Souls of blessed Martyrs
lying under the Altar, and crying for revenge; where first he shows the
essence of true Martyrs: they were killed, Pseudo-martyrs.
(so may false Martyrs) it is a good cause that makes a Martyr, and therefore it
is said, that they were killed for the word of God, and for the testimony of
the truth, verse 9. The words may have reference either unto the Church
Militant, who may be termed Martyrs, though they be never killed, and though
they never strive to blood, viz. when Christians are rayled at, reviled,
scorned, disgraced, abused, false witnesses suborned, either to empaire the
credit of their person, or empeach the sincerity of their profession: for the
Devil first lets loose the tongues of the wicked to speak ill, before he
lets loose their hands to do ill. Thus that Protomartyr Steven was gnashed
at with the teeth of the wicked, Acts 7.54. before he was stoned; and they
suborned men, which said, We have heard him speak blasphemous words, etc.
Acts 6.11. Thus our Savior, before he suffered, endured such contradictions
of sinners, accounted sometimes for a seditious person, a wine-bibber, a friend
to Publicans and sinners, one that had a Devil, one that preached false
doctrine, etc. And thus Paul, before he sealed Peter's confession with his
blood, he was accounted for a mad man, August. l. 10 confess.
a seducer of the people, and for one not worthy to live: Lingua impiorum est
quotidiana fornax, The tongue of the wicked is a furnace, wherein Gods children
are tried; and there is not a man or member of this little poor despised
Church, whether zealous Preacher, or sincere Professor, but must be tried in
this Oven of evil speaking: for as long as you are in the world, and are not
of the world, the world will hate you, and speak evil of you, Ioh. 15.19. Or
the words, as it should seem, may in a better sense only be referred unto
that heavenly troop of blessed Soldiers discharged the field, with the loss
of life, and for a reward of this their perseverance, striving unto blood, are
clothed with white Robes; which cry for revenge, either in respect of us which
do suffer (for the Saints in Heaven do pray for us in general, howsoever
they know not our wants in particular) or in respect of themselves which have
suffered, they cry for revenge (for it is Gods peculiar) either in this life by
his temporal plagues or punishments, or by hastening his coming unto
Judgment, when they shall eternally be rewarded in that everlastingly burning
Tophet, prepared for all persecuting Kings and Princes, who have made havoc
of the Saints. Now the time when this was, Saint John makes it manifest, that
it was after the opening of of the fourth Seal, and after the coming forth of
the fourth Horse: for the fierceness and furious rage of this Romish Beast was
not utterly abated, although there was scarce matter left for malice to work
upon: but no sooner was Christ borne, which was when Augustus Octauius was
Emperor, in the two and fortieth year of his reign; and also put to death
again, which was when Tyberius was Emperor, before the Church had recovered
any strength or growth, but Tyranny waited on her, to devour her children as
soon as they were borne. There are two distinct times, in which the Church of
God suffered most grievous persecutions; the first was in her Primitive estate,
when by the preaching of the Apostles, the number of believers were multiplied
exceedingly; then did the foes increase, that troubled her peace and
prosperity, bearing evil will to Sion, inueigled by that hellish Dragon, that
was set at liberty, bending and banding all their forces and furies,
prosecuting her with all might and malice, did set her again a bleeding, when
she was yet but a budding. Her most bloody persecutours were these Roman
bloodthirsty Emperors, Domician, Traian, Nero, Doecius, Dioclesian, Antoninus,
Maxentius, Lycinius, and other cruel Tyrants, even until the time of
Constantine the Great; by whom the Saints were killed all the day long, and
were accounted as sheep to be slain.

The second time was in these last times, under Antichrist, when the whole
number of Martyrs shall be completely finished, as it is v. 11. which may also
be divided into ten persecutions, if we reckon up all those slaughters of
blessed Martyrs, which have been from the time of John VVickleeue within these
138. years, The first persecution.
until this time throughout all the coasts of Europe. As first under King
Henry the fourth and fifth, here in England; the Constantia, and Bohemia; the
Bishops of Rome, and the nearest Provinces thereof; Charles the fifth
Emperor in Germany; the fifth under Henry the eighth in England; the sixth under
Henry the second in France; the James the second, in Scotland: the eight under
Charles the ninth in France; under whose reign there were within the space of
one month put to death, above twenty Mary here in England, she that was a
second Nero, for her cruelty, but yet for the Churches comfort, she was but
Nubecula cito transitura* A short tempest: Q. Elizabeth.
for had she lived, then had the Churches chiefest nursing mother been
bereaved of her life, and we her children should never have inioyed these
Halcyonian days wherein the Gospel flourishes in despite either of Pope or
Turk. During the time of whose reign, which was but for the space of five
years, there were above forty thousand living bodies of the most choicest
Martyrs most cruelly burnt, I say, the living bodies, to aggrauate the depth of
their enraged envy; for they would not suffer the bones of the dead to rest in
their graves, but they must be burnt to ashes, when they were almost rotten to
the dust. The Philip in Spain and Flaunders, as in the Spanish Inquisition we
may read more at large; nay, almost what part of the earth has not that
drunken Whore of Rome moystned with the blood of Saints? And yet here is not
an end, but still she is plodding and plotting some secret mischief upon the
bed of her fornications, and hatching still a malicious brood of Serpents and
Cockatrices, Men and Devils, hellish conspiratours, still machinating the
works of darkness, their fellow-helper being the Devil, which is the Prince
of darkness: and therefore no marvel though the Church triumphant in heaven,
and the Church militant upon earth, do daily cry for revenge upon that Where
of Babylon; and the Lord hearing the loud cry of the Saints, whose blood cries
as loud as ever Abels did against his brother Cain, at the length awaketh as
one out of sleep, comes forth as a Giant refreshed with wine, strikes their
enemies upon the thigh, and puts them unto a perpetual shame; as you may see
at the opening of the sixth seal, when God, in the severity of his wrath,
summons all Kings and Princes of the earth, which have been bloody agents in
massacring of Saints, unto the trembling Tribunal of his general Judgment;
where the first thing that we may take notice of, is the fearful alteration
of natural things both in heaven and earth ver. 12.13.14. In the Sun
blackness, the Moon became as blood, and the Stars fell from heaven, heaven
departed as a scrowle, the earth shook, mountains, and Islands were moved out
of their place; All which are evident demonstrations of that great and
fearful Day; Mark. 13. v. 24.25. Matthew. 24. v. 29. Luke 21.25. The second is
the fear and amazedness of men: Kings, great men, rich men, chief Captains,
bond and free, their hearts did fail them for fear, Luke 21.26. desiring
rather that the earth would swallow them up alive, as it did Corah, Dathan, and
Abiram, then to behold the countenance of so angry a Judge, and breathing forth
such bootlesse exclamations unto the senseless Rocks and helpless Mountains,
Fall upon us, cover us from the wrath of the Lamb, v. 15.16. All which do
immediately go before the day of Judgment, verse. 17.11. I had rather wade
with the Lamb in the shallow, lest with the Elephant plunging my self into
the depth, I should be drowned in the depth; which is a just judgment of God
upon all rash enterprizing spirits, and curious inquisitors into the
unsearchable secrets and mysteries past finding out of almighty God, to be
given over unto their own private spirits, and to lose themselves in the
Labyrinth of their own self motions, and all because they will not confess
their ignorance, and content themselves with a sober knowledge, Romans 12.3. but
will be wise above what is written. Once, sure I am of this, that the Scriptures
do contain in them all things necessary to salvation, and that they are
riddles, and mysteries, dark, and obscure unto none, but unto those that
perish.

Amidst variety of Interpretors, some inclining unto a Litterall, some unto an
Allegorical, some unto a Tropological sense, I doubt not but that I may safely
lay down this plain and litterall exposition, viz. That this Text sets
forth the desperate estate and condition of the wicked, at the dreadful day of
Judgment: wherein I observe Kings, great men, rich men, chief Captains,
mighty men, bond men, free men, that is, some of all sorts and sexes; all They
hid themselves in dens and in the rocks of Mountains, v. 15. Thirdly, their
lamentable, yet fruitless They said unto the Mountains and Rocks, Fall upon
us, and hide us from the presence of him, etc. v. 16. Lastly, the reason of
all; For the Great day of his wrath is come, and who can stand?

The Kings of the earth] not Romani Principes, the Princes of Rome; that had
bin too plain, and it had bin a means to have exasperated the malice of those
bloody Emperors more cruelly to imbrue their hands in the blood of Saints: for
Kings that are Tyrants, and rich men that are wedded to the world, can hardly
endure to hear of their downfall and destruction, but they will rage more
furiously, and redouble their cruelty; so Herod slew all the children that were
in Bethlem and in all the coasts thereof from two years old and under, when the
Wisemen told him that Jesus was borne, and that He should be the King of the
Jews, Matthew. 2. v. 2.16. Therefore Saint John noting their power and malice,
being that they are Kings and rich men, does for the Churches safety, of set
purpose, conceal their names: so the Apostle Saint Paul in the second to the
Thessalonians, c. 2. v. 3.4. describing the downfall of the Pope of Rome, he
calls him not in plain and direct terms, Antichrist, or the Pope, but (...)
That man of sin, (...), That son of perdition which exalts himself, (...),
Above all that is called God, describing the nature of him so, that it can be
competent unto none, but unto the Pope of Rome.

(...). Vegetius l. 2. c. 2. dear militari.
Tribuni, the chief Captaines] such as were set over a thousand soldiers,
such amongst the Romans were called Tribunes: and a Roman Legion consisted of
six thousand soldiers: by which finite agnomination the Devils showed, that
the number of their infernal Kingdom was infinite, My name is Legion: for we
are many.

Every bond and every free-man] that is, all the wicked: but especially those
that have been actors of the Kings decrees, and executioners of new devised
tortures, in the persecution of the Saints.

Hid themselves in dennes] Some there are (and that not a few) that would have
this to be understood figuratively of the corrupt estate of the Church, and of
the last persecution of Antichrist, when the Popish Prelacy had gotten the
supremacy. The Sun, say they, is Christ, black and obscured, not in
himself; but in the hearts of men. The Moon is the Church, which resembles
the Moon waxing and waning; and she borrowes her light from Christ. The
Stars are the Doctors of the Church, Teachers and Preachers of the Word;
Falling to the earth]. i. slain by the wicked, which seem to men to fall to
the earth; when as indeed, if faithful in their endeavors to work a sinners
conversion, they shine like stars for ever and ever, Dan. 1 2. v. 3. The
Heaven, say they, is the sacred Bible and Canonical Scripture; containing in
it the revealed will of the King of Heaven, by means whereof we are led unto
Heaven, as the Wisemen were to Christ by the conduct of a Star, Ioh. 5.39.
Matthew. 2. v. 9. Within the Pages of this holy Writ, Christ, the Church, the
Ministers, are placed like the Sun, Moon, and Stars in the Firmament of
Heaven; This Heaven departed in the reign of Antichrist, and became as a
clasped Book in respect of the use of it, for almost as good as if it had not
been at all, then the people never a jot the better by it, when the Laiety
might not read it; but through the Priests spectacles: when Images were
Laymens Books, and sacred Scripture departed like a scrole, that is, locked up
in an unknown tongue. Earthquakes do signify seditions, alterations,
mutations of Kingdoms, and Empires; such as began in the Papacy, and do not
end as yet; but still does that exceeding dreadful beast, Daniel 7. v. 19.
stir up seditions, disturb common peace, shake Kingdoms, blow up
Parliaments, cut off and anathemize Kings, by the thunderbolt of
excommunication, yea and afterward Canonize Devils for Saints; if they would
adventure to kill Kings.

The Mountains are, say they, the Prophets whom the breath of Antichrist does
ouer-turne, and by the same breath of that not erring Man of sin, do the
Schole-Doctors by their false glosses and perverse interpretations, corrupt,
deprave, and ouer-throw the sense of the Prophets.

The Islands, say they, are the works and writings of Philosophers, which the
same Doctors do pervert some other way, beyond the mind and meaning of
Philosophers, so that there is nothing common with the Prophets, nor with true
Philosophy. Kings and rich men, etc. are the Monarchs of the world, and other
private men made subject to the Popes Catholicall and Universal Supremacy,
when Kings must hold the stirrup, and kiss the greasy feet of that
triple-crownd Monster.

Hid themselves in dennes] that is (say they) the Cells, Cloisters, Solitary
places, Nests of Nuns, and unsociable Monks. I will not disallow of this
allegorizing interpretation, for it may very well stand for current: but
according to the simple sense and meaning of the words, as they lie nakedly to
be considered, and if Scripture may interpret Scripture, the Prophet Isaiah
makes them plain; expounding this place in the self same terms, or this
place expounding that, both setting forth the narrow strait, and desperate
perplexity, which the wicked are brought unto; They shall go into the holes of
the Rocks, and into the Caves of the earth, for fear of the Lord, and for the
glory of his Majesty, when he arises to shake terribly the earth, Isaiah 2.19.
yea, and to strike a deeper dread and horror into the hearts of the wicked, he
does ingeminate it, like that triple woe in the eight of the Revelation, verse.
21.

And said to the Mountains and Rocks, Fall on us, etc.] Here the holy Ghost
does allude unto two places of Scripture; the first is the tenth of Hosea v. 8.
the second, is the 23. of Luke verse. 30. both describing the desperate estate
of the wicked; where our Savior speaks of a certain time, when these things
should be, after he had spoken of the destruction of Jerusalem, which was a
type of the consummation of the world, and dissolution of al things; but in
Hosea, the Prophet speaks of the captivity of Israel, which was a figure of
Ierusalems utter diuastation, and the worlds final destruction, as Hierome
observes upon that place: It was an old dotage of Aquinas upon this place,
who, as his custom is, to turn all things into Allegories, does wrest this
place of Kings and chief Captains, and would have it to be understood of the
Romish Clergy, the Bishops, the Archbishops, and the rest of that rabble,
cloistred Monks, and Masse-muttering Priests, crying unto the Mountains, that
is, inuocating the Saints, imploring their patrocinie and their safeguarding
protection, from the wrath that is to come. But these cursed Crew, that rob
Christ of his honor, who is that one only Mediator, 1. Tim. 2.5. pro quo nullus
interpellat, sed ipse per omnibus, as Augustine defines a Mediator; by making
as many Mediators as there are Saints departed, shall at that day find the
Saints no better then Jobs friends, miserable comforters, and that the
inuocating of them shall be no more regarded, then the shouting and crying of
the Priests of Baal, 1 King. 18. v. 27.

Hide us from the face of him that sits upon the Throne, and from the voice
of the Lamb. takes away the sins of the World? as Peter told the Jews,
that through ignorance they did crucify Christ, as did also their Governors,
Acts 3. v. 17. for had they known, they would never have crucified the Lord of
glory. Sol.
I will not insist upon any curious distinction, either of Logicians, or Schole
divines concerning ignorance. In brief I answer thus, that the wicked out of
the horror, and hellish despair of a distracted conscience, partly by reason
of that imminent danger without them, and the guilt of conscience within them,
they shall be compeld to acknowledge Christ to be that Incarnated Word of
truth, sent out of the bosom of the Father, and to be that Lamb of God slain
for as many as believe: then they shall see, know, and be made to acknowledge
him; though in their life time they called his sacred Deity into question, yet
then shall they acknowledge him without all question. As Pharaoh at the first
answered Moses and Aaron, entreating him from the Lord, to let the children of
Israel go, that they may celebrate a feast to the Lord in the wilderness.
Quis est Deus, Who is the Lord? as though he had thought (belike) that there
had bin no God, as Atheists say in their heart, There is no God, Psalm. 14.1. or
that he himself had been God only, Exodus 5.2. yet afterward he learned a
new lesson, being instructed by diverse sorts of afflictions, which were as so
many Sermons to convict and convince him of Atheism, and was compelled to
acknowledge God, to be the Author of them, Exodus 8. and he only to be prayed
unto, Exodus 14. So shall the wicked at that day, howsoever at this day they do
scorn, deride, and not believe in Christ to be Jesus, a Messiah, a Savior,
but persecute him in his members, Act. 9.4. when they see the truth of
prophesies fulfilled, the destruction at hand, their own dismal desolation
drawing near, then shall they acknowledge Christ to be the Son of God, the
Savior of the world, the Redeemer of Israel.

For the great day of his wrath is come.] (...), (...), Jude 6.
the great day: where we may note the universality of it; all the days of
judgment going before, were but types and figures, but Epitomes and compends
of that day, that great day, that is to come; the drowning of the old world was
a great day, the burning of Sodom and Gomorrah, a great day, the ransacking of
Jerusalem, a great day; yet all these together will not express and show forth
the least part of that dreadfully incomparable great day, that is to come.

And who can stand?) It is a Metaphor drawn from those, that whiles some
eminent danger hangs over their heads, cannot look up, but speedily they
fly away, until they are out of breath, their spirits spent, and so they fall
groueling to the ground; so says our Savior Christ, men's hearts shall fail
them for fear, and for looking after those things that shall come to the
world, Luke 21.16. The cause of this their flying is not only the fearful
apparitions of heaven, as presages and prognostications of their dismal doom,
but Erynnis conscientiae, as Melancthon calls it, the sting of conscience, like
a fiend of hell, dogs and drives them; for the wicked fly when none pursues
them, Pro. 28.1. They therefore are said to stand, that are not terrified and
appaled, which are not cast down, neither in body nor mind, but do
confidently expect and wait their Masters coming; and therefore it was our
Saviors counsel unto his Disciples, and in them unto his whole Church,
having forewarned them that he would come upon them, at a time, that they wot
not of, as travel upon a woman, as a thief in the night, he does fore-arme
them too, by willing them to be frequent in watching, fervent in prayer; Watch
therefore, and pray continually, that you may be counted worthy to escape all
these things that shall come to pass, and that you may be able to stand
before the Son of man, Luke 21.36.

Thus having Analyzed the whole Chapter, divided my Text, and expounded the
words, I draw forth this general doctrine, and it flows natural, of its
own accord, without any violent strayning, or injury unto the Text: this is
the doctrine: 1. Doct.
that the state and condition of the wicked is full of horror at the day of
judgment.

This is proved by phrases of Scripture: First, It is called the Lords day, the
day of the Lord, intimating thereby, that as the wicked have had their day, the
term of their life, wherein they dare as boldly to commit sin, as if they
should never come to judgment, and as the Prophet Amos speaks, putting far
off the evil day, and approaching to the seat of iniquity, Amos 6.3. so
likewise the Lord will have his day: and these are the days of vengeance,
says our Savior Christ, Luke 21. v. 22. wherein the Lord will execute the
severity of his wrath, upon sin and sinners.

Secondly, it is called the day of wrath; now, the wrath of a King is the
messenger of death, how much more the wrath of the Lord of Hosts, the breath of
whose nostrils kindles that everlastingly burning Tophet, and his wrath
abides for ever upon the children of disobedience, in that burning Lake of
hell fire; for they that have justly provoked the Lord unto wrath in this their
life time, by fornication, by uncleanness, by inordinate affection, by evil
concupiscence, by covetousness, which is Idolatry, by wrath, by anger, by
maliciousness, by cursed and filthy speaking, Colos. 3.5.8. shall be sure to
find the recompense and their reward; wrath for wrath, the very fruit of their
own fruitless works, for, for these things sake the wrath of God comes upon
the children of disobedience, Colos. 3.6. temporally by manifest judgments of
his wrath, and eternally in hell, where his wrath abides for ever and for
ever; in that dungeon of Dogs, that is, among the wicked, whose estate is worse
then a Dogs; as namely, Inchanters, Whoremongers, Murderers, Idolaters, and
whosoever loves or makes lies, Revel. 22.15.

Thirdly, our Savior Christ speaking of that day, says; that it should come
upon the world, as travel upon a woman with child: which is not only to be
understood of the uncertainty of it when it will come, (yet as sure will it
come as travel upon a woman with child:) but the similitude holds true in
another sense; that as a woman with child drawing near to her travel, is in
sorrow, and cries in her pains, Isay 26.17. (a punishment peculiar to that
sex, by reason of our first Parents transgression, Genesis 3.16.) she does
oftentimes send forth bitter sighs, and sobbes, grievous groans, and
lamentable cries, uncertain whether her issue will be a Benjamin, the son
of her right hand, or a Benoni, the son of her sorrow and death, yet still
does she lift up her eyes unto the Hills, from whence comes her help; so the
wicked shall lift up their eyes unto the Hills, for they shall cry unto the Hills
for help, unto the Mountains for succor, and unto the Rocks for safety, yet
they shall receive none from neither. Me thinks, I hear not only Ieroms
Trumpet sounding in mine Surgite mortui, venite ad iudicium.
ears; but a horrible howling of a promiscuous multitude; a greater mourning,
weeping, and lamentation was never heard in Rama, Matt. 2.18. Parents weeping
for their children, children for their parents; the husband for the wife, the
wife for the husband; yet can they not help one another, but as they have
been companions in sin, so shall they be companions in torments, and such
torments that are matchless, far beyond the pains of women, for her pains
end, either with a happy birth, or with as happy a burial; for better is the
day of death, then the day wherein we are borne: but the pains of the wicked
are endless, easelesse, remediless, and as they have conceived iniquity, so
shall they receive the fruit thereof.

Fourthly, S. John describing the miserable estate and condition of the Church
under Antichrist, does very lively set forth the desperate estate and condition
of the wicked, at the day of judgment: they shall seek for death in those
days, and shall not find it, they shall desire to dye, and death shall fly
from them, Revel. (...). Arist. l. 3. Ethic.
9.6. Death, according to the Philosopher, is of all terribles the most
terrible, and unto the natural man it is even death to remember death, yet
full glad would the wicked be, if they might return to their grave again,
and never hear and feel that dreadful doom of divine justice, denounced and
inflicted upon them, at that last everlasting judgment in Hell, Gregor. Moral.
Vbi erit miseris mors sine morte, finis sine fine, defectus sine defectu, quia
mors ibi semper incipit, and deficere nescit; where the wicked shall be ever
burning, and yet never consume; ever dying, and yet never dead; for there is
death without a death, an end without an end, because death always begins, and
knows not how to end. If Death be acceptable unto the aged, whose strength
fails, and are vexed with all kind of evil things, Eccles. 41. verse. 2. and
are deprived of all kind of good, belonging unto a natural life, as of
Seeing, Hearing, Tasting, Smelling, Feeling, how much more welcome would Death
be unto the wicked at that dreadful day of judgment, when they are banished
out of the society of Saints, excluded out of heaven, sent packing to hell,
where their sight shall be afflicted with uncomfortable darkness, and ugly
Devils, their smelling with noisome stinks, their taste with ravenous hunger
and bitterness of gall, their hearing with hideous and horrible cries, their
feeling with intolerable fire; yet notwithstanding, death shall be far from
them, Hell must be their habitation, the Devils their companions, and they must
embrace flames of fire in their arms, for their inheritance.

5. The Prophet Malachie in his fourth Chapter, verse. 1. prophesying of the
terrible day of the Lords coming, compares and likens it to an Oven: Behold,
the day comes, that shall burn as an Oven, and all the proud, yea, and all
that do wickedly shall be stubble, and the day that comes shall burn them
up, so that there shall not be left neither root nor branch. The Oven
whereinto the three Children were cast, was exceeding fearful, being made
seven times more hot, then it was wont to be, and yet not an hair of their
head was burnt, nor their coats changed, nor any smell of fire came upon them,
Dan. 3.27. But how dreadful shall this furnace of hell be, being so infinitely
hotter then that was! Our Savior Christ calls it a furnace of fire, Mat.
13.42.50. S. John the Divine, a lake of fire and brimstone, Revel. 21.8. The
Apostle to the Hebrews, a devouring fire, Heb. 10.27. an unquenchable fire,
Matthew. 3.12. wherein all unbelievers, and the abominable, and murderers, and
whoremongers, and sorcerers, and all liars, the proud, and all that do
wickedly, shall be fuel: for they shall be bound in sheaues and bundles, says
our Savior Christ, Matthew. 13.30. The Adulterer and the Adulteress in one
bundle, the Drunkard and the Glutton in another bundle, the Covetous and
Extortioner in another bundle, the Usurer and the Oppressor in another bundle,
the Swearer and the false Swearer in another bundle, the Contemners of God and
Breakers of his Sabbaths in another bundle, and shall be cast as faggots and
firebrarnds into this Oven, into this furnace, into this lake of brimstone,
into this devouring and unquenchable fire; vbi nec tortores deficient, nec
torti miseri morientur, where their torments shall never cease, but there shall
be torments always for the body, and body always for the torments, world
without end.

6. Our Savior Christ setting forth the desperate estate, and condition of of
the wicked at that day, says, Anxietas gentium in consilij inopia, Bez. vsque
ad desperationem, Ierom.
that there shall be distress of nations with perplexity, Luke 21. the word
(...) and (...) properly belongs unto captives and prisoners, that are so shut
up in dungeons, or close prisoners, and brought unto such a doubtful and
narrow strait, that there is no means possible for them to get out:
Regiomentaenus in Brussia.
or alluding unto some kind of prisons, wherein the party imprisoned is in
such a perplexity, that he can neither sit, stand upright, nor lie upon the
ground: such is the estate of the wicked at that day; they are in such a
strait, in such a perplexity, even unto desperation, that they see no means
possible to escape the hand of God. If they look upward, there is Index
iratus, Greg.
an angry Judge; if they look downward, there is horrendum inferni chaos, the
horrible wide gaping mouth of hell; if they look on the one side of them,
there are peccata accusantia, their sins accusing them, if they look on the
other side of them, there are infinita daemonia ad supplicium trahentia, Anselm.
a Legion of devils ready to draw them to execution; if they look without
them, there is mundus ardens, a world of fire burning round about them, ready
to devour them; if they look within them, there is conscientia vrens, a
griping conscience, the worm that never dies; Latere erit impossible, to lie
hid it will be impossible, apparere erit intolerabile, to go forward 'twill be
intolerable. No marvel therefore though at the worlds end, men be at their
wits end, Luke. 21.26. Hinc illae lachrimae, hence arise Esaus tears, to no
end nor purpose; Hinc eiulatuum angustiae, hence arises a horrible howling,
when all the wicked shall be gathered together as prisoners in the pit, and
shall be shut up inprison, Isaiah 23, 22. to be arraigned at the bar of Gods
tribunal, and to receive according to those things, which they have done in
the flesh, 2. Cor. 5.10. Then tribulation and anguish, nay, desperation shall be
upon the soul of every one that does evil, Romans 2.9. then shall the wicked not
be able to stand; because they have walked in the counsel of the wicked, and
stood too long in the way of sinners, Psa. 1.1. They cannot sit; because they
have been too long sit fast in sin, and Moablike, have weltred in the dregs
of their own impieties, or as the Psalmist speaks, have sit too long in the
seat of the scornful. They cannot lie along upon the ground, because they
have had a sufficient portion of rest already, they have lived at case all
their life long, and done nothing but stretch themselves upon their beds of
down, spent their days in chambering and wantonness, taking thought for the
flesh, to fulfill the lust thereof; and like the Israelites, sit down to eat
and drink, and so rise up to play: but now their joy shall be turned into
heaviness, their mirth into mourning, their singing into sighing, their case
and rest into caselesse pains, and restless torments, for the wicked shall be
turned into hell, and so shall al they that do forget God.

If we look back again unto the Text, the Parent of my doctrine, we shall
find, that it will yield much strength to the confirmation of this truth; then
shall the Kings of the earth, and great men, and rich men, etc. They that in
their life time have been able to control whole Kingdoms with their
countenance, and chase before them millions of men, shall be compeld to seek
such weak shelters, such bootlesse refuges, as to hide themselves in dens,
creep into the craggie rocks, and hollow vaults of the earth, as though that
the infinitely-discerning eye of Almighty God could not find them out: though
they could go down into the very depth of the sea, or center of the earth,
whither can they go or clime from the al-discerning eye of Almighty God?
though in their life time they think, that they shall never be removed, but
are as seemingly safe as Nebuchadnezar, or as secure from danger as Edom,
though now their greatness reaches unto heaven, and their dominion to the
ends of the earth, Dan. 4.19 though now they build themselves stately houses,
for the honor of their Majesty, verse. 27. Though now they seem to dwell in
the clefts of the rocks, secure and far enough remote out of danger; mounting
aloft like Eagles in the air, making their nest among the Stars, Obad. v. 3.
as though no danger should ever come nigh their dwellings. Yet Kings with their
Armies then shall fly, and be discomfited, and yet cannot fly from the
presence of God, nor from beyond the reach of his arm. Thus you see, that the
truth of this doctrine is confirmed by many proofs, that the estate and
condition of the wicked is full of horror, at the dreadful day of Judgment.

Ob signorum multitudinem.
Now the reasons of this doctrine are many: the first is this, by reason of the
manifold signs, and fearful apparitions both in heaven and earth, which will
strike an horror, dread and amazedness into the hearts of the wicked: Saint
Matthew describes them thus; the Sun shall be darkened, and the Moon shall
not give her light, the Stars shall fall from heaven, and the Powers of heaven
shall be shaken, Mat. 24.29. The words are to be understood not metaphorically,
but properly of the alteration of the works of nature; as adjuncts,
circumstances, and fearful presages of that dismal day; when the Sun shall
not stand still only, as at the prayer of Iosuah, Ios. 10.12. neither shall it
only go backward ten degrees, as upon Ahaz Dial, Isa. 38.8. but it shall be
as black as a sackcloth of hair, Revel. 6.12. We read, that there was an
exceeding great darkness of the Sun at our Saviors Passion throughout all
the land, and many bodies of the Saints which slept, arose, Matthew. 27.52. How
fearful then, and how wonderful shall the coming of Christ unto Judgment
be, when the Sun, the Moon, and the Stars, and all the powerful
influences of heaven, shall grow black, duskie, and utterly be obscured? when
all the dead, Saints, and sinners, great and small, both in Sea and land, shall
come forth of their graves, whereof the first was a type and figure, Mat. 24.31
when the Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shoute, and with the
voice of the Archangell, and with the trumpet of God, 1. These. 4.16. Saint Luke
likewise describes the circumstances of that day thus, There shall be signs in
the Sun, and in the Moon, and in the Stars, the Sea, and the waters shall
roar, men's hearts shall fail them for fear, and for looking after these
things that shall come upon the world, Luke 21. verse. 25. An Earthquake of it
self is very fearful; as threatening the ruins of Cities, hazarding the
subversion of many stately buildings, and shaking the very foundations of Kings
Palaces; and the inundation of waters has been very terrible, as our Western
parts can very well witness; when men even wished for Noah's Arc again, and
sought the highest places for refuge, against the merciless waves of the Sea;
some climbing the clifts of craggy rocks, some steeples, some the tops of
houses, some trees, some floated upon the waters, like Paul and his companions;
many were drowned. But now when the Seas shall roar, Rocks shall rent,
Mountains shake and shiuer, and the glorious Heavens become dark and dusky:
how shall the hearts of men be appaled with dread and terror to behold the
same: and yet notwithstanding, these things are but the beginning of sorrows,
says our Savior Christ, but a Preamble, but a Proem, but a Prologue to the
Tragedy.

I am not ignorant but that the darkning of the Sun, the Moon, and the
Stars in the holy Scripture, may sometimes be taken for some kind of
calamity ready to fall upon some particular Kingdom; and that these signs do
not always denotate properly the last day of Judgment: but may be referd to
some other particular times of judgment; as the great overthrow of the
Babylonish Kingdom, Isa. 13. or the last total and final destruction of the
Jews by the Romans, Luke 21. or that celestial and truly Divine victory of
Constantine the Great, against Maxentius and the Roman Governors; in the
which the great power of almighty God, miraculously shone from heaven, in
revenging the precious blood of the blessed Martyrs. So the Wiseman exhorting
us to think on God in youth, and not to defer repentance until we be old;
draws one of his motives and arguments to induce us thereunto ab incommodo,
from the manifold inconveniences and impediments accompanying old age, that
will hinder us from the true performance of so weighty a work: Repent, says
he, and turn to God while the Sun is not dark, nor the Moon, nor the
Stars, Eccles. 12.2. that is, before old age approaches, when thou shall
have no more pleasure in thy days, then if thou were shut up in a dark
dungeon, and debard of the comfort and benefit of those great and glorious
lights of Heaven.

Why the state and condition of the wicked is full of horror at the day of
Judgment, Ob Iudicis, Maiestatem.
is, the Majesty of the Judge, the beholding of whose countenance, so full of
glory and majesty, shall possess the hearts of the wicked with amazement and
astonishment. Now the Judge at this great Assise and general Audit, is Christ
himself; he that once stood before the judgment seat of Pontius Pilate to
receive his sentence, shall now summon Pontius Piliate, and all the Potentates
of the earth unto his Consistory, to receive their dreadful doom. That Christ
is the sole Judge at the last day; they are his own words. The Father judges
no man but has committed all judgment unto the Son, John 5. v. 22. And has
committed unto him all power and authority to execute judgment, because he is
the Son of man, v. 27. Because he is the Son of man; and this cause yields
us comfort, else were we in a miserable case, he does partake of our nature;
and therefore is pitiful, compassionate: yea, far beyond humane reach or
reason; the Apostles likewise were commanded to testify this truth, and to
preach this point; that Christ is ordained by God, to be Judge of the quick
and dead, Act. 10. v. 42. So likewise in the 17. Act. 31. Paul preaching to the
Athenians, presses repentance; and the argument which he uses to provoke them
thereunto, is the consideration of the day of Judgment; when God will judge
the world in righteousness by that man, that is, Christ whom he has
ordained. So likewise the Apostle in the second to the Romans, ver. 16. God
shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ. And in the second to Timothy,
c. 4. verse. 1. Jesus Christ shall judge the quick and dead at his appearing.
Whereby it is manifest, that neither the Saints nor the Angels, not God
himself: but mediante Christo, by Christ, into whose hands he has resigned
all power and authority, shall judge all the world at the last day.

Whereunto if any object the words of the Apostle, in the first to the
Corinthians the 6. c. v. 2.3. The Saints shall judge the world, and not only
the world, but the Angels too: I answer, that there is such a narrow band and
strict union, betwixt Christ and the Saints, that they make one body: so that
which is granted unto the head, is not denied unto the body: Christ as the
chief principal upon that Bench, does pronounce that sentence already
revealed unto us in the Gospel, Matthew. 25. v. 41. and the Saints as witnesses,
shall subscribe unto that sentence, and triumph at the just condemnation of the
wicked. This is manifest by the mouth of our Savior Christ, Ye which have
followed me in the regeneration, shall sit upon twelve Thrones, and judge the
twelve tribes of Israel, Matthew. 19. v. 28. or as some of the Fathers do
expound the place, Amb. Chry. in hunc locum.
The Saints shall judge the world: Quia exemplo fidei perfidiam mundi
damnabunt, as our Savior speaks of the Ninevites, and of the Queen of the
South; that they should rise up against the Jews to condemn them at the day
of Judgment, that is, by the example of their faith, they shall condemn them
of infidelity. Thus Noah is said, by preparing the Arc, to save him and his
posterity from the general Deluge of water, to condemn the world of
infidelity, who would not believe at the preaching of Noah, that the world
should be destroyed with water, as many Atheists and Epicures now a days, at
our preaching will not believe, that the world shall be destroyed with fire,
Heb. 11. verse. 7. and unto this Origin says well; Orig. Hom. in Numb.
Non Paulus ipse sed opus Pauli, quod faciebat in Euangelio, iudicabit mundum:
So that to conclude, the Faith, the Life, the Doctrine, the Death of the
Saints, for the testimony of the truth, shall condemn the wicked at the last
day.

And whereas it is said, the Saints shall judge the Angels (leaving Saint
Chrysostomes opinion, In hunc locum.
who would by Angels to be understood Ministers, who are called Angels, Apoc.
2.1. and so the Bishops of the Churches of Asia are called Angels) we may
safely and most truly understand the spiritual powers, Angels that fell from
their first estate, and so are become reprobate Devils: these cursed crew, I
say, that are reserved in everlasting chains under darkness, unto the judgment
of the great day, Jude 6. shall yield themselves subject unto the censure and
sentence of the Saints.

Thus having showed, who that Judge shall be, it remains that I speak of his
Majesty, as far as it is revealed unto us in his word. As a King providing
for war, makes choice of such men, as may best serve to set forth the
royalty of a King, and for their valor able to encounter with the best of his
approaching enemies: So Christ, when he comes riding upon the clouds, to
encounter with the inhabitants of the earth, for sin, he will come in power
and great glory, Luke 21.27. and this his power does consist in a glorious
multitude of heavenly attendants; not silly Fishermen, as in the days of his
infirmity, but a glorious troop of holy Saints and blessed Angels, as
consorting with him at the appearing of his Majesty. Behold, (...), Jude 14
he comes, says S. Jude, with thousand of his Saints, to give judgment
against all men, and to rebuke all the ungodly; and as Christ shall come with
his many Saints, so shall he appear with his infinite troop and train of
Angels. For thousand thousands shall minister unto him, and ten thousand
thousands shall stand before him, yea he shall come with all his holy Angels,
Dan. 7.10. which is to be understood of Christ, and his coming to Judgment:
for in the ninth verse mention is made of the Ancient of days, sitting down
upon his Throne; that is, God the Father: and in the thirteenth verse it is
added, that the Son of man approached unto the Ancient of days, which gave
unto him power, honor and a Kingdom: that is, Christ, into whose hands, God
the Father has given power and authority of judging the quick and the dead, at
the last day. Now if Iehoram was half astonished at the furious marching of
Iehu and his company, and therefore sent forth horsemen to meet him, and
enquire whether it were peace or no, 2. King. 9.16. how much more will it
strike the wicked with amazement, and dreadful astonishment, when they shall
see Christ coming against them with millions of Saints, and Legions of Angels,
and no conditions of peace will be accepted of, but he will bruise them with a
rod of iron, and break them in pieces like a Potters Vessel? Psalm. 2.9. And
he will not only come in power, but in glory, in great glory: and no
marvel, for the Father has glorified him, and will glorify him again, when
he has gathered together the Elect, from the four corners of the earth, and
both shall make one glorious body in that Kingdom, so full of glory, where
their Hymns and Haleluiahs shall be glory, and honor, etc. for ever and for
ever. It is the observation of some upon the 24. of Matthew. that the Sun shall
be darkened, Ferus Spangin.
and the Moon shall not give her light, at the bright shining and glorious
appearing of Christ Jesus. As greater lights are wont to obscure the lesser (as
the bright beams of the Sun, the glimmering light of a Candle) so the
exceeding brightness and transcendent glory of Christ, at his appearing, shall
darken all those glorious lamps and lights of heaven, whose sweet influence,
and comfortable beams we now enjoy day by day. To this S. John the Divine
alludeth. 1. These. 1.7. Act. 1.11.
He had in his right hand seven stars, and out of his mouth went a sharp
two-edged sword, and his face shone as the Sun shines in his strength,
Revel. 1.16. S. Paul setting forth the glory of his coming, says, He shall
come in flaming fire, with the sound of an Archangell: he shall come in the
clouds, and ride upon the wings of the wind. Saint Matthew thus; Then shall
he sit upon a Throne of glory, and before him shall be gathered all Nations,
Matthew. 24.31. The gloriousness of which Throne Daniel describes, saying: His
Throne was like a fiery flame, and the wheels like burning fire, Dan. 7.6. And
if the Earth and the Sea do reele too and fro, start and stagger, and fly
away* Revel. 20.11. as not being able to behold the glory, nor endure the face
of this approaching Judge: how much less shall the wicked be able to stand,
which are inutile terrae pondus, the very chafe, the dross, the offscouring
of the earth, and therefore no marvel, though they go into the holes of the
Rocks, and into the Caves of the earth, from before the fear of the Lord, and
from the glory of his Majesty, when he shall arise to destroy the earth, Isaiah
2.19. Mallent enim impij esse in inferno, quam videre faciem irati Iudicis. The
wicked had rather be thrown down to hell, where is utter darkness, then
endure the glorious presence of so angry* a Judge. If S. John the blessed
Reuelator of heavens secrets, fell at the feet of Christ as dead, when he
beheld him, Reu. 1. v. 17. If Moses that man of God, could not endure the face
of God: but covered his eyes with a veil: If the Seraphins that stand about
the Throne of God, cover their faces with two of their wings, as not being able
to behold the glorious Majesty of God, how shall the Majesty of this our great
God, ever our Savior Jesus Christ, Tit. 2.13. daunt the hearts of the wicked
at his appearing, even more then can be expressed?

The third reason, why the estate and condition of the wicked is so full of
horror at the Day of Judgment, is; by reason of the strict account that they
must render: All men without any exception, Adam and all his posterity; as many
as have been dead before, and as many as are then living: and they that are
then living, shall not prevent them that sleep: I say all men, and so says
the Apostle, We shall all appear before the Judgment seat of Christ, Romans
14. v. 10. Every one of us shall give an account of himself to God, v. 12. And
every man shall receive the things which are done in his body, according to
that he has done, whether it be good or evil, 2. Cor. 5. v. 10. And not
only all men, but all the Angels which kept not their first estate, but left
their own habitation, 2. Pet. 3.4.
are reserved in everlasting chains, under darkness, unto the Judgment of
the Great Day, Jude, verse. 6. This truth the Devils themselves did confirm by
their desperate crying out, fearing their present execution, unto the which
they themselves know they are reserved; Quid nobis and tibi, What have we to
do with thee, Jesus, thou Son of God? art thou come to torment us before the
time? Matthew. 8. v. 29. And this fear is the chains and fetters before
mentioned, in the which the Devils are manacled, until they be brought forth
unto the full execution of the wrath of God in Hell, the place of Devils, and
all the damned.

And not only men, and Devils; but unreasonable creatures, the heaven and the
earth, and whatsoever is contained within this spacious Universe, shall be
judged also after their manner at that day. So says Saint Peter, The heavens
and the earth are reserved unto fire against the day of Judgment, and of the
destruction of ungodly men, and the heavens shall pass away with a noise, that
is, they shall pass away from a mutable condition, unto an immutable degree of
perfection; The Elements shall melt with heat, and the earth with the works
that are therein shall be burnt up. Not that the great Fabric, and glorious
workmanship of heaven and earth shall be burnt, and brought to nothing: for the
earth remains for ever, Eccles. 1. v. 3. Sed ab ea quae nunc habet specie,
per ignem tergetur, ea tamen in sua natura seruatur, Greg. l. 17. Moral. c. 5.
They shall be purged of their corruptible qualities, and purified from the
filth of their imperfectio^s, as the Sun and Moon shall be no more eclipsed,
and sublunary things shall be no more subject to generation and corruption: but
as the gold cast into the fire, is purged from the dross, whereby it becomes a
refined substance; so the heavens and the earth shall put on, as it were, new
apparel, adorned with a new fashion: for the (...).
fashion of this world passes away, 1. Cor. 7.31. but not the nature and
substance. Hierom proves as much by that place, Isa. 30.26. The light of the
Moon shall be as the light of the Sun, and the light of the Sun shall be
seuen-fold; non interitum significat pristinorum, sed commutationem in melius.
Whereby the holy Ghost does signify, not a destruction of those lights which
were before; but a change into a better. Calvin goes farther, saying; that
they shall be fellows with the Saints in that glorious estate. And so says
the Apostle, the (...). Non singula generum, sed genera singulorum, Ordi.
Gloss. (...).
Creature (that is the world) shall be delivered from the bondage of
corruption, into the glorious liberty of the Sons of God, Romans 8. v. 21. So
Acts 3.21. there is promised a (...). Non singula generum, sed genera
singulorum, Ordi. Gloss. (...).
restoration of all things; So Psalm. 10. The heavens shall all wax old as does
a garment, and they shall be changed, that is, into a better form and fashion.
So S. John saw a new Heaven, and a new earth, Apo. 21.1. So S. Peter, We look
for a new heaven, and a new earth, according to his promise, etc. v. 13. Hence
is it, that the perpetuity of Christ his spiritual Kingdom, is shadowed out
unto us by the continuance of the Sun and Moon. His Throne shall be as the
Sun, Psalm. 89. v. 36.37. and shall be established for evermore as the Moon,
Psalm. 72. ve s. 5. Gods children shall fear him, so long as the Sun and
Moon indureth, verse. 7. And Christ his name shall endure, so long as the
Sun, verse. 17. Therefore it must be granted, that these creatures shall be
restored, and so continue without decay, or corruption; or else it must must
be yielded, that Christ's Kingdom must have an end, which may not be granted.
But after what manner this instauration shall be, it is not manifested unto us
in the word of God: and to what end they shall serve, whether as Monuments of
Gods glory; it were curiosity to search or determine, sufficient is it to know,
that they shall be judged after their kind.

But if any should object against what has bin spoken, as namely, that al men
shall give an account: The sixth verse of the first Psalm, the wicked shall not
stand in Judgment, And that of John 5.24. He that believes in him that sent
me, has everlasting life, and shall not come into Judgment. Lombardus ex
Gregorio binos facit ordines Iudicandorum, alij iudicantur and pereunt, alij
non iudicantur and pereunt, alij iudicantur and regnant, alij non iudicantur
and regnant, Lomb. l. 4. did. 49.
These places indeed have much troubled the Fathers, in so much, that Hillarie
and Origin were of opinion, that neither the godly Faithful, nor the wicked
Infidels shall be judged: the one being cleared, the other condemned in their
own conscience. Ambrose thinks, that the righteous only shall come into
Judgment, quia festinant innoxij adiudicium, the righteous they do hasten to
Judgment, and long to hear that comfortable sentence pronounced: Come ye
blessed of my Father, etc. But the places may better be reconciled thus: there
is a twofold Judgment, a Judgment of absolution, and a Judgment of
condemnation. The wicked shall not stand in that Judgment, which the righteous
shall receive, as namely, to be quitted and absolved. The latter part of the
verse thus expounding the former, nor the sinners in the assembly of the
righteous: and the righteous shall not come into Judgment, that is, shall not
be condemned with the wicked: for they shall both be judged apart, the one at
the right hand, Mat. 25.34.41. Non iudicabitur.i. no^ condemnabitur, Irenaeus.
the other at the left hand of Christ, and shall receive a far different
doom, as far as a curse differs from a blessing, hell from heaven; so that
the Texts alleged are thus to be reconciled; The righteous shall not come
into Judgment (that is) into condemnation; the wicked shall not stand in
Judgment, (that is) they shall be convinced in their own conscience of the
just sentence, and deserved condemnation, that they shall not be able to gain
say, or contradict.

Now the strictness of their account will appear, if we, consider how many
things they shall be called unto an account for. First, De cogitationibus.
of the thoughts of our hearts, though never so secretly contrived, though
never uttered by the tongue, though never acted by the hand, yet if there be a
deliberate consent, and free approbation of the will and affections, and a full
resolution to put the same in practice, if we had place and fit opportunity; I
say, this sin of thought shall not go for naught at the day of Judgment;
else why should the Lord take notice of all the imaginations of the thoughts of
his heart? Genes. 6.5. why should the Lord desire so much the heart, My son,
give me thy heart: but because it is the root and fountain, either of good
or evil? If it be the storehouse of good things, and Treasury of divine
meditations, it is a Temple meet for God to dwell in: but if it be a cage of
unclean birds, of evil thoughts, it is already possessed with so many devils.
If the evil thoughts of the heart were not sins, and so by a consequent come
to Judgment: Why should the Lord style himself the searcher of the heart, and
trier of the reins, were it not so punish? according to the saying of the Wise
man; There shall inquisition be made for the thoughts of the ungodly, there
shall not a wicked thought pass in Judgment, Wis. 1.9. If adultery be a
sin, and lusting after a woman, though it breaks not out into act, be
adultery, Matthew. 5.28. And no adulterer shall enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven, 1. Cor. 6.9.10. then are the thoughts of the heart sin, and so by a
consequent, they shall come to Judgment, and shall prevail in Judgment. If
manslaughter be a sin, as indeed it is a crying sin: 1. Ioh. 4.15
and if he that hates his brother be a manslayer, and no manslayer shall
inherit the Kingdom of Heaven, Revel. 21.8. then are the thoughts of the
heart, sin, and they shall be brought forth to the condemnation of the
wicked, at the day of Judgment. Hence is it, that our Savior Christ so
sharply inueigheth against the Scribes and Pharisees, who stood so much upon
their own righteousness in fulfilling the Law; thinking that if they did not
violate the Law in act, by killing, or committing adultery, or by any other
actual transgression, contrary to the Law of God, that they had performed the
Law to a hairs breadth. But our Savior reproouing them and their
righteousness, which they did so much extol, that they should not enter into
the Kingdom of Heaven, notwithstanding this their righteousness, shows,
that there was a stricter course required in performing the Law: for whosoever
is angry with his brother unadvisedly, shall be culpable of judgment, Matthew.
5.22. The Law condemns every inclination to be evil, and the heart does kill
as well as the hand, in will, in wish, in desire: the heart commits
adultery, the heart does steal as well, or rather ill, as the outward members.
For if we consent to those wicked motions suggested by Satan, (though we never
perform them outwardly in act) yet before God we have done the sin: and if
the thought be truly sin, far greater is that sin of act. Yea, the sin
of thought is not only a sin, but is the very original, the fountain, and
root, from whence all other sins do spring; and therefore says our Savior
Christ, That which goes into the man, defiles not the man: but those things
which come forth from the heart, as evil thoughts, murders adulteries,
fornications, thefts, false witnesses, blasphemies, these defile the man, Mat.
15.19. So that there is not a sin, of what nature soever, great or small,
from the least infirmity to the highest blasphemy, but it had its first
beginning from the heart: thought is the seed of all sins, and though but a
spark at the first, yet will it increase into a flame, if it be not repressed.
For this is sins gradation, first, Hall. Meditat.
there is presented a fit object; from the object, is raised an il suggestion,
suggestion brings on delight, delight consent, consent endeavor, endeavor
practice, practice custom, custom excuse, excuse defense, defense obstinacy,
obstinacy boasting of sin, and boasting of sin a reprobate sense; when the
custom of sin has taken away the sense of sin, and miserable man is sold
as a bondslaue unto Satan to commit wickedness, even with greedines. And
therefore Salomons counsel in this kind is very worthy to be embraced. Keep
thine heart with all diligence, for thereout comes life: If thou keep it
not diligently, and warily, thereout will proceed death, Proverbs, 4.23. As
Christ's advice unto the Church is, that the little Heresies.
Foxes be taken, and be killed whilst they are but Cubs, (not that they can do
much harm, but if they live until they be Foxes, they will spoil, kill, and
make a prey of any thing whatsoever:) even so the thoughts of the heart at the
first, may seem to be but small sins; but if they be not slain at the
first, and smothered as soon as they be conceived, they will break forth into
actual transgressions, and so lade the soul with sin; kill therefore these
Cockatrices in the egg, slay them whilst they be but Cubs: Oh, happy is he
that takes these young children, and dasheth their brains against the stones:
and so much the rather, because they are sins, and shall come to Judgment,
for the Lord shall judge the secrets of men, Romans 2.16.

Secondly, Inquisition shall not only be made of the thoughts of the heart,
but we must also give an account of the words of the mouth: They are the words
of him that is the word of truth; Of every idle word that men shall speak,
they shall give an account thereof at the day of Judgment, Matthew. 12.36. If a
man might be called to an account but for his grosser sort of sins, as for
his Whoredom, Swearing, Cheating, Stealing, Vsuries, Briberies, Extortions,
dishallowing of Sabbaths, and the like; there were some hope of safety,
although, God knows, there is no hope of the salvation of such, without a
speedy and unfeigned repentance; which does consist in an holy confession of
their sins; in an hearty sorrowing for the same; Sermonem otiosum vocat
inanem, and nullius vtilitatis, qui sc: nihil aedificatienis, vel fructus
adfert, Marlor. ex Cal^.
in a faithful restitution of that which he has taken from any man by
falsity and wrong, and in a godly reformation of his forepast life: but God
will bring into judgment, not only every secret thought, but every idle word:
and who, alas, shall be able to answer him, one of a thousand? Job 9.3. Now an
idle word is that, which is spoken without a fruitful edification of the
hearers: for our words ought not only to be few, but also they must be good,
and gracious, they must be sauoury, and well seasoned with the salt of the
Sanctuary, and therefore Job calls the ear the taster of the Word; that as we,
in the common food of our body swallow not any thing down into the stomach,
but what the pallat approues to be good, and the grinders prepare for
digestion: so the ear will not give passage unto any word, unless it relish
of the Spirit of sanctification, and be truly good to the use of edifying,
and may convey some spiritual nourishment unto the soul: and therefore it is
the exhortation of the blessed Apostle, Let no communication proceed out of the
mouth, but that which is good, to the use of edifying, that it may minister
grace unto the hearers, Ephesians. 4.29. The tongue is the Harbinger of the heart,
and the truest Ambassador, both of the mind and meaning, it will soon discry
and make manifest unto others, what Countrymen we are, whether we belong unto
the Province of Babel, or the Land of Canaan. If we belong unto the Province
of Heaven, then our speech is of this Country, our language is heavenly; we
are frequent in praising of God, in talking of his Word, and in telling forth
what great things the Lord has done unto our souls: as our affections are in
heaven, so is our talk of heaven, and heavenly things. But if we belong unto
that infernal Kingdom, then is the speech carnal, sensual, diabolical;
then is the tongue exercised in the language of that Country, in swearing,
false-swearing, cursing, banning, and blaspheming: then is our communication
such, as may help to advance the Kingdom of Satan, whereof we our selves are
limbs, and whereof hereafter without repentance, we shall be everlastingly
burning, and never consuming firebrarnds.

To conclude therefore, if every man must giue-an account of every idle word,
not tending to the edification of himself and others, and of all corrupt and
filthy communication, whereby he has grieved the holy Spirit of God, Ephos.
4.30. Tremble then, thou swearing and false swearing tongue, whose Rhetoric
and Eloquence of common talk, is an execrable oath, nay, as many oaths as
words: thou that can not sell a penny worth, or a pound weight, without
dozens of oaths: we have a world full of such tongues, and because of such kind
of tongues the la^d mournes; Gods heavy judgments are gone out against it: if
account must be made of every idle word, what shall become of that tongue that
has pleaded an unjust cause to the perverting of Justice, wresting the Law, to
the utter undoing of the fatherless and widows? what shall become of that
tongue, that cannot speak a word, in the defense of the poor, unless it be
well tipped with gold, the oil that makes every joint to be nimble, and every
bad cause to go for current? If account must be made of every idle word, then
stand amazed, thou vain and wanton tongue, understand and quake when thou
hear mentioned the terrible day of Judgment; thou, whose words do not only
not tend to edification, but to disgrace the Scripture, the word of God it
self; thou that think no jest will go for current, unless it be seasoned
with the salt of the Sanctuary: such is the profaneness of the age in which
we live, that every Actor upon the stage, every profane Swaggerer, and every
mincing Minion cannot speak a word, but must have a fling and gird at
sanctified Scripture; assuredly, thine account is the greatest, thy case
fearful, thy judgment intolerable. Let every man therefore take heed unto
his ways, that he offend not in his tongue; let him refrain his tongue from
evil; let him desire the Lord to set a watch before his lips, that he may not
speak his own words, but such as the Lord by his word commands him to
speak; for if our words are not such as they ought to be, we shall give an
account for them at the day of Judgment.

3. We shall not only be called unto an account for our thoughts, De operibus.
and words, but also of our works, wheresoever and whenever committed,
whether by day, or by night; whether in the field, or in the City; whether in
the City, or in the house; whether in the house, or in our chamber; whether in
our chamber, or in our bed; there is nothing covered, that shall not be
revealed; nothing hid, that shall not be known, and made manifest, before
God, before the Angels, before Saints, before the whole world, at the day of
Judgment: so says the blessed Apostle, We must all appear before the
Judgment seat of Christ, and there receive according to our works, 2. Cor.
5.10. God will give unto every man according to his ways, and according to the
fruit of his works; they that have done good, shall go into everlasting life,
but they that have done ill, shall go into everlasting fire: This, God himself
revealed to S. John for truth it self: I saw the dead, great and small, stand
before God, and they were judged according to their works, Apoc. 20.12. To
this purpose says August. In quibus actibus quisque homo inuentus fuerit,
quando exierit de corpore, in his iudicabitur; in what sins soever man goes out
of the body unrepented of, of the same he shall be judged at the day of
Judgment: as the Preacher therefore concludes his Book; so will I conclude
this point, God will bring every work unto Judgment, with every secret thing,
whether it be good or evil, Eccles. 12. v. 14.

4. Neither shall we be only called unto an account for our thoughts, our
words, and works: but also for our goods and possessions, how we have gotten
them, how we have kept them, how we have spent them; whether we have gained
our goods through others hurt, building our houses like the Moth, Job 27. verse.
12. The Moth is made fat by spoiling the book and barks wherein they live;
so the covetous is made rich in devouring the poor: Of which sort are these,
Usurers, Extortioners, Cheaters, Brokers, and all covetous Ahabs whatsoever,
that join house to house, land to land, until there be no place for the poor
to dwell in: For great men must render great account, when that great Landlord
comes to reckon with them, and biddes them give an account of their
steward-ship: for they may be no longer stewards. Secondly, we shall give an
account how we have kept them. Indeed we are but keepers of our wealth,
though we had the world at will: Amb. l. de Nab. c. 14.
Custos es tuarum, non Dominus facultatum, Thou art but a keeper, thou art not
Lord over thy goods and substance. Chrysostom.
Deus enim diuitiarum suarum dispensatores esse voluit, non Dominos: God will
have us dispensers and disposers of our goods, unto the good of others, and not
to be Lords over them our selves; and therefore they be goods, Non quod faciunt
bonum, sed vnde facias bonum: not that they make a man good, but because a man
by them may do good, employing them to the glory of God, and the good of his
neighbor, and his own comfort. First, unto God, laying out temporal things,
for spiritual comforts: in maintaining the Preachers, in defending the
Gospel, in repayring his Temples. Secondly, thou must lay them out upon thy
neighbor; making friends of thine unrighteous Mammon, as thy Master commands
thee, Luke 16. v. 9. Stips pauperum thesaurus inopum, was the word of the good
Emperor Constantius, The rich man's treasure, is the poor man's stock; so that
he that denies them what they stand in need of, denies them their due; of which
sort Saint James speaks of, that have their presses full of garments, and their
chests full of coin: but their gold and silver is cankered, their garments
motheaten, whiles Christ himself in the person of a beggar, stands at their
door with an empty belly, and a naked back, crying for a morsel of bread to
put in their belly, or some old cast garment to cover their nakedness, and yet
they are sent away as comfortless and as empty-handed, as ever they came
thither. No marvel therefore, though Saint James so sharply inueigheth against
rich men, against such kind of keepers of their goods: Go to now, ye rich
men, weep and howl, for the miseries that shall come upon you; your riches are
corrupted, and your garments motheaten, your gold and silver is cankered, and
the rust of them shall be a witness against you, and shall eat up your flesh,
as it were fire; ye have heaped up treasure against the last days, James 5. v.
1.2.3. Thirdly, he shall give an account how he has spent them; whether upon
works of superstition to the dishonor of God; or in the unnecessary quarrels
of the Law, to the hinderance of his neighbor, or in spending of them upon
Whores and Harlots, until pox and penury be his end; or in surfeiting and
drunkenness; to the ruinating of his estate, danger of soul, hurt of body,
loss of credit, grief of friends, undoing of his children; 1. Tim. 5.8.
and such a one is worse then an Infidel. To conclude therefore this point,
every man must give his account unto God; the King as well as the Subjects, the
Prince as well as the People, Ministers and Magistrates, Parents and children,
Masters and servants, rich and poor, good and bad, and every transgression
from the highest blasphemy, to the least infirmity, must be brought to a strict
trial at the Day of Judgment. Which is the third reason aggravating the
fearful estate and condition of the wicked at the Day of Judgment.

The fourth reason why the estate and condition of the wicked is so full of
horror at the Day of Judgment, is, by reason of the multitude of witnesses,
and accusers, which shall come forth to witness, accuse, and condemn them at
that Day. As first of all, GOD himself above them, which knows and seals
up their sins, as it were in a bag, Job 14.17. And therefore says Job, in a
case of controversy that could not be decided; My witness is in heaven. So
Samuel declaring to the people his integrity, how uprightly he had conuerst
amongst them; he takes the Lord to be a witness betwixt him and the people,
1. Sam. 12. v. 5. Whereby we may see how fearful a thing it is, thus to dally
with our all-seeing and all-knowing God; as to call his sacred Majesty, to be a
witness in matters of untruth, contrary to our own knowledge, and the testimony
of our own conscience. For assuredly the Lord will be a witness, a swift
witness; they are the words of his own mouth: I will be a swift witness
against the Sorcerers, against the Adulterers, against false swearers, against
those that oppress the hireling in his wages, the widow and the fatherless,
and that turn aside the stranger from his right, and fear not me, says the
Lord of hosts, Mal. 3. v. 5.

The second sort of accusers are the Devils, the whole rabble of that infernal
Kingdom; the common and sworn adversaries to all mankind, and if they dare to
accuse the brethren, the Saints, and servants of God: as he did that perfect
and upright man of God, holy Job. Assuredly this will be his practice at that
day, he will bring forth a most exact bill of all our sins committed all our
life long. Presto erit, says Augustine, Diabolus ante tribunal Christi, and
recitabit verba professtonis nostrae, and obijciet nobis in faciem omnia quae
fecimus; in quo die and in quo loco peccauimus, and quae facere debuimus. The
Devil will be ready before the Tribunal of Christ, and will recite the words of
what we have made profession of, and object our own sins to our faces; in
what day, and at what place we did commit them, and all other circumstances;
howsoever we now cast them behind our backs, then will he bring them forth
before our faces. It behooues us therefore, to be watchful over our own ways,
considering the Devil watches over us so, that he will not let pass any one
of our sins vnregistred: but will bring them forth to the confusion of the
wicked; yea if it were possible, of the Saints, at the day of Judgment. The
third sort of accusers are the Angels beside them. I will not here maintain
Origens opinion, who says, Vnusquisque Angelorum aderit, producens illos
quibus praefuit, qui testimonium prohibebit quot annis circa eum laborauit ad
bonum instigando, sed monita eius spreuit. That as every man has his
particular Angel attending on him, provoking him to good, protecting him from
evil; every man's particular Angel shall witness against the wicked at that
day. But far greater is the royalty of Gods children, they have gards of
Angels, thousands of Angels do inuiron them about, and defend them from all
their foes, though never so many, never so mighty; sometime striking off the
fetters in which they are tied prisoners, and making passage for them, by
throwing open the doors of the prison; and as these swift-winked messengers do
observe the ways of the wicked, whose ministry they have abused; and as they
have presumed to commit sin in the sight of the Angels: the Angels being
spectators and eyewitnesses to all their actions, shall be produced as so
many accusers at the day of Judgment. Tremble then, thou profane and loose
liver, that dare to commit that in the sight of the Angels, which thou
fear to do in the sight of little children.

The fourth sort of accusers are the Saints before them, whom they have
despised, scorned, and abused in this life, whom they have accounted as the
scumme, and the off-scowring of all things, men unworthy to live, whom they
have had in derision, and a proverb of reproach; as the wicked have judged the
godly at their pleasure, so the Saints then shall judge the wicked, the world,
that is, the company of the wicked: and they that in this life have been made
the foote-stooles of the wicked, shall then sit upon Thrones, judging the
twelve Tribes of Israel, Matthew. 19.28.

The fifth sort of witnesses are the wicked, witnessing against the wicked. The
men of Niniue, says our Savior Christ shall rise up with this generation, and
shall condemn it; the Queen of the South shall rise up with this generation
in the Judgment, and shall condemn it, Matthew. 12.40.41. Tire and Sydon shall
witness against Corazin and Bethsaida, Sodom and Gomorrah against Capernaum,
Ephraim against Manasses, Manasses against Ephraim, the Pharisees against the
Sadduces, the Sadduces against the Pharisees, the Pope against the Turk, the
Turk against the Pope; and they that know not whether there be a holy Ghost
or no, shall witness against the formal Protestants of our time, who often
talk of the Spirit, and yet walk after the flesh, having a show of godliness,
and yet deny the power thereof; yea, and not only so, but birds of a feather,
such as have been companions in sin, and have had fellowship in the
unfruitful works of darkness, shall witness one against another; the Egyptians
against the Egyptians, the swearer against the swearer, the Extortioner against
the Extortioner, the Usurer against the Usurer, the Drunkard against the
Drunkard, and they that have slept in the same bed of sin, the Adulterer
against the Adulteress, one wicked wretch shall witness against onother at the
day of Judgment. And what know we, but that the Satyrs of Virginia may
witness against many seeming Saints in England at that day? they unto whom the
light of the Gospel has not dawned as yet, but are nuzled in darkness, bred
in blindness, and led along in ignorance, shall doubtless witness against
many of us, that live under the sound of the Word, enjoying the free passage of
the Gospel, the pure preaching of the Word of God in season, and out of
season, that have had so many Sermons of repentance that have had so many
threats of Gods Judgments denounced against us; and yet we persevere in the
same sins which we find condemed by the Word; for where grace is most
plentiful, there sin is most sinful: doubtless, the Heathens, Pagans, and
Infidels, Whores and Harlots, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, before
such, as turn the grace of God into wantonness.

Neither shall the wicked only one witness against another, but they shall all
witness against themselves. Out of the hellish horror of a distracting
conscience, they shall witness against themselves, and pronounce themselves
guilty of everlasting condemnation: for when the Ancient of days shall sit
down upon his white Throne, before whom Heaven and Earth fled away, then shall
the Books be opened; and the Books are two, the Book of the Law, and the
Book of thine own conscience: The Law will plead for transgression of her
Precepts, and will tell thee what thou should have done: thy conscience will
present unto thy view, the things which thou have done, and shall pronounce the
sentence of condemnation with so shrill a voice, that thy deafest ear may
hear it: this book of conscience is in thine own keeping, locked up within
the closet of thine own bosom; none can falsify it, neither is there any
thing written in this book, but what thine own hand has subscribed thereunto;
therefore thou can not take any exception against it. As was Gods proceeding
against Judah and Jerusalem, such shall his proceeding be against the wicked at
the day of Judgment: before he pronounced their Judgment, he appealed unto
their own consciences, whether they had not deserved, that God should utterly
reject and forsake them; O Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and men of Judah, judge,
Isaiah 5.
I pray you, betwixt me and my Vineyard. Judge you, that is, look into your
own consciences, and there read your own sins, and judge whether you have
not deserved, that I should take away the hedge: that is, leave off to defend
you from your enemies; and suffer the Babylonians to invade and spoil you.
Make you desolate, that is; destitute of political government, and that Briers
and Thorns should grow up: that is, many of you carried away unto the
Idolatry, and other sins of the Babylonians; and that the clouds should rain
no rain: that is, that you should be deprived of all kind of comforts in your
captivity, altogether pining with sorrow, Psalm. 137
sitting down by the waters of Babylon weeping, and hanging up your Harps upon
the Willow trees that are therein. So shall it be at the day of Judgment, God
will appeal unto the consciences of the wicked, and the consciences of the
wicked shall frame that desperate conclusion of everlasting condemnation against
themselves. They shall not be brought to the fight of their sins by
parables, as Judah and Jerusalem here, or as David, 1. Sam. 12. But their sins
shall be written in the book of their conscience, in such great capital
Letters, that he that runs may read it, and so shall they be evidently
convicted and convinced by the contents of this book, and testimony of their
own conscience: so that, as Eliphaz said falsely of Job, thine own mouth, and
not I, condemn thee, shall the just Judge of all things at that day speak
truly unto thee by the mouth of thine own conscience, O thou evil servant,
thine own conscience bearing witness against thee, will I condemn thee:
Ascendat itaque homo tribunal mentis suae, si timet, illud meminerit, quod
oportet eum ante tribunal Christi exhiberi, August. Hom. 50.
Quicquid enim erubescimus confiteri, hoe totum proprijs linguis coram
totomundo proclam abimus. Et apertis conscientiarum libris singulis
manifestabimus: Whatsoever, says Bernard, we now blush to confess before men,
we shall then proclaim with our own tongues before the whole world, and the
book of our conscience being laid open, we shall make it manifest unto all
men.

The last sort of accusers are the creatures without them; the creatures, I
say, whose use, by right of inheritance, belong properly unto none, save unto
the children, of God, 1. Cor. 3.25. Romans 8.32. Howsoever, churlish Nabals and
covetous Ahabs, by usurpation do withhold them from them, the sin that is
committed in the use of them, shall rise up in judgment to the condemnation of
the wicked. And not only the sensible creatures, groaning and traveling in
pain, till they be delivered from the bondage of corruption, which against
their will suffered under the wicked: but even the very senseless creatures,
The heaven shall reveal their iniquity, and the earth shall rise up against
them, Job 20. v. 27. The stones crying out of the wall, and the beam out of
the timber, Heb. 2. v. 11. that is, they that have erected their houses by
iniquity, by oppression, by keeping back the hirelings wages: this their sin
in so doing, shall witness against them, nay, the Moth of the garment, and the
rust of their cankered coin, shall witness against the covetous worldling at
the last day, James 5. v. 3. Nay, the dead Letter of the Bible, which thou
carriest about thee, shall witness against thee, if thou make not good use of
it. Thus Christ told the Jews, Do not think that I will accuse you to my
Father: there is one that accuses you, even Moses in whom ye trust, John 5.
v. 45. In illa die vltionis nihil habe bit, quod respondere possit homo
peccator, vbi coelum and terra, sol and Luna, and totus mundus stabunt aduersus
nos in Testimonium peccatorum nostrorum, Hugo. de S. Victor. In that day what
shall sinful man answer for himself, when the Heaven and the Earth, the
Sun, the Moon, the Stars; nay, the whole world will stand up against the
wicked, in testimony of their sins? and yet if all these should hold their
peace, Ipse cogitationes nostrae, and ipsa specialiter opera, stabunt tante
oculos nostros, nos ante Deum accusantes, Chrysostom. super illud, Mat. 24. and
virtutes, etc. Our very own thoughts, and especially our own works, shall
stand before our eyes, and accuse us before God.

The fifth reason, S. Matthew. verse. 41. Depart from me, ye cursed, into
everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels. This sentence is very
fearful, whether we respect the words themselves, the Judge, from whose mouth
they do proceed, or the irreuocablenesse of them.

Depart from me,] Those are words of separation; you cursed, words of
detestation; into everlasting fire, words of desperation; prepared for the
Devil and his Angels, a doleful exemplifieation. Depart from me: what shall
the Creature do, when he is banished from the presence of the Creator: Oh, the
bitter fruit of sin, which causes the Lord to deny that Creature to be his,
as not belonging unto him, but utterly to disclaim him, which once he made to
his own Image. O, consider, this in time, who shall receive thee; when God
casts thee out from his face: Assure thy self, every Creature shall refuse her
comfort to thee, if a drop of cold water might be a relief unto thee, thou
shall not get it. But as thy whole life was but a turning back from the Lord,
a wandering, and a going a whoring after lying vanities; at that day thou shall
receive this for a recompense of thine erring, Depart from me: and who are they
that must depart, the cursed: they that in their life time have been renowned
by great and glorious Titles, as King Prince, Duke, Noble, Reverend,
Worshipful; now all their glory shall be turned into shame, their honor into
ignominy, and their seemingly blessed estate, shall be turned into a truly
cursed: ye cursed depart from me; and whither? into fire: and what fire?
everlasting fire: If this fire were but like that fained fire of Popish
Purgatory, where venial sins are cleansed, and purged, there were some hope
that their torments should have an end: but they that are cast into this fire,
shall there lie, and cry, and fry for ever: Vbi per millia millia annorum
cruciandi, nec tamen in secula liberandi, Mat. 9.46.
there they shall continue a thousand; nay, ten thousand; nay, a thousand
thousand, as many years as there are hairs upon thine head, stars in
heaven, drops of water in the Sea, Moates in the Sun, leaves in Autumn, all
these must be doubled, nay redoubled, every one must be a thousand, nay ten
thousand, and yet thy torments shall not have an end, Matthew. 22.13.

To this purpose, Augustine, setting forth the desperate estate of those that
are adjudged to that place, says: In inferno nulta est redemptio, quoniam qui
illic damnatus, and demersus fuerit, vlterius non exibit: In hell there is no
redemption, because he that is adjudged to that place, shall never come out any
more. In inferno nulla est redemptio, quoniam ibi nec pater potest adiuuare
filium, nec filius patrem: In hell there is no redemption, because there the
Father cannot help the son, nor the son the father. Ibi non inuenitur
amicus, aut propinquus, qui valeat argentum, and diuitias dare: There is no
friend or neighbor to be found, that will give a sum of money, for the ransom
of our soul: None by any means can redeem his brother, or give to God a
ransom for him, Psalm. 49.7. Then shall they weep and house bitterly, and by
reason of the extremity of their pains, shall break forth into these or the
like lamentable exclamations: What has our pride, our riches, our honors, our
royal dignities, our riotous kind of life, all our carnal pleasures and
delights, what have they profited us? lo, al things are past away, like a
dream, like a shadow, and as a post that hasted by, as a ship that passes
over the waves of the water, or as a bird flowne through the air, and are
become as if they never had been, and hither are we adjudged unto perpetual
pains, and everlasting punishments. But neither their weeping, nor their
crying, August in Ser. ad Erem.
nor their screeching, will avail them any thing. In inferno nulla est
redemptio, quoniam ibi gemitus, sunt and suspiria, and non est qui misereatur:
In hell there is no redemption, because there is weeping, sobbing, and sighing,
and yet there is none to take pity. Ibi est dolor, and planctus, and clamor,
and non est qui exaudiet: In hell there is sorrow, mourning, crying, and yet
none that will hear. Then shall the wicked wish that they had never been
borne, or that God in their first creation had made them some creatures of
another kind, as Todes, Serpents, or Cockatrices, for then their miseries and
shame should have ended with their lives. Then shall the rent-racking La^dlord
wish, that he had never oppressed his poor Tena^ts. Then shall the covetous
Patron wish, that he had never made a prey of the Levites portion. Then shall
the careless Pastor wish, that he had never left his flock unto the hyrelings,
who instead of Preaching the word of God in season, and cut of season, do tie
their flock unto a slender diet, either a few cold dead Homilies, or some
certain monthly Sermons, and yet think their charge is very sufficiently
discharged. Then shall the covetous Lawyer wish, that he had never sold his
tongue for bribes, to plead against the fatherless and widows. Then shall
the gourmandizing Epicure wish, that he had never surfetted at his table, and
suffer the poor to starve at his gate. Then shall the carnal Protestant wish,
that he had never prattled so much of Religion, and practiced so little. Then
shall the drunkard wish, that he had never turned so much liquor over his
tongue, wantonly, and wastfully, and now want a drop of cold water for to cool
his tongue. Then shall the wanton fornicator wish, that he had never wasted
his body, and his goods, upon the body of a strange woman, and withal shall
confess, that breuis est volupt as fornicationis, sed perpetua est poena
fornicatoris: short is the pleasure of fornication, but perpetual is the pain
of the fornicator. O consider this, in time, all ye that forget God! I will
conclude with Chrysostomes meditation: Vtinam homines, Hom. 13. in Epist. ad
Romans
in tabernis vinarijs, reliquisque commessationibus, and balneis, imo vbique de
gehenna disputarent: I would to God that men, even in wine Tauernes, Alehouses,
in their ba^quets, in their baths; I will add, in bawdy houses, yea every
where would dispute of Hell. Non enim sinet in Gehennam incidere, Gehennae
meminisse: Men would not run so headlong to hell, did they but remember hell,
did they but meditate on that fire: our common kind of fire, is but painted
fire, in respect of that; and yet how hardly can we endure our finger near it
an hour? how much less shall we be able, to dwell eternally in that
everlastingly burning Lake, of fire and brimstone?

With the Devil and his Angels.] The wicked have served the Devil, all the
days of their life, and therefore now they must have an irksome habitation
with the Devils, and portion of torments with his Angels; as it is said, that
the beast and the false Prophet were cast into the place of eternal torments,
with the Devil, Revel. 20.10. And indeed this conclusion of the wicked does
agree well with their conversation: as they have forsaken God, and followed
Satan, in obeying his sinful suggestions, now therefore they shall go their
way with Satan, as companions in sin, so partakers in suffering. The body
shall be tormented, because it would not obey the soul: the soul, because it
would follow the rebellious body, both soul and body, because they obeyed the
instigation of Satan, and left the directions of Gods holy Spirit.

Secondly, this Judge is so upright in judgment, that in giving of sentence
against the wicked: first, he cannot err through ignorance, for he searches
the heart, and tries the reins, to give unto every man according to his
ways, and according to the fruit of his works, Heb. 4.13.
Ierem. 17.10. Yea, all things are naked and open to his eyes, before whom we
must appear. He that knew John the Baptist in the womb, and saw Nathanael
under the Fig Tree, does also know, and see our goings out, and our commings
in; he discernes Esau from Jacob; and knows fair Rahel, from bleare-eyed
Leah: he knows the thoughts, and intents of our hearts, the words of our
mouths, and the works of our hands, Psalm. 139.1.2.3.4. and is able to set
before us even our most secret sins.

Secondly, he cannot be ouer-swayed with favor, or friendship. Indeed in
earthly Courts, amongst the sons of men, wickedness may be in the place of
Judgment, Eccles. 3. ver. 16. but in this great Court of heaven, the Judge
will not be parciall to any; God has no respect of persons, Romans 2. v. 21. but
every one that fears God, and works righteousness, shall be accepted at
that day. Nothing will then prevail, but a pure heart, and an upright spirit:
and as for the Judge, with righteousness will he judge the world, Causa, non
persona iudicabitur, Martyr.
and the people with equity, Psalm. 58.9. If great men be found in great
sins, they shall be adjudged unto great torments. Tophet is prepared for the
King, and the poorest beggar shall then have as good audience in this Court of
Justice, as the mightiest Monarch in the world.

Thirdly, this Judge cannot be overcome with power. Indeed amongst the sons
of men, might oftentimes ouer-comes the right; but unto this Judge, all power
is given both in heaven and earth, Matthew. 28.18. He it was that threw the
Angels out of heaven; Adam out of Paradise; Saul out of his Kingdom;
Nebuchadnezzar out of men's society, to converse with beasts: and he it is that
will humble the high looks of man, and abase the loftiness of men in that day,
Isa. 2.11.

As this Judge cannot be ouer-swayed with power, so can he not be bowed with
pity and compassion. The time was indeed when our Savior wept over Jerusalem,
and made a Sermon full of tears, O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Luke 19.41. But now,
alas, there is no place for pardon, though Jerusalem should seek it with
tears. Could thine eyes then shead as many tears as there are drops of water
in the Sea, yet thou could not be able to move Christ unto compassion. The
day before the trumpet sound, mercy shall be preached to the penitent, and
believers, by the Gospel; but from the time that the sentence is once given,
there shall never be more offering of mercy; the door shall be closed: though
the wicked cry for mercy, and with Esau seek the blessing with many tears,
yet shall they never find it. But as Christ does now weep for the sinners
conversion, so will he then laugh at the sinners destruction.

5. Lastly, this Judge cannot be corrupted with bribes, which amongst the
sons of men pervert justice, and blind the eyes of those that sit in
Judgment: for the richest in the world must appear naked and empty-ha^ded,
before Christ, as naked as ever we came into the world, and nakeder then ever
we went out of the world, by as much as a winding sheet comes unto: Riches,
Pro. 11.4.
gold and silver, avails not in the day of wrath, but righteousness saves the
soul. I will conclude with Augustine: August. de Symb. l. 3.
Iudex ille nec gratia praeuenietur, nec misericordia flectetur, nec fletibus
mitigabitur.

This Judge will not be prevented with favor, moved with mercy nor mitigated
with tears, nec sententia eius lata vnquam reuocabitur; neither will the
sentence once past against them, ever be revoked any more; which is the third
thing that I am to speak of.

This sentence is the more dreadful, because it is irreuocable: sentence
proceeding from the Judgment seat of mortal men, may be revoked, or stopped
by sundry means: as first, by appealing unto some higher Judge; as Paul
appealed unto Caesar: but at this great Assise there is no higher Judge, for he
is the only and blessed Prince, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, 1. Tim.
6.15. And the Father has committed all Judgment unto him, Ioh. 5.27.

2. The Judge upon better and more mature deliberation, may alter his opinion:
but there is no alteration of Judgment, when it is once gone forth from the
Throne of the Lord, whose Judgments are more resolute, then the Decrees of the
Medes and Persians, which might not be altered. When Esau came to his father
for a blessing, which was formerly past to Jacob, his father said, I have
blessed him, and he shall be blessed, Genesis 27.33. So resolute shall the Lords
sentence be at the day of Judgment: I have cursed them, and they shall be
cursed: and as Balaam said unto Balak, The Lord has blessed, and he cannot
reuerse it, Numb. 23.20. So say I, The Lord will not reuerse this his sentence
of malediction, Go ye cursed: neither will he alter the thing that is gone
out of his lips.

3. By supplication: but, because the wicked turned away their cares from
hearing the Lord, when he entreated them by his Word, it shall be just with
God not to lend an ear, when they do call and cry unto him: there is not any
of that glorious Court of Heaven, that will friend them so much as to speak a
word in their behalf. Should the Saints, whom they ever despised, accounting
their life madness, and their end to be without honor? Wis. 5.4. Should the
Angels, whose Ministry they have refused and abused? if they did, should God
himself hear them, whose Spirit they have so oftentimes grieved? And
therefore Job said well, There is no vmpire, when God and man are at odds, Job
9.33.

is the punishment of loss; Schol. poena damni.
the consideration of Heavens banishment, and Hels eternal imprisonment, is a
sufficient torture unto the soul of the wicked, and as Chrysostom judges it
to be much more bitter and irksome, then the pains of Hell; Duplex est
damnatorum poena: nam and mentem vrit tristitia and corpus flamma, Isidorus de
meditatione Ignis gehennalis.
yea, worse then a thousand Hells if there were so many, Chrysostom. super Mat.
Hom. 33. according to our Saviors saying, There shall be weeping, and gnashing
of teeth, when they shall see Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and all the Prophets in
the Kingdom of God, and they themselves thrust out of door, Luke 13.18. Where
shall be Dogs, and Enchanters, and Whoremongers, and Murderers, and
Idolaters, and whosoever loves or makes lies, Revel. 22.15. And not only
shall they be debard of the joys of Heaven, and glory of the Saints, but they
shall be deprived of all Earthly comforts, and all their former delights. The
Pome granat tree, the Palm tree, the Apple tree shall wither; the Apples after
which their soul lusted, shall depart from them, and they shall find none:
Yea, if a drop of cold water would comfort them, it shall be denied them; The
Epicure shall be deprived of his dainty dishes, the Drunkard, of his bowls
of wine, the Adulterer, of his wanton Mistress, the Covetous, and Usurer, of
their gold, which they made their God. To conclude, they shall be deprived of
all Heavenly joys, of all earthly comforts.

But I will begin to sing a Song of melody, and proclaim a year of Iubile
unto the children of God: Consolemini, consolemini; Lift up your heads (says
our Savior Christ) for your redemption draws near, Luke 21.28. There is a
great Emphasis in the Greek (...), which does signify a freedom from
captivity, and a restoring unto a former liberty. As if our Savior should
say, The Church, as long as she is in this world, she is like Israel under
Pharaoh, held captive in imprisonment and slavery: But now at this great
Assise, there shall be a gaole-deliuerie, an everlasting freedom from all
evils whatsoever: our life is wouen full of miseries; Psalm. 90.10. Diu viuere
est diu torqueri, Aug. Tertul. vita carcer.
the best of it is but labor and grief. We are borne into the world weeping
and bewailing, as it were, our own ensuing miseries; the progress of our life
is labor, the end is grief. Joseph was never wearier of the dungeon, Daniel of
the Den of Lions, David to dwell in the Tents of Kedar, then the children of God
are to remain so long in the Land of Egypt, in the Prison of this world; and
therefore it is said, that they look and long for a City to come, whose
Builder and Maker is God. But then shall we be everlastingly delivered from all
the miseries and calamities, which now we are subject unto: the soul shall be
delivered from disordred passions, as hope, fear, joy and sorrow: the body
from sundry outward calamities, as sickness, pain, labor, reproach, from
prouocations and intisements of the wicked world, from the power of the devil,
from the slavery of sin, from death, from hell; it is our marriage day, when
our rotten bones shall be raised out of the dust of the earth: and we shall be
clad with glory, and shall meet Christ in the clouds, 1. The. 4.1^
and shall be ever with the Lord: Where we shall have an everlasting Sabbath,
joy upon every ones head: sorrow and sighing shall flee away. The^ shall we see
God face to face, and that with these eyes, says Job. God shall wipe away all
tears from our eyes, there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying,
neither shall there be any more pain, Revel. 21.4. There shall be no more
Winter, nor Summer, heat nor cold, day nor night, death nor hell. But there
shall be Vita sine morte, Dies sine nocte, securitas sine timore, etc. There
shall be life without death, day without night, security without fear,
pleasure without pain, tranquillity without labor, beauty without deformity,
strength without weakness, every thing that is good, without any thing that is
bad: To conclude, Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither has it entered
into the heart of man, the things which God has prepared for them that love
him, Isa. 64.4.
1. Cor. 2.9. Let the faithful soul sigh out this meditation, with blessed
Gregory, Bone Jesus, verbum patris, doce me facere volu^tatem tuam, vt a spiritu
tuo bono ductus, ad beatam illam proueniam ciuitatem. O sweet Jesus, thou that
art the word of the Father, teach me thy will, that being guided by thy good
Spirit, I may be brought unto that City, where there is Certa securitas,
secura aeternitas, and aeterna tranquillitas, and tranquilla foelicitas, and
foelix suauitas, and suauis iucu^ditas. Where there is Security, Eternity,
Tranquillity, Felicity. Vbi tu Deus cum Patre and Spiritu Sancto, regnas per
infinita secula. Greg. in Psalm. sept.
Where thou do reign as God, with the holy Ghost, world without end. Let us
therefore stand with our loins girded, like good servants waiting for their
master: Let us pray, that this Kingdom would come; and let us ingeminate that
of the Spouse, the Church of Christ, Come, Lord Jesus, come quickly, Apoc. 22.

And here let us rest our thoughts a while, and settle our meditations on
serious consideration of this great day, not curiously to define or determine,
how far, or how near, the day or year when these things shall be, it being
locked from us, and kept vnreueyled in the secret counsel of God: yet wading
herein as far as Hercules Pillars, that is, as far as the word of God will
conduct: but where the holy Ghost is silent, and has not a tongue to speak,
my pen shall not indite, nor my ear listen thereunto. And first I will set
down the opinions and conjectures of others, touching the end of the world.
Augustine reckons up six Ages of the world, August. l. 1. in Genesis con.
Manichaeos.
the first from Adam to Noah, the second, from Noah to Abraham, the third from
Abraham to David, the fourth from David, to the captivity of Babylon, the fifth
from the captivity of Babylon unto Christ, the sixth from Christ, unto the end
of all things, the day of Judgment. So that this Age in which we live, is the
last Age, and may be termed the decrepit and old age of the world: and if
Saint John's time was the last hour, then surely these our times are the last
minutes: Then now the end of all things is at hand, and we are they upon whom
the ends of the world are come, and Christ is ready to judge the quick and the
dead. But how long this last Age, being the dotage of the world, will continue,
it is conceald from men and Angels. Augustine told his friend Heschius
(curiously inquiring of the end of the world) that he durst not measure, limit
or determine the times and seasons which God has put in his own power; it may
be every man's answer unto all such curious questionists. There are very many
of the learned Rabbis, Oraculum a schola Eliae.
who being led by their own vain and weak conjectures, would seem to set
down a certain set time of the end of the world, positiuely affirming the
world shall endure six thousand years, and those years they do distribute
into two thousand before the Law, two thousand under the Law, two thousand
after the Law; whereupon some other feign, that the world shall endure six
days, as it was made in six days, and the length of every day to be a
thousand years; as if it had been David's meaning where he says, that A
thousand years in thy sight are as yesterday, Psalm. 90 v. 4. Whereas his
meaning is, that all things past, and to come, are present with God. Indeed it
is the Devils policy, because he would have us to put off far from us the
evil day, and with the sluggard in the Proverbs, desire yet a little more
sleep, a little more slumber, to busy us with an infinite many of frivolous,
idle, and unprofitable questions, that we may neglect that one thing which is
necessary: as namely, a careful preparation, rather then a curious inquiry, to
watch and pray, according to our Saviors counsel, lest that day come on us
unawares, and we found sleeping: for as Augustine truly; Prophecies are sooner
fulfilled, then understood. Prophetias impleri qua^ intelligi, Aug.
Of that day and hour knows no man, no not the Angels in heaven, neither the
Son, but the Father, Mark. 13.32. If our Savior would have revealed this day
unto any, doubtless he would have revealed it unto his Apostles, his
secretaries, his favorites, his followers, unto whom he imparted greater
things, and better things, yet he tells them flatly, Non est vestrum nosse
tempora, etc. It is not for you to know the times or the seasons, which the
Father has put in his own power, Act. 1.7. Of the day and hour knows no
man, no not the Angels. The Angels abound with much knowledge, natural,
experimental, and revealed, unto whom God himself does reveal certain
Ambassages to convey unto his children, and having far better means of
knowledge then we have, for as much as they know God intuendo, by his looking
in his face, Matthew. 18.10. But we have our knowledge, discurrendo, by
discussing, reasoning, disputing, and that not a priori neither, but a
posteriori, by his back parts, as he has manifested himself in his works,
being mirabilis in maximis, mirabilis in minimis, wonderful in all his works:
The invisible things of him are clearly seen in the creation of the world, and
are understood by the things that are made, Romans 1.20. And yet of that day and
hour knows no man, no, not the Angels in heaven, neither the Son. To let
pass Epiphanius interpretation, Epiphanij in illum locum expositio est valde
arguta and detorta, Martyr.
and his witty, but wrested distinction of a twofold knowledge, Executionis
Scientiae.
I will, under the correction of the Learned, show, how Christ knows the day,
and yet how he is ignorant of it. It should seem strange, that the wisdom of
God should be ignorant of those things which are in God, neither can it be
said, that Christ being GOD and man, in one person together; (...).
his Deity should not inform his Humanity, as our soul does the body, but
leave it destitute of knowledge: for in Christ, says the Apostle. i. in his
humane nature, dwells the fullness of the Godhead bodily, Colos. 2.9. Christ
himself being the best and truest interpretour of his own words, thus
expounds himself, As the Father gave me commandment, even so I do, John
14.31. Therefore because Christ was sent as an Ambassador, to declare and
manifest the will of the Father, he would neither do, or speak any thing, but
that unto the which end he was sent: as therefore he was an Ambassador, sent
out of the bosom of the Father, he is said to be ignorant, because he had no
commission to reveal it: Aquinas part. 3. q. 10. Art. 2.
According to that of Aquinas, Dicitur nescire, quia non facit scire: He is
said not to know, because he would not have us to know; thus he told his
Disciples, It is not for you to know the times and the seasons, Act. 1.7. I
will conclude with the saying of Augustine, Ne nos addamus inquirere, quod ille
non addidit dicere, Aug. Epist. 146.
Secret things belong unto the Lord, revealed things unto us, Deu. 29. verse
29. Let us not dare to pry into the Ark of the Lord, striving to know that
which is impossible for us to know, it being reserved unrevealed within the
secret bosom of his sacred Majesty.

The word of God affoordeth us certain signs and prognostics, whereby we
may conclude of a certainty, that that day is not far off: the first is this:

The revealing and coming of Antichrist. Antichrist must first come,
Antichrist the forerunner of the end of the world.
so says the Apostle. That Man of sin must first be revealed, before that day
come, that son of perdition, 2 Thessalonians. 2. ver. 3. Little children, says S.
John, it is the last time: and as you have heard Antichrist shall come, even
now are there many Antichrists, whereby we may know that it is the last time,
1. Ioh. 2.18. I need not prove that the Pope of Rome is Antichrist: many by
their writings have made this plain and apparent, and discovered that Man of
sin, unto the whole world, as manifest to be Antichrist, as he is Pope.

The second sign, that the day is at hand, is, an Apostasy from Faith, and
from sound Doctrine, of which the Apostle speaks: Now the Spirit speaks
expressly, that in the latter times, some shall depart from the faith, giving
heed to seducing spirits, and doctrines of Devils, 1. Tim. 4.1. And is not this
time come to pass already? are not many carried about like vapors in the
air, with every blast of vain Doctrine, having itching ears, affecting
always some new fangled point or other? what a dispute begins there to be
about that Twinne of our salvation, Faith and Repentance, touching the priority
of them? which makes me think, that either men have no repentance, or else no
faith: unless both consist upon the tippe of the tongue, in prattling, not in
practice.

The third is the promulgation of the Gospel (...), throughout the whole
world. So says our Savior Christ, And this Gospel of the Kingdom shall be
preached throughout the whole world, and then shall the end come, Mat. 24.14.
It must be published among all Nations, Mar. 13.10. And is not the sound
thereof already gone forth into the ends of the earth? is it not spread already
from Dan, even unto Beersheba? from one Sea coast unto another?

The fourth is, the rising up of false Christ's and false Prophets. Many shall
come in my name (says our Savior Christ) saying, I am Christ, and the time
draws near, Luke 21.8. And many false Prophets shall arise, and deceive
many, Matthew. 24.11.

The fifth sign is, Iniquity shall abound, The fifth sign is the generality of
sin.
Matthew. 24.12. There shall be such a general infection of sin, Men shall be
lovers of their own selves, covetous, bosters, proud, blasphemers,
disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy, without natural affection,
truce breakers, false accusers, incontinent, fierce, despisers of those that
are good; Traitors, heady, high minded, lovers of pleasures, more then lovers
of God, having a form of godliness, but deny the power thereof, 2. Tim.
3.1.2.3.4. And this is Gods ordinary proceeding against sin, he does never
punish general, until sin be grown general. God never washed away the
inhabitants of the earth, with the waters of his wrath, until all flesh had
corrupted his way upon the earth, until the earth was filled with cruelty, and
all the imaginations of the thoughts of man's heart were evil, only evil,
continually evil, Genesis 6.5.11.12. The Lord never rayned down fire and
brimstone from the Lord, out of heaven, upon those two Cities, Simeon and Leui
like, sisters in sin, until he had made enquiry whether there were any
righteous men amongst them; for the Lord, had it not derogated from his
Justice, and so consequently from his glory, in not being a just revenger of
sin, was as willing, and as well contented, as Abraham, that Sodom should be
saved, for every petition returned unto Abraham with some advantage: and most
comfortable is it, the Lord never ceased granting, till Abraham ceased asking;
but in the end there being such a penury, such a scarcity, such a nullity of
good men, that the Lord destroyed them with fire and brimstone, and so it
remains until this day, as a monument of Gods wrath, Mare mortuum.
a Sea of fire and brimstone. If we travel unto that great City Jerusalem, the
Metropolis of the world, the Lady of the earth, the perfection of beauty, we
shall find it but a heap of stones. But what did move the Lord to destroy so
famous a City, called the City of God, the habitation of the most Highest, a
place where he did delight to dwell? yet sin had made her infamous and odious
in the sight of God: the contagion and infection of sin was general, and
that not only some kind of sins, but all sin, all oppression, that is, all
kind of sin: Synechdoche speciei.
and well may it be, for oppression is a crying sin, and they that make no
conscience of great sins, surely, will not make conscience of lesser; and
these sins were not committed in corners, or by-lanes, but in the open
streets, in the market place; men were grown impudent in sin; all oppression
was in the midst of Jerusalem, Ierem. 6. verse. 6. sin was grown general,
Jerusalem was a den of Thieves; there was no righteous man found throughout
the whole City, that executed judgment, and sought the truth; No, nor at the
Court, amongst the great Men, amongst the Rulers, amongst the Noblemen, These
have altogether broken the yoke, and burst the bond: no, nor yet amongst the
Prophets, for they prophecy falsely, and the Priests bear rule by their
means, that is, both agree together, in a mutual and mere collusion of the
people, as the Pope with his orders of begging Friars: first, they rob and
deceive the people, and then they divide the spoil, Ierem. 5.1.5.31. To
conclude, sin was as general in Jerusalem, as ever it was in the old world
when it was destroyed with water, or in Sodom, that City of pride, luxury,
idleness, when it was burnt with fire; so Ierusalems punishments were parallel
to her sins; her sins were general, her judgments were as general: There
is not one stone left upon another, of so many stately buildings, on which the
Jews so confidently presumed, Joseph. l. 6. hist. Iud.
and so presumptuously insulted over the Romans, saying, that if the Romans
had wings, yet they could not fly over their walls, and invade their City.

And is not sin grown as general in this world, as ever 'twas in the old
world, or in Sodom, or in Jerusalem? may we not as justly take up the
complaint of Isay in his time? Both head is sick, and heart is heavy, Isai
1.5. where, by head (as Interpreters observe) is meant the King (for the
Prophet speaks unto the Jews, as if they were one body) and when the Prophet
complained of this sickness of the head, he meant Ahaz, who then was head of
the Kingdom, and his disease was not in the foot, as Asa his gout, but in the
corruption of his life, he did nothing that was right in the sight of the Lord
his God, 2. K. 16.2. and the heart is the Priests that if they be such as they
should be, may very well resemble the heart, that as the heart communicates
vital spirits unto the whole body, so the Ministers of God should endeavor to
create the life of grace in every man's soul: But if, like the heart, they do
not employ themselves in their peculiar office and duty, preaching the Word of
God in season and out of season, quickening the members that are dead in sin,
and endeavoring daily the conversion of souls, by wholesome doctrine, and holy
conversation; then are they not hearts any longer, but harms, and in Gods due
time they shall be trodden under foot like clay in the street, or cast out
with unsavory salt to the dounghill. The foot may not find fault with head or
heart: only I will ingeminate the Prophets words, Both head is sick, and heart
is heavy: The matter which I have in hand, forces me to show the generality
of sin, and so consequently the propinquity of the general Judgment. If God
should look down from heaven upon the children of men, and mark what is done
amiss in this our sinful Sublunarie, he may see that al are gone aside, even
from the highest to the lowest, from the youngest to the eldest, from the
richest to the poorest, from the Eagle to the Wren, They are altogether become
abominable, there is none that does good, no, not one, Psalm 14.3. The
foundations of the Earth are out of course, sin has gotten the upper hand,
iniquity abounds, virtue is disgraced, vice advanced. Sin now adays is
grown unto such a presumption, and that notwithstanding the sword of
Authority, which unless it lay unsheathed in the hand of the Magistrate,
bearing it in vain, were able to destroy this Hydra of sin, though new heads
budded out continually. It it recorded of a French Ambassador in the time of
King Richard the third, how he told the King, that there were three great
Whores in England, Pride, Covetousness, Luxury: If this Ambassador were to
come again, he may tell the King, that there are more then ten times three;
not a sin but has his mate: Pride and Ambition, Covetousness and Extortion,
Adultery and Fornication, Flattery and Dissimulation, Strife and Contention,
Swearing and Forswearing, Lying and Cursed speaking, Chambering and
Wantonness, Strife and Envying; nay, more sins then I can name, Si
superbientibus angelis Deus no^ pepercit, quanto minus tibi putredo and vermis?
Bernard.
and such sins as are not to be named.

To insist a while upon some particulars, to begin first with the first, that
first sin of Pride, so hateful in the highest Eye, that it threw the Angels
out of Heaven, whereby they became reprobate Devils: and yet no sin so
common, none grown more general, then this sin of Pride. Were the daughters
of Zion ever more proud and haughty, then our Dames of England? who are so
far from being like women that profess the fear of God, 1. Tim. 2.10. that
they scarce look like the creatures of God, being so miscreate ofttimes, and
so deformed with their French, their Spanish, and their foolish fashions, with
their Plumes, Fannes, Feathers and Fardingales, Velvet Vizards, that they look
rather like some Antickes, Maskers, May games? Esaias Text of fashions is
multiplied by the fancies of our time: Their bonnets, and their bracelets,
their slippers and their mufflers, their vailes, their wimples, and their
crisping pinnes, their round tyers like the Moon, Isaiah 3.19. Yet he makes no
mention of the yellow Ruffes, of their perfumed shagged hair, which never grew
upon their ownehead; nor of their painted faces: a pretty artificial means to
mend the workmanship of their Maker. But I think, that the Mystery of this art
may rather be reduced to the common place of whorishnesse, or in a nearer
term, the attire of an harlot, Prou. 7. that as Erasmus said of a Liar,
Oftende mihi mendacem, and ostendam tibifurem, show me a Liar, and I will show
thee a thief: so show me a painted face, may I say, and I will show thee a
whore, for she dwells at the Sign of a painted face. Neither is this sin of
pride peculiar unto women only, but also to men, for they are almost become
like unto women, as though they were willing to change sexes with them. In the
time of Popery, as one says wittily, England was made an Ass to bear the
burden of the Popes taxations: but now England is metamorphosed into an Ape,
an imitator of all fashions, of all Countries and Nations, France, Spain and
Italy, etc.

To leave pride as an ugly monster, and to speak of the generality of the
sin of whoredom, which deserves the second place in Satan's Kingdom: The
base-begotten-bastard-broode that this sin brings forth into the world,
manifests the generality of it: for almost what Parish within this Kingdom,
nay, almost in the whole world, but has an adulterous issue within it? and
whereas one has none, another has two. Beside, how is the bed of honorable
marriage abused by unlawful mixtures? God that is vnus one, as Bernard,
Vnissimus, most one, has made vnam, one woman vni, for one man, and one man
for one woman; so speaks the Prophet; And did he not make one? where God
sends us back to the coppie, and first institution of marriage, he made one
man for one woman, Adam for Eve, and joined them both together in one
inviolable band of honorable wedlock, Ge. 2.24. Yet had he abundance of spirit,
that is, by that self same secret inspiration, whereby Adam became a living
soul, by that same powerful influence, if I may so speak, God could have
created more men for one woman, yet he did not. And why would he not? Because
he sought a godly seed; that is, as marriage is honorable, so the fruit of
this divine ordinance should be holy, not illigitimate, not bastards, not a
promiscuous seed, Malach. 2.15. But alas, how is the end of marriage
perverted? how does every man neigh after his neighbors wife? Jeremy 5.8.
That is, men are as shameless, and as resolutely impudent in this filthy fact,
like welfed horses, that have no understanding, Psalm. 32.9. which the Prophet
calls the sin of abomination, Ezekiel. 22.11. How does every man lay wait at
his neighbors door? Job 31.4. that is, by private stealth, to warm another
bed, leaving their own cisternes, the wife of their youth, to embrace the
bosom of the stranger, Prou. 5. But I will leave this sin in secret where it
is committed: for the silent night only is guilty of these unchaste actions,
and secret chambers are only privy unto these works of darkness: this sin is
more suspected then known, and yet known too well, to be too too general.

Drunkenness may be the third head of this monstrous Hel-hound, and Cerberus
of sin: how general is this shameless, swinish, idle, base, beastly sin
grown! It was once but one man's sin, and of infirmity too, as not knowing
the virtue of the grape, Chrysostom.
nor the quality of that liquor: and long since it has been scorned, as the
beggars fault. Hence came the Proverb, As drunk as the Beggar. But now adays
it is reputed not only the Seruingmans complement, but the Gentleman's grace.
Seneca spoke well of these times, Habebitur aliquando abrietati honor, and
plurimum caepisse vini, virtus erit, The time shall come, that honor shall be
attributed to drunkenness, and to drink much wine, shall be accounted virtue
and valor. How many now adays draw their whole Patrimony through their
throat; making a practice, almost a profession of drunkenness: rising up
early to follow strong drink, and so continue until night, till wine inflame
them? Isaiah 5.11. And as the Wise man speaks, tarry long at the wine, Prou.
23.29. Our Tauernes, our Innes, and Alehouses, were they well looked into by the
Magistrate, would yield too many of such kind of stayers by, who, under
pretense of drinking a pot or two, fill their brains ere they go away and
empty their purse.

I will not insist any longer in discoring Satan's kingdom. From the generality
of these sins, we may conclude an universality of all the rest. What sin is
there, but is grown as general, as ever the Plague was in any city or
country? like Naamans leprosy, it has ouerspred the whole body; From the
sole of the foot, to the crown of the head, there is no soundnes, but wounds,
swellings, and putrefying sores, Isa. 1.6. Sin is grown unto such an height,
and to such a head, that it is safer for a man to commit sin, then to reprove
it; and he that refraineth his foot, and runs not into the same excess of
riot, shall be a prey, a scorn, a by word, a derision, a laughing stock.
Behold, the regions are white unto harvest, sin is ripe, even to the full
growth; and therefore assuredly it will not be long ere the Lord sends forth
his Laborers, those winged executioners of his wrath, with sickles in their
hands, to gather the wicked into bundles, that they may be cast into hell. It
is the Lords gracious and merciful dispensation to prorogue a while the term
of his coming, because we should have a little more time to repent in, and so
be left without less excuse. Let us then use the Lords patience, as a spur
and provocation unto repentance, so says the blessed Apostle prophesying of
the Atheists of our time, who do not stick to say, Where is the promise of
his coming? Shows what use they should make of the seeming slacknes of his
coming, his long suffering, is an argument that the Lord is not willing, that
any should perish, but that al should come to repentance, 2. Pe. 3.9 And thus
mercifully the Lord dealt with the old world; after he had threatened their
destruction, he gave the^ one hundred and twenty years to repent in, Genesis
6.3. Put not then off far from thee the evil day: if the Lord seems slack,
it is because thou should fly speedily with Lot unto Zoar, that is,
accelerate thy repentance. Almighty God has already whet his sword, and bent
his bow, and made it ready, how soever he may seem slack, yet he may easily
come before thou art ready; if he does come, thou being unprepared and
unprovided, assuredly he will pay thee home for thus abusing his patience. The
Heathen writer could say thus much, Valor. Max.
Deum grauitate supplicij compensare tarditatem puniendi, the greatness of his
punishment shall recompense the slacknesse of his coming, when he does come:
when Deus and dies vltionum conuenerint, when the God of vengeance, and the day
of vengeance shall meet together, thou shall be paid home for altogether. I
will conclude with that questioned. Author to the Hebrews: Yet a very little
while, and he that shall come, will come, and will not tarry, Heb. 10.37.

The last use shall be an exhortation to repentance, and that betime, while
we have time: Walk, says our Savior Christ, in the day, John 11. v. 9. that
is, in thy life, which is but a moment, a spanne of time, The night comes
wherein no man can work, John 9. v. 4. that is, the night of thy death, which
is the conclusion of the day of thy life, and then there is no more time to
work out our salvation. For an Angel has sworn from heaven, by him that
lives for evermore, that time shall be no more, Apoc. 10.6. that is, after
this acceptable time, no more time for repentance, no more days of salvation.
The Apostle wills us to do good while we have time, intimating thereby, that
after this time, Cypr.
there is no more time. Vitae aut hic amittitur aut tenetur: cum isthinc
excessum fuerit, nullus poenitentiae locus, nullus satisfactionis effectus:
Life here is either got or lost; for when we go out of the body, there is no
place for repentance, no effect of satisfaction; if we have sinned to day, and
have not repented, it may be we shall have leave of the Lords patience, to
learn it better another day: but after the transmigration of the soul from
the body, there remains nothing else, but a fearful looking for of judgment.
It stands us therefore upon the salvation of our soul, to look before we
leap, to be certain that we have one foot upon the border of Canaan, before
we leave our earthly tabernacle. Let us make our election sure unto us, by
true and speedy repentance; and seal up this comfortable conclusion to our
souls, that our sins are pardoned in the blood of Christ. Suppose that the
general day of Judgment were far off, and that this day of salvation were
to shine upon this Land, still on to the worlds end: yet what is that to thee
or me? the day of grace ends to thee and me, at the day of our death; after
that, the Lord shall never offer mercy unto us. It is the gracious and merciful
dispensation of almighty God, who when he may justly cut thee off, as thou art
committing of sin, and throw thee down to hell, yet he gives thee space
and time to repent of this thy sinning, and so thy sins may be done away.
Thus our Savior speaking of that woman Iezabel: for so the holy Ghost points
her out, by the finger, as it were in contempt, says, That he gave her space
to repent of her fornication, and she repented not, Revel. 2.21. Meaning, he
did let her live to repent, whereas if he had cut her off before, he had
taken from her the time of repentance. Thus after he had threatened a Deluge and
destruction unto the old world, he gave them many years to repent, before he
washed them away with the waters of his wrath. He gave Sodom and Gomorrah, two
sinful Cities, he gave them a time to repent. Niniue had a time, Jerusalem
had a time, two and forty years after the passion of Christ, the Fig Tree
had a time, Chrysostom. obseruat.
the foolish five Virgins had a time when they might have entered, nay, God
gives a time, and lends a long space unto the most profane, to make them the
more inexcusable; Cursed Cain, profane Esau, desperate Judas, they had all a
time. This gracious proceeding does the Lord observe and keep, and will unto
the worlds end; he gives unto some of us twenty years, unto some thirty, unto
some forty, unto some fifty, even until gray headed Age, the blossom of the
grave, Hec momentum vnde depe^det aeternitas, Aug.
bids us prepare our winding sheet. And if in all this time, which in all is
but a spanne, a moment, a small scantling, we let it slip until our glass
be all run out, and the thread of our life clean cut off; then are we left
without excuse, and our end is damnation. The children of this world are wise
in their generation, they take their time and opportunity. The Merchant buyeth
while the Mart lasts, the Soldier fights while the battle indureth: the
Husbandman sows while it is winter, reapeth when it is summer. That
faithful measurer of time, heavens great Orname^t, observes his rising and
setting. The Sun, the Moon and Stars keep their constant revolution
according to the will of their Maker, in the first Creation; The Storke, the
Turtle, and the Crane know their appointed time, Ierem. 8.7. But man neglects
his time, and lets it steal away one day after another, until the day of
grace be closed upon him. We are called upon to repent in the days of our
youth, before sin is habituated, and custom of sinning has taken away the
sense of sin. Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth, Eccles. 12.1.
But men for the most part refuse to repent until they be old, and so by a just
judgment of God, they go down to the grave, having their bones full of the
sins of their youth; for how almost is it possible that we should repent
truly, when we be old? repentance is so hard and difficult a thing, a heavy
burden, a difficult duty; Age of it self is a burden, a sickness, a
languishing disease: the Sergeants and Officers of Death have arrested every
limb, and have taken up the whole body, as an habitation of death. One cries
with the Shunamites child, Non vita longa, sed longa aegritudo.
Alas, my head, alas, my head, another with with Antiochus, My belly, my belly,
the third with Asa, Shaking Palsy.
My feet, my feet: this man's limbs tremble as a reed shaken with the wind,
another man's limbs are like the dead boughs of a dying bark, Dead Palsy.
one labors in one disease, another in another one in the chollicke, another
in the stone; this man's eyes begin to wax dim, his ears deaf, his
wind-pipes even stopped up with phlegm, his teeth falling out of his head, his
hands possessed with the palsy, his legs not able to bear up his body, his
knees strike one against another, his back not able to bear the weight of a
Grasshopper: and when man is brought unto such an exigent that he cannot put
off, or put on his own clothes, how shall he put off sins, and put on newness
of life? Surely, I see not how he can repent, unless he repents that he has
lived too long, and therefore they wish for welcome death: when little do they
well consider, that death is the dissolution of a miserable life, but a passage
to a worse, a gate, an entrance to hell, if they dye unrepentant. Augustine his
counsel in this case is very heavenly, and very worthy to be embraced. Lib. de
Vtilitat. poen. agend.
Age poenitentiam dum sanus es, si sic agis, dico tibi quod securus es, quia
poenitentiam egisti eo tempore quo peccare potuisti: si vis agere poenitentiam,
quando iam peccare non potes, peccata te dimiserunt, non tu illa: Repent while
thou art in good health, if thou do so, I tell thee, thou art safe, because
thou repe^tedst, when thou could have sinned; if thou do repent, when by
reason of the weakness of thy body, thou art not able to perform the works
of darkness, sin has left (...) to save me. Acts 3.19.
Repent therefore, that thy sins may be done away, when the time of
refreshing shall come from the presence of God. and that with all speed.
Pharaoh bad Moses pray for him to morrow: but do thou repent to day, thou
know not whether thou shall live until to morrow, thy life is but a flower
flourishing to day, fading to morrow, but a bubble soon blown up, soon
blown out: thou may dine in all thy royalty with Balthazar, carouse in
golden bowls, yet ere thy dinner be ended, such is the uncertainty of our
fleeting life, thy soul may be divorced from thy body, and thy body fit for
no company, but the worms. It is not to morrow that God requires, but to day:
To day if you will hear my voice, Heb. 3.15. Remember that there will be a day,
when there will be judgment without mercy, when, if thou neglectst this day of
salvation, this acceptable season, thou shall be cast to Hell, and there shall
lie in misery, howling, and crying out, O miserable wretch that I am, what did
I mean, that I did not confess my sins, repent and turn to God, when I was
upon earth? now I see others partakers of heavenly joys, and I thrust out and
cast into these miserable torments; where thou shall be enforced to say, O how
just are Gods judgments! I was spoken unto, but I would not hear: I was
instructed out of Moses and the Prophets, and entreated by the Ministers of
Christ to repent; but I stopped mine ears against their admonitions. How do I
justly feel that, which nothing could make me fear? Let us not therefore
neglect this opportunity, this space which is our life time, and a time which
God in mercy has allotted unto us to repent in: after this time repentance
will never be preached any more, nor sins pardoned. Nazian.
Hic namque peccatorum remissio, vbi peccatorum commissio, hic nobis prompt a
medela est, post autem clausa est omnis medicinae falutis, For sins are
remitted here, where as they were committed. Here only have we the Balm of
Gilead to cure the wounds of a sinful soul, but hereafter all medicines of
salvation shall be locked from us, and we from them. (...) (...), Basil.
Basil: This present time in which we live, is the time of repentance and
remission of sins. Frustra sibi homo post hoc corpus promittit, quod in hoc
corpore comparare neglexit, Augustine. August.
And therefore in vain does man promise unto himself, that after this life,
which he does neglect to obtain this life. This is our day, the next is the
Lords day, wherein he will come to judge every man according to his ways; as
the Tree grows, so it falls, and as it falls, so it lies; as men live,
so they die, and as they die, so they come to Judgment. In what sins
sosoeuer we dye unrepented of, in the same shall we be judged and condemned.
Let us learn therefore, in our growth to grow the right way, let us look
toward Jerusalem, grow toward heaven, that is, let us live well, that we may
dye well: so that at the worlds general Judgment, at the resurrection of the
just, we may meet our Savior in the air, and be ever with him, Amen.

Come, Lord Jesus, come quickly.

FINIS.

