THE DIALOGVES OF S. GREGORY SVRNAMED THE GREAT: POPE OF ROME: AND THE FIRST
OF THAT NAME: DIVIDED INTO four Books.

WHEREIN He entreats of the lives, and miracles of the Saints in Italy and
of the eternity of men's souls.

WITH A short treatise of sundry miracles, wrought at the shrines of martyrs:
taken out of S. Augustine. Together with a notable miracle wrought by S.
Bernard, in confirmation of diverse articles of religion.

Translated into our English tongue By P. W.

Ecclesiastic. cap. 1. v. 1. and 2. A wise man will search out the wisdom of
all the ancient: and keep the sayings of famous men. Printed at Paris. 1608.

blazon or coat of arms In earth long life. with happy state:
Queen Anne, Christ Jesus send.
In heaven that bliss, amongst his Saints:
Which never shall have end


TO THE HIGH AND EXCELLENT PRINCES ANNE: BY GODS SINGVLAR providence, Queen of
great Brit^aine, France, and Irelande.
HAD the consideration of high dignity (most gracious Quone) suggesting
retiring thoughts, more prevailed, then the reports of your virtuous
inclination inciting for ward:never should I have presumed, to make so mean a
person, known to so great Majesty. But the constant fame of your Princely
parts, and a soul not stouping to transitory toys, emboldened my fearful
heart: hoping that with gracious countenance, you will behold the poor and
rich present, of your devoted servant: poor in respect of that, which my small
ability affords: but most rich in regard of the thing it self, being a rare
jewel worthy of any Christian Prince, and of none more, then your most
excellent person. For to whom could so heavenly a pearl, more justly be
presented, then to your royal Highness: whose heart Gods grace so touched, that
when the glorious beams of an earthly paradise, and new kingdom first
saluted, it mounting above all corruptible creature, and not complying in
complements with this false flattering world, thought rather upon the
perpetual pleasure of the heavenly paradise, and that kingdom, which crowns
Queens with the divine diadem of eternal glory. For I have been credibly
informed, how at that very time, in the midst of those meeting joys: and the
very thronge of those terrestrial pleasures: you sent for out of England, such
principal books of piety and devotion, as were there to be found. A zeal
verily commendable, in the person of a meaner fortune, admirable in the highness
of Princes, whose eyes usually the vanishing vapors of earthly content, do
with false reflection dazell and deceive: but surpassing all common conceit, in
such a springtide of the worlds flowing felicity. God the inspirer of such
heavenly cogitations, contine we them with the fire of his divine grace, to the
inflaming of your soul with his love, that you may with increase of spirit,
walk for ward in that heavenly path, and go sal. 83.
from virtue to virtue, until the God of gods be seen in Sion.

Many alas be the allurements, which carry many a main from the following of
virtue, to the embracing of vice: from the sweet service of Christ, to the
sour servitude of Belial: yet none are in such danger as Potentates and
Princes: whose flourishing fortunes, and transcendent soueraigntye, commonly so
bewitch the powers of the soul, that present pleasure proffered on all hands,
is prosecuted with full sail: and future endless pain, the dreadful dregs
of delights enchaunting cupp, is not thought upon, or else spedily banished; not
to disturb the tyranny of false felicity. And that which is lamentable, and
deserves an ocean of tears: whereas private persons, find either friends
that of charity do, or enemies, that of malice will put them in mind of their
errors and imperfections: only the eminent dignity of Princes are exempted, who
meet with few friends so faithful, that in any spiritual nec^ssity
whatsoever, list to apply any such charitable corsiue, not to incur
displeasure: and fawning foes to many, that with the pleasing venim of
flattery, will be ready to christen any vice by the name of virtue, to gain
royal grace and favor. Holy David though a man according to Gods heart, yet
was his court haunted with such vermin, and his ears acquainted with the
music of such Sirenes songs. The wicked (says he) have Psalm. 118. v. 85.
told me fables, but not as thy law. S. John Baptist is not found in kings
houses, and the text of Potent persons shall suffer potent Sapient. 6. v. 7.
pains, seldom sounds in the Palaces of Princes.

This being the dangerous estate of the worlds dearlings, especially of Kings
and Queens: passing necessary it is, if they desire from the short and
variable pleasure of corruptible crowns, to pass unto the endless and
immutable glory of an everlasting kingdom, that they should principally
procure, such faithful and virtuous teachers, to instruct the^ in the way of
truth and piety, of who^ no suspicion can be had, that either private interest
causes the^ to speak to please: or any fear conceived, that they use silence
not to offend: such as be the spiritual books of ancient and learned
fathers, whose lives for holy conversation were gracious in the eyes of men,
and their deaths for the sweet smell of virtue, precious in the sight of God.
For these be they, which (far unlike to many courting Chaplins, that chaunt
little other euensonge then in the pleasing tune of placebo) teach the way of
truth, without respect of persons: giving the same documents, to great and
sinall: and without all distinction of dignity, power wine and oil into the
wounds of our souls, launcing the festered ulcers of obdurate and seared
consciences: and applying comfortable lenitiues, and sweet salues, to them
that be of contrite hearts, of tender and timorous disposition.

For as much therefore as divine grace that inspired into your soul, that
heavenly resolution, as to seek for such spiritual masters, as may without
all fear of erroneous direction, guide you in the sea of this world (where
not only the surging waves of adversity, but much more the sweet gale of
delighting prosperity is dangerous) to the harbor of true repose, and happy
tranquillity: to whom more worthily could I present this rare ie well of
glorious Saint Gregory's Dialogues, entreating of the miraculous lives of
diverse renowned Saints, then to the Princely person of your Majesty: wherein
you may behold the faith of the Primitive Church, to which by him our country
was first cou^erted: and in which so many Kings and Queens your
predecessors, through the current of diverse happy ages, gloriously ended their
days: where in also you may find so many heavenly lessons very delightful to
read, and passing profitable to practice: view great numbers of familiar
examples, of diverse holy persons: and see the comfortable ends, sweet
deaths, and sovereign rewards of Gods servants: rauishing our souls with
the love of virtue, and drawing our thoughts, from the short, uncertain, and
false joys of this world, to the serious cogitation, of the eternal,
permanent, and true delight of the world to come: and that in a most familiar,
and pleasing manner, no grief interposing it self, except it be that (which
is to be wished) of true contrition for sin: or else that which other business
brings, by drawing us from so sweet conversation: or lastly to see that the
golden stream of so divine a discourse, runs not still forward in an
endless channel.

As your royal disposition to virtue, has justly deserved the dedicatio^ of
this book: so the love of the author himself blessed S. Gregory, not only to
our country in general, but to your most excellent person in particular,
persuades the same. For if the purple glutto^ buried in hell, had care Luc.
16. v. 27.
of his brethren, and prayed for the^, moved thereu^to of mere natural
co^passio^: how much more does his soul reigning in heaven, inflamed with
supernatural charity tender the good of the^ who^ whiles he lived he loved so
dearly. Being upon earth such was his affection to our nation, that by his
pastoral care it was turned 1. Thessal. 1. v. 9.
to God from idols, to serve the living and true God: and being yet mortal he
wrotte to Aldiberga, Lib. 9. epist. 59. cap. 69.
Queen of England, most kind letters, encouraging her by the example of Saint
Helena (the glory of great Britayne) to labor the conversion of the king and
his people, and therefore no question, but living now in heaven, his charity to
God being greater, his love toward us is not less and consequently no doubt
can be made, but with far more burning zeal, he does sollicitte in that
celestial court the cause of our country: and enjoying him self immortal
felicity, both desires and also labors, the temporal and eternal happiness
of Queen Anne our most gracious Princes.

To these former reasons which especially gave support to my fearful heart,
this also was adjoined as no small inducement, to think that I was the first,
that offered his labors to your most excellent Majesty: for whereas diverse of
diverse professions, have directed their works to our most dread Sovereign,
and one also to our young Prince (your dear son, and the orient object of
our countries joy) so none at all for ought that I can learn, much less that
professes the religion os S. Gregory, has hitherto presented any book to
your Princely person. Together with this alluring motive concurred also the
very time it self of the new year, dedicated by long and laudable custom
(descending to us from our forefathers) to the giving and receiving of diverse
gifts and presents.

Voulsafe therefore most noble Queen graciously to accept, among so many
Princely gifts this small present, of Saints lives (written a thowsande
years since, by the glorious Apostle of England, blessed Saint Gregory)
inferior no question to any for temporal value, but yelding to none at all as I
verily suppose in spiritual and true estimation: to grace with the benign
beams of your royal countenance these my poor labors, published to the
worlds view, under the patronage of your gracious Highness, which your
renoumed inclination to virtue, and pious affection to spiritual books has
deserved: the love of S. Gregory to our country, and the Queens of England,
has allotted you: and my happy fortune to be the first in this kind, with the
very consideration of the time it self, has justly consecrated to your most
excellent and worthy person: and to cast a favorable eye upon the first
fruits of my sincere and serviceable affection, which is such, that should I
mention, worthily might I be suspected: and yet verily hope, were it known,
that it would never by Princely bounty be rejected. The new borne Savior of
the world, Christ Jesus, send you in earthly court, both this and many happy
new years: and eternity of years, in the celestial court of heauene. The
first of January, 1608.

Your Majesty's most devoted servant, and daily orator. P. VV.

TO THE COURTEOUS, AND VIRTUOUS CHRISTIAN READER: DESIROVS OF THAT KNOWLEDGE.
which brings pleasure, and leads to true religion, piety, and devotion.
THERE is no kind of study (yood Christian reader) that either generally so
contenteth all humors, and fitteth all affections: or which brings such
honest pleasure to the soul, and with so exquisite knowledge, and necessary
documents for the direction of a man^life, furnishes our understanding: or so
forcibly and sweetlye inclines our wills to the pu^suite of virtue, as does
the reading of a learned and holy history. Some there be that delight in the
speculation of the Mathematics: others otherwise addicted principally price
poetrye, and the study of humanity: some take no pleasure, but in the secrets
of philosophy and Aphorisms of Galen: and others whose hearts Gods grace has
more touched, rapt as it were with S. Paul, contemn 2 Corint. 12.
all earthly things, and bestow them selves wholly in diuinitye, and the most
pleasant contemplation of heavenly mysteries. Yet this variety of natures, and
diversity of desires, is ever accompained with this unity, thar all with common
cons^nt, commend the reading of histories, and in them find singular
recreation: none almost being so simple, that can for any difficulty reject
them, the subject being so easy and familiar: nor any so curious, thar can
contemn them, plenty of diverse matrers drawing still forewarde, and with
wonderful pleasure rauishing the soul of man. This is that study, which in
prosperity delights: in adversity, brings comfort: when we are solitarye,
it is our companion: when in company, it ministers matter of talk, and
excellent discourses. This presents before our eyes, the factes of former
ages: and delivers the sundry accidents of our time, to succeding posterity.
This by the fall of many, teaches us what to fear: and by the advancement of
others for worthy deeds, what to follow. This by the events of other men's
actions, quickneth the wit, ripeneth the judgment, and so purchases true
wisdom, for the carriage of our life, and managing all worldly affairs. This
intertayneth all wits, sits all fancies, and pleases all persons: with this
exercise, many wear out sundry troubles, deceive many melancholy passions: and
the mighty Monarch of the world Assuerus, passed Esther cap. 6.
over the tedious night, which gave no sleep to his heavy eyes as holy
scripture reports.

Is this great commodity and pleasure, be reaped by the Dccades of Titus
Liuius: the paralelled lives of Plutarch, or the Chronicles of our own
country: what treasure of true delight, and what singular profitt, shall an
Ecclesiastical history, especially entreating of the lives of holy men, and
Saints of Gods church, bring to a true christian heart, that loves God, and
prefers the good of his own soul, before all the vain pleasure, and
transitory pelf, of this flattering false world? For who can doubt, but that
so far as heaven is distant from earth: and the immortal soul excels the
corruptible body: so great difference there is, betwixt a profane and a sacred
history: that entreating of things belonginge to this life, this ha^dlinge
those, which avail to life everlasting: that describing the te^porall wars
of Monarchs and Princes, the sacking of cities, the slaugther of men, the
triumphs of conquerors: this describing the spiritual battles of the soul,
the voluntary forsaking of all temporal preferme^t, riches, and earthly
pleasures, the virtuous lives, and happy ends of holy men, and the triu^phant
crowns of martirs, who sacrificed their bodies for the name of Christ, and
washed Apocal. 9 v. 14.
their robes, and made them white in the blood of the lamb: that, out of
sundry prudent observations, giving us occasion, togather many politic notes,
and moral lessons, for the ordering of our life, in this vale of misery: this
with divine documents, and examples of Gods servants, informing us, how to
arrive to the top of all perfection, and as it were with the arcke of Noe, to
escape the vast deluge of sin, which ouerfloweth the world, and safely to
arrive at the mountains of the heavenly Armenia. Genes. ^. v. 4.


These being the pleasant fruits, and sweet flowers, which the caelestiall
gardin of Saint^ lives does yield: in vain I think it (good Reader) further to
commend this book of S. Gregory's Dialogues, which now in our english tongue
I present to thy view: thy soul happily desiring as much to enjoy the
conversation thereof, as ever did the old Patriarch Jacob, Genes. cap. 45. v.
28. 2. Reg. 14 cap. 14. v. 32. 2. Paralip. cap. 9. v. 23.
to see his son Joseph: Absalon, to come unto the presence of his father
David: or the kings of the earth, to behold the face o^ Solomon: yet for thy
better instruction, and more to inflame thee, I can not but add a word or two.
Thou shall therefore understand, that this book has in ancient tyn^es, been
so highly esteemed, and thought so necessary, that great Prelates and Princes,
though otherwise charged with the weight of their government, and occupied with
the continual flow of new business: yet were they so inamored with this
precious pearl, and so much desired that the light thereof, might be set upon
a candle-sticke, for the profitte of others, that they found spare time, to
translate it into the language of their own country. Pope Zachary a Grecian
Genebrard. in his Chronicle.
borne, who lived about an hundred and forty years after that blessed Doctor,
for the benefit of the East church, did turn it into the greek tongue. And
here in our country, king Alfrede seven hundred years ago, either translated
it him self, or else as Ingulphus writes, caused In his history.
it by the holy Bishope of Worcester, Werfredus, to be translated into the
Saxon tongue: so highly was this work esteemed in former ages, and thought so
necessary for the good of Christian people. Wherefore seeing continuance of
time, has not abased the dignity thereof, but rather made it more venerable,
and of greater authority: no less reason, nay sar more, have we to embrace it,
then our forefathers had: and that not only inrespect of virtuous life, none as
I think making any doubt, but that we are many degrees inferior to them
(sin never so tyrannizing, as in these unhappy days of ours) but especially
in respect of faith, and true religion: whereof they had none or little need,
and we most of all: seeing we be fallen into the latter days, in which as our
Savior says many false prophets Math. 24. v. 12.
shall rise and ^seduce many: and as the Apostle foretold, men will not bear
sound religion, but according to their own desires, heap to them selves
masters: and as experience teaches, new religions daily spring up and
multiply: and therefore great reason we have, carefully to look unto our
selves, that we suffer not s^ipwrake about the faith, and perish upon the
mutable sands, of late inuen^ions. For avoiding of which peril, what pilot
more cunning can we desire, in the tempes^tuous sea, and surging waves of these
diverse opinions, to conduct us to the secure harbor of the ancient,
catholic, and Apostolic church, then blessed S. Gregory? For if we wish an
indifferent judge, and one that was long before we fell at variance: he is so
ancient, that he lived a thousand years ago, and so by common computation
within the compass of the primative church. If we seek for virtue, he was
therein so rare, that both in his life time, he was had in great reverence, and
after his death honored for a Saint. If we desire learning, he is so
excellent, that he is reputed for one of the four princicipall doctors of the
church, and worthily surnamed the Great, and generally so famous, that with
his praise the earth is full, ana his glory above the heavens.

S. John Damascene, a doctor of the greek church, who lived not long after his
time, gives him this commendation. Prodeat in Orat. de defunctis
med^um Gregorius Dialogus, etc. Let Gregory (quoth he) that wrote the book of
Dialogues, Bishop of the elder Rome, be brought forth: a man as all know, that
was notable and renowned, both for holiness of life, and learning: who had as
men report, when he was at the holy mysteries, an heavenly and divine Angel
present with him in that sacred action. Isodorus also Bishop of Seuill in
Spain, prosecuteth De scriptorib. ecclesiasticis cap. 27.
his praises in this manner. Gregorius Papa Romanus, etc. Gregory pope of Rome,
Bishop of the Apostolic sea, full of compunction, of the fear of God, and
for humility most admirable: and so endewed through the grace of the holy
Ghost, with the light of knowledge, that neither in our days, nor in former
times, there was ever any doctor his equal. And the Council of Toletan. 8.
can. 2.
Toledo, in this manner extolleth him. Blessed Pope Gregory, honorable both for
merit of life, and worthily almost to be preferred before all, for his moral
discourses. To conclude, such as desire more herein, I refer them to our dear
country man venerable Bede, that lived within less then one hundred years
after him, (as is evident out of the two last chapters of his history,
translated into our english tongue) who in that said story of our countries
conversion, makes Lib. 2. cap. 1.
a brief rehersall of his learned works, among which this of his Dialogues is
also mentioned. There also he calls him, holy Pope Gregory, and the Apostle
of our country: and recounteth many of his notable acts, of piety and religion:
and diverse zealous labors, employed for Christ and his church: which for
breuity sake, I willingly pass over with silence.

Neither have only Catholic fathers and councels, had this reverent opinion
of blessed Pope Gregory: but Protestants also, judge him worthy of honor, and
commendation. Among many to name two or three. Master Jewel, sometime of
Salisbury, thinks him so sound for religion, that for credit of his cause he
thus cries out. O Gregory: o In his challenging sermon.
Leo:o Austen etc. If we be deceived, you have deceived us. Thomas Bell also,
so magnisieth this father, that he vouchsafes him, of this honorable title.
Saint Gregory Survey page 187.
(quoth he) surnamed the great, the holy and learned Bishope of Rome. And
master Coper, not long since of Winchester, In his Chronicle, in the year of
our Lord 599: See also his Dictionarij in the word Augustinus.
in his Chronicle entreating of the conversion of our country from Idolatry,
and paganism, to the faith of Christ, writteth thus. Gregory sent Austen,
Melitus, and John, with other godly and well learned men, to preach the
christian faith to the Angles: which were first received, of Ethelbert king of
kent: whom they converted to the faith, with diverse of his people. Finally his
memory is continued in the church of England, and him self enrold in the
callendar for a Saint in heaven: and I verily think, few Protestants yet so
far waded in malice, that they dare condemn him of false doctrine, and heresy:
or without blushing affirm him for infidelity to be damned in hell.

This being so, what better vmpiere in this cause can be had then he? what
arbiter more indifferent to tell us what religion flourished, not only in his
time, but also in the agesprecedent? and so consequently, which is the true
faith of Jesus Christ? For by common confession, what religion was in those
pure times, by holy men taught, believed, and practiced, is that, which the only
bogotte^ Son, brought from the bosom of his Father: that which the Apostles,
planted in the world, and registered in the writings of the new testament: and
that, which every one, that desires to come to heaven, ought with his heart
firmly to embrace, and in his life sincerely and constantly to follow, and
profess. Read then and peruse over these his Dialogues, and if thou find
in them, the platform of that faith, which the Protestants preach, confidently
in Gods name follow it: for it can not be false, which the holy Fathers in the
pure time of the primitive church taught: nor disagreing with sacred
scriptures, which verneralle antiquity practiced. But if on the contrary,
plain evidence shall convince, that Page 11. 116. 358.
Abbeys, and Nuneries, were then usual: that the solitary life of Page 390 426.
445.
Eremits, and Anchorets, was known to Christians: that Page 28. 238. 385. 330.
religious men, were a different habit, from seculare people: that Page 135. 18.
young children, were admitted into Abbeius and trained up for a religious
life: that Page 500
religious men, observed monastical poverty, according to their rule: that it
was Page 239 278. 291. 385.
d^mnuable, for virgins consecreated to God, to marry: that Page 220 379.
Eccle^^asticall persons, dedicated them selves to chas^ity, and after holy
orders, were bound to forsake the carnal company of their former wi^es: that
the Page 197
Saints in heaven, know our prayers: that Page 43. 68. 288. 338.
invocation of Saints Page 44. 86. 145. 266. 371.
Pilgrimage and visiting of holy places, Page 74. 300. 307.
reverent reserving and translation of relickes, were then in practice: Page
197. 258. 264. 280.
that they also wroughte miracles: Page 300
that churches were then hallowed: that they were also Page 744. 131. 328.
dedicated to the honor of Saints and that Page 6^.
holy days were likewise instituted, for their memory and due veneration: that
the Page 11. 79. 109. 218. 2^0. 222. 321. 459.
sign of the holy cross, has sorce to drive away devils, and work miracles:
that Page 83. 328.
holy water was had in devotion: that Page 465 490.
all sins were not mortal and damnable, but some small and venial: that the
Page 464. 503.
fire of Purgatory, was then taught and believed: that the Page 65. 213. 301.
432. 505.
sacrifice of the holy mass, was highly esteemed: that it was Page 165 499.
506. 509.
auailable for faithful souls departed: yea that Page 503
trentalles of Masses, were not then strange, or vnkne^^ne to Christian people:
That the Page 213 510.
real presence was confessed: that the Page 325
Sacrament was reserved: that Page 286 298.
burning lamps for reverence, were kept in the church: that Page 92. 266.
S. Peter was reputed Prince of the Apostles: and his successor the Bishope of
Rome, page 467
superior over other Bishiops: that Christ's servants might Page 274 402.
meritt upon earth, and that according to the variety of good work, in this
life, page 443
diversity of rewards was found in the next. If thou do find I say as
thou shall find, these and such like articles, so much detested of
Protestants, so highly ebraced of all Catholics, to have been curre^t in these
golden ages, believed of S. Gregory, and his predecessors: then what doubt can
be made, which religion is most true, and of every good Christian to be
followed?

Here it may be, that some to the discredit of antiquity, and disgreace of S.
Gregory, will say, that the stories reported in his look be incredible: and
many miracles seem utterly void of all truth. But answer is some returned,
that the authority of him that u^rote them, and the testimonies before
alleged, of Catholics and Protestants, in commendation of the author, be of
far more weight to justify his relation, then the light and vain suspicion of
any, to call the book in question. To this may be added, that seeing S.
Gregory, was a man of great learning, and had by reason of his high place, the
best kind of intelligence, easily could he not be deceived: and being besides
of great virtue and holiness, never would he willingly deceive others. Nay to
free us from all fear of any suspicion, him self was so careful of truth,
that being about to write this book, of the miraculous lines and deaths of
Italian Saints, invited thereunto by the virtuous importunity of his familiar
friends, he directed his letters to others, for certain information therein:
as namely to Maximinianus, Bishope of Syracusis in Sicilie: to whom he wrotte
touching this matter, in these very words. My Lib. 2. epist. 50. cap. 89.
indict. 11.
brethren that live familiarly with me, do enforce me by all means, briefly to
commit unto writing, some miracles of those fathers, which we have heard done
in Italy. For the effecting whereof, I stand in very great need of your
charitable assistance: to wit, that you would signify unto me such things, as
come to your memory, or it has been your chance to know. For I remember See
lib. 1. cap 7.
well, that you told me some things, concerning Abbot Nonnosus, who lived
nere unto Anastasius of Pentumis, which I have quite forgotten. Wherefore I
desire you, to write unto me both that, and whatsoever else you know of like
quality, and spedily to send them, unless you determine to be here shortly
your self in person.

This was the great care, and singular circumspection, which he used in this
heavenly business: by reason whereof, he was the better able to perform that
thing, which abundantly he has done, and that is, diligently to set down
how, and by what means, he came to the particularities, of whatsoever in his
Dialogues he reports: a greater thing then which, to give credit to his
writings, none can be devised: and therefore thosE that will doubtfully
descant of his stories; will hardly ever believe any, further then shall please
their own humor: for a more certain, and sure course can not be devised:
neither do I remember, the like to have been so observed of any other ancient
histriographers whatsoever. And surely, those which be so captious, as to
control what fitteth not their fancy, would I make no doubt, as liberally
speak their pleasure, (as in truth some in like cases have) and deliver their
quick censure, against many stories, no less strange then any reported by S.
Gregory, who yet when they shall understand, from whence they be taken, must of
necessity veil bonnet, condemn them selves sor too lavish of tongue, or
desperately fall to graceless infidelity or Atheism. For example: tell them
that there was a certain barren woman, which received a message from God by an
Angel, con^erning the bringing forth of a son, who should be consecrated to
God from his infancy: which falling out accordingly, and he coming ^o man's
estate, slew, him self alone, with the iawe bone of an ass, many hundreds of
his enemies that set upon him: and afterward being passing thirsty, and in
great extremity for lack of water, he prayed to God, and suddenly a
fountain sprung out of one of the great teeth of the said iawe bone: by
means whereof he was refreshed, and recovered his former strength. Tell this
story, I say, to many Protestants, that know not with what infallible
authority it is backed, and a man had need of a broad back, to bare the
frumppes and scoffs which they will load upon him, for giving credit to such
an old wives tale: and yet in fine, their chekes must consesse their
incredulous folly, if any christian blood be left, when they shall know, that
it is recorded by the holy Ghost in sacred scripture. Ind. cap. 13. and cap.
15. Iosue cap. 10. v. 12.
The like affections will they show, and the same liberty of speech will they
use, to hear, that at the commandment of an holy man, the sun did stop
his course and for some time stood still: that the iron head of an hatchet,
was made by an other, to ascend of it self from the bottom of the water, 4.
Reg. 6. v. 6.
and to swim in the top: that a great servant of God, did many hundreds of
years after his death, appear in body to Math. 17. v. 3.
an other, and talk with him in the presence of diverse: that there were two
famous and holy preachers, which wrought such wounderfull miracles, that the
very shadow of the Act. 5. v. 15. Act. 19. v. 12.
one, cured all sick persons, over whom it passed: and the napkins of the
other, brought from his body, healed diseases, and dispossessed devils. These
and such like, be as strange, and far more incredible, then any reported in
this book, and therefore will they as quickly be rejected for fables of many,
that hear them, until they understand that Gods word does give them
authority.

If then such miracles as these, find credit at the Protestants hands: why
should they contemn those here mentioned, being in them selves no more
strange or improbable: especially our Savior him self having made this
promise, to his Church. Amen Amen I say to Joan. 14. v. 12.
you, he that believes in me, the works that I do he also shall do, and
greater then these shall he do: Lib. de Babila Martiri.
which S. Chrysostom, in an whole book against the Pagans, writes to have
been fullfilled, not only in Peter's shadow, and Paul's garments, which as we
read in the Acts of the Apostles, healed Act. 19. v. 12.
infirmities: but also by the relics and monuments of Saints, and namely of S.
Babilas, of whom he there entreats. Seeing then we find, such wonderful
things wrought in the time of the old testament, and in the Gospel by our
Savior, as that the very touching of the Math. 14. 2. 36.
hemme of his garment, cured infirmities: and him self assuresh us that such
as bel^ued in him, should work greater, what reason is there, to discredit
those things, that are reported by ancient, holy and learned men: for as to
believe uncertain legendes, and apocriphall stuff, not commended to us by any
sufficient authority is not commendable, bnt an argument of ignorance or great
leuity: so to be so straight laced, as not to credit that, which is published
by them that be of known antiquity, learning, and virtue, and have besides
used all those means, which man's wit can devise, is passing injurious to
Gods Saints, opens the gate to the utter denial of all monuments of
antiquity, and all stories of former times whatsoever, and is in very truth
(not to say more) a plain demonstration, at least of a cauilling complexion.

For more light of that which has been said, let us a little descend to
somewhat in particular. S. Gregory in this third book, Cap. 15.
tells how an holy monk called Florentius, lived a solirary life, whose cell
upon a time, was environed with a huge number of snakes, which yet God at the
prayers of his servant, destroyed with a tempest, and afterward by his divine
providence, caused to be carried away by a great multitude of birds. The story
by some, may be thought ridiculous, and altogether incredible, and perchance,
not many in all his book more improbable: yet no reason, ouerhastily to
censure so worthy a man, as thereporter was, to seed our own foolish fancy:
more zealous of Gods glory I think we be not, then he was, nor more sharp of
judgment, to discern betwixt truth and falshoode, nor yet more religious to
avoid fabulous relations: why then should we be so captious, or curious as to
doubt of that, whereof he made no scruple at all? Does he not also note, by
what means he came to the knowledge thereof, which was not by any uncertain
rumor; or flying tale, but from the mouth (as him self says) of a virtuous
and faithful Priest called Sanctusus, who dwelt in the same province of
Valeria, where Florentius also led his life, and where ^he foresaid miracle
happened. By all which who sees not, that none can, with any color of reason,
quarrel at the truth of his narration. And, that Gods pleasure vouch saseth
sometimes, in such small things as these, to show his power, for the honor of
his servants, we learn out of holy scripture. For not only a small piece of
ground, as in this our case, nor an whole town or province, but almost all
the country of Egypt was pestered with fragges, and the face of the earth so
covered with locusts, that they did consume and spoil all herbs, and fruits
of trees: which yet at the intercession of Moises, were Exodus cap. 8. and cap.
10.
all by a western wind cast into the sea, so that not one remained in all
that land.

And not only in Gods word, but also in our own chronicles, and that yet fresh
in memory, we read of as prodigious a thing, concerning mice and owls: as
that which S. Gregory tells of snakes and birds. The strange accident, Anno
Domini 1581. Regni Elizab. 23.
is by Stovve thus set down. About hallowtide last past, in the marshes of
Dansey hu^drec, in a place called South, minster, in the country of Essex, a
strange thing happened: there suddenly appeared an infinite multitude of
mice, which ouerwhelming the whole earth in the said marshes, did sheare and
gnawe the grass by the roots, spoiling and tainting the same, with their
venomous teeth, in such sort, that the cattle which grased thereon were smitte,
with a murrin, and died thereof: which vermin by policy of man could not be
destroyed, till at length it came to pass, that there flocked together, all
about the same marshes, such a number of owls, as all the shire was not able to
yield, whereby the marshholders, were shortly delivered from the vexation of the
said mice. Having then the like miracle recorded in scripture, which no
christian can deny: and an other accident as wonder full, though happily without
any miracle at all, which fell out in our own days: shall we be yet for all
this, so wedd to our own will, or peruersely settled in opinion, as to believe
these, and to discredit the other: and in plain terms, without all reason
admit what we like, and reject what we please. This indeed may be the humor,
of some extrauagant conceit: but never can be the resolution, of a sober and
staide judgment.

But what do I dispute in a matter so clear, as though the authority of one
only S. Gregory, were not of more weight, to discharge him from falshoode, then
the empty words of thousands, that now live to impeach him of that crime.
Yet let us grant a thing not to be granted: to wit, that there be diverse
false things reported in his book, which is unreasonable: that the most of
his stories be not true, which is incredible: nay that they be all false and
fables, which is monstrous and intolerable: yet this being admitted, of
necessity for all that, granted it must be, that all those points of religion
before mentioned, as prayer to Saints: prayer for the dead: visitation of
relickes: and the rest, were then believed, and practiced throughout the
world: for otherwise, how could he have spoken of them so familiarly, if no
such things had then been in use, which is sufficient to prove the antiquity
of our religion, and that it was the current doctrine of the primative Church,
which is the principal and maine point, that I intended now to prove.

What has beue said, I hope may yield full satisfaction, to any indisserent
and moderate man, that rather desires truth for the saving of his soul, then
to contend in words, not to lose the victory. Yet for a more clear
demonstration of our says, and to show, that what religion S. Gregory speaks
of, was also long before his days generally taught, and received: I have to
the end of this book, adjoined an other small treatise taken out of the most
famous and renowned doctor of Gods Church glorious S. Augustine, who lived two
hundred years before the other: the contents whereof shall declare, that the
faith of his days, was in these very points, which the Protestants condemn
for most abominable, the very self same which S. Gregory taught, and we now
prosesse and mainetayne: and that so plainly, and perspicuously, as none shall
deny it, that have so much conscience, that their tongue can truly report what
their hearts do think: so that no doubt can be made, but that it was our
religion which the Apostles planted in the world: and consequently, that which
has from them descended unto us, by the continual succession of Pastors and
Doctors, as we can plentifully show out of diverse histories, and the notable
monuments of approved antiquity. Much more concerning this matter might be
said, but a Preface gives not scope to large discourses: hereafter Gods grace
assisting me, I intend more plentifully and exactly to entreat of this
subject.

Before I conclude, I cannot but lightely touch one point which in reading,
may somewhat trouble such as be not of learning, nor beaten in matters of
controversy. And it is concerning Lib. 4. cap. 14. page 385.
one Seruulus registered in this book for a Saint, who albeit he knew never
a letter in the book, yet did he cause the word of God to be readd unto him,
and did much profit therein: which fact of his, may seem to some to controull
the custom of the Catholic church, that neither likes, nor allows, the
promiscuall reading of the scriptures by ignorant vulgar people. But the ends
of this difficulty are so open, that the knot is soon loosed. For the Church
never forbad the scripture in the three learned tongues, of the Latin, Greek,
and Hebrewe: and therefore the Latin being the vulgar language in Rome, where
Seruulus lived, (though somewhat decayed by the mixture of foreign inundation)
lawfully might he do that, which by no law was then forbidden. But suppose it
had been a vulgar translation, yet certain it is, that the text was sincere,
and not fashioned by certain vpstart teachers to fit that religion, which
most pleased the ytching ears of their new disciples nor inuenimed with the
deadly drugges, of heretical invention, as the translations of our adversaries
english Bibles be (not to speak of any other) as any that please, may sone
find in the Rhemes Testament of the latter edition, straight after the
Preface, in a special rabble made for that purpose: Printed at Antuerp. 1600.
See the Conserence page 46.
and none can be ignorant, when as his Majesty in the Conserence at Hampton
court openly censured them all for corrupt and that of Geneua for the wo^st of
all: whereupon order was giuen^ for a new translation as ^he world know (...)
being so, in what a lamen^able state have those been (and still be, the same
books yet remaining) which these man^ (...) past thinking to have tasted the
hols^^^ ^^ters of Gods word, leading into life everlasting, b^^e on the
contrary druncke the filthy p^d^lles of corrupt translations, that infect the
soul, with the utter perrill of eternal damnation. No mother that tendereth
her children, would suffer them to be present at that dinner, in which though
she knew very well, that there were sundry dishes very healthful and good:
yet very pregnant suspicions she also had, that some one or two (she knew not
which) were dressed with a dram of poison. And shall the Church of God like a
me^cilesse and cruel stepdame: permit her children to feed upon that soode,
which though of it self it be never so sovereign, cordial, and angelicaell:
yet she knows, and that not by suspi^io us collections, but experiment all
demonstrations, that it is intersprinkled with many distillea drops of poison
not killing the corruptible carcass, but utterly destroying the immortal
soul? God forbid.

Besides all this I do not find, that in those days there was any such
prohibition enacted against vulgar translations: no such necessity then
occurring, which might move the governors of the Church, to make any such
law, men in those times generally proceedinge, with more discretion and
moderation. But the licentiousnes of latter times has herein been so
exorbitant, that requisite it was, the precipitate headines of men's unbridled
affections, should be restrained, and curbed by the severity of law. So in
old time, not only fasting, but also watching in the Church upon the Eues of
principal feasts, was with great devotion observed: and Vigilantius the
heretic, about Contra Vigilant.
that very point, taxed by the famous doctor S. Hieron: yet the great abuses,
which latter times brought forth, caused that custom to be quite abandoned:
for God has left that authority with his Church, in such matters as these, to
command or sorbidde, as the variety of times and edification of men's souls
should require.

Lastly, never did the Church so forbid vulgar translations, that they might
no manner of ways in private be readde of lay people: for euene in these our
days, they be found generally in all languages translated by Catholics, and
may be read of those, that have license, which is easily granted to such, as
are known to be of staide judgment, and humility, and likely to read them
with spiritual profitt to their souls, yea in those countries, which be not
infested with the late doctrine of Protestants: marry where that infection
rangeth, the reason of reading is more apparent, and consequently the liberty
more enlarged. This being so, the fact of Seruulus gives no shelter of refuge
to the unruly practice of our times, both because the scripture readde to him,
was in the latin tongue, which never any law interdicted: and though it had
been in an other vulgar language yet was it not tainted with the leuin of
heretical novelty, against which kind of Bibles in those days, I suppose no
prohibiting decree can be produced and though there could, yet not so strict,
but that devout people and of an humble spirit. might have them with license,
especially such a one as Scruulus was, who as S. Gregory reports, used
therein the help of religious people. Were men in these days endoued with
his spirit, and the scriptures sincerely translated, this question would be
sone determined. But alas we are fallen into these times, in which new masters
with extreme boldness, have corrupted both the sacred text it self, and the
unlearned of either sex be mounted to so high a pitch of presumption, and so
addicted to the suggestion of the private spirit, that they never blushe to
censure and contrary both fathers and Councels: by reason whereof, new faithes
be Anabaptists burnt. in Smith. field. in the 17. year of Queen E^^zab.
Ha^mond, Ket, and Cole, burnt at N^^ which H^ckat. with his prophets. Lib. 1.
cap. 10. page 74.
daily forged, and unspeakable blasphemies, have been broached: some oppugning
the incaernation of the son of God: some denying his divinity: and others
with insernal inspiration, adua^cing the^ selves, I know not to what
participatio^ of Christ, and divine digniti^: which being so, can any m^ruaile,
oriustly complain, that either such insectious trasla^ios be sorbide^, or the
outra giouslices of such unruly spirits be reslrained?

An other doubt also which may occurr is that fearful punnishment, which
besella certain ge^t lewoman present at a processio^, in which the relickes of
the blessed martyr S. Sebastian were translated, for the dedication of a new
oratorie: sor as S. Gregorye says, not abstaining the night before from her
husband, she was there by a deuile possessed: by which it shoud seem, that
she committed therein a greiuous sin. This lamentable accident, because it
may breed some scruple in those that be of a timorous and good conscience,
when they are to receive the holy communion, I have thought good bri^sely to
speak thereof. Certain therefore it is, that it is good counsel for married
folk, at such holy times to refrain, (as the Israelites did at the receiving
of the Exodus 19. v. 25.
lure) that they may be the better disposed for so heavenly a bancket: and that
sometime likewise a venial sin may be cowmitted, especially by the party
demanding that conjugal duty: so according to the resolution of holy and
learned men, no sin at all may be incurred, and very hardly a mortal,
except it be either done in contempt of God, or the holy time, which malice is
not almost imaginable among Catholics: or else against our conscience: for to
do any thing though otherwise indifferent or never so good, against our
conscience, is accompained always with sin more or less: which 4. did. 32.
q. vnica a^. 5. quest 2. ad pr. Sancher lib 9. de Matrim 6. disput. 12.
was the error of this woman mentioned by S. Gregory, as S. Thomas Aquinas
affirms, and other learned me^ following him, teach and maynetaine. If any
desire further instruction herein, let them in the fear of God, co^sult with
their learned virtuous and discrete spiritual fathers.

Now to make an end, I reserre the gentle Reader to the divine communication
and most pleasant conferences, that passed betwixt S. Gregory, and Peter his
Deacon: Voutsafe them I beseech thee of audience, and no question but thou
wilt say, that they are Psalm. 18.
more to be desired then gold and many precious stones, and more sweet then
the honey and the honey comb: and that in this small book, be more rich
treasures and rare spices contained, then ever king Ezechias 4. Reg. 20.
showed to the ambassadors of Babylon: gardins more fuller of delighte for the
soul to sollace it self, then ever were the vyneyardes of Engaddi: and to
conclude, variety Cant. 1.
of most excellent and sacred stories, far more pleasant to the ear, then
ever was bewtifull to the eye, Genes. c^p. 13.
the Paradise of God, or Egypt to them that come into Segor.

P. W.

FAVLTES TO BE CORRECTED IN SOME COPIES.

Page 1. lin. 20. read cap. 39.

Page 16. lin. 11. read since.

THE CHAPTERS OF THE FIRST BOOK.
1. OF Honoratus, Abbote of the monastery of Funda. 2. Of Libertinus, Prior of
the same Abbey. 3. OF a monk, that was gardener to the same Abbey. 4. Of
Equitius, Abbote in the province of Valeria. 5. Of Constantius, clerk of S.
Steuens church. 6. Of Marcellinus, Bishop of Ancona. 7. Of Nonnosus, Prior of
the Abbey in Mount Soracte. 8. Of Anastasius, Abbote of the monastery called
Suppentonia. 9. Of Bonifacius, Bishop of the city of Tuderti. 10. Of
Fortunatus, Bishop of the city of Tudertin. 11. Of Martirius, a Monk in the
province of Valeria. 12. Of Seuerus, a Priest in the same province.
THE DIALOGVES OF S. GREGORY THE GREAT POPE OF Rome. The first Book.
BEING upon a certain day too much ouercharged with the troubles of
worldelye busynes, in which ofte^tymes men are enforced to do more then of
duty they are bound: I retired my self, into a solitarye place, very fit
for a sad and melancholy disposition: where each discontentement and dislike
co^cerninge such secular affairs, might plainly show them selves, and all
things that usually bring grief mustered together, might frelye be
presented before mine eyes: in which place after that I had satt a long
while, in much silence and great sorrow of soul, at length Peter my dear
son and deacon came unto me, a man whom from his younger years I had always
loved most intierelye, and used him for my companion in the study of sacred
scripture: who seeing me drowned in such a dompe of sorrow, spoke unto me in
this manner: what is the matter? or what bad news have you heard? for certain
I am, that some extraordinarye sadness does now afflicte your mind. To whom I
returned this answer. o Peter, the grief which continually I endure is unto me
both old, and new: old through common use, and new by daily encreasinge.
For mine unhappy soul wounded with worldly business does now call to mind,
in what state it was, when I lived in mine Abbeye, and how then it was
superior to all earthly matters, far above all transitory and corruptible
pelf, how it did vsuallye think upon nothing but heavenly things: and
though is was enclosed in mortal body, yet did it by contemplation pass far
beyond earthly bounds, and penetrat to the very height of heauene: and as for
death, the memory whereof is almost to all men grievous, that it did love and
desire, as the end of all miserye, the reward of her labors, and the very
entrance to an everlasting and blessed life. But now by reason of my
pastoral charge, my poresoule is enforced to endure the burden of secular men's
business, and after so excellent and sweet a kind of rest, defiled it is with
the dust of worldly conversation: and when it does at the request of others,
attend to outward affairs, no question but it returns back, far less
fit to think upon those that be inward, spiritual, and heavenly: Wherefore at
this present do I meditat what I suffer, and consider what my soul has lost:
and the memory of my former loss, does make that more grievous which I do
now e^dure: For do you not be hold at this present, how I am tossed with the
waves of this wicked world, and see the shipp of my soul beaten with the
storms of a terrible tempest: and therefore when I remember my former state of
life I ca^ not but sighe to look back, and cast myne^eies upon the forshaken
shore.

And that which does yet greiue me more is, because I see my self so carried
away amayne with the boisterous blastes of this troublesome world, that I can
not now scarce behold the port from whence I did first hoise sail: for such
be the down falls of our soul, that first it loses that goodness and virtue,
which before it possessed: yet so, that it does still remember what it has
lost: but afterward, carried away more and more, and strayinge further from
the pathe of virtue, it comes at lenghte to that pass, that it does not so
much as keep in mind, what before it did daily practice: and so in
conclusion, it falls out as I said before, that saylinge further on, we go at
length so far, that we do not so much as once behold the sweet harbor of
quiet and peace from whence we first set forth. Sometime also my sorrow is
increased, by remembringe the lives of certain notable me^, who with their
whole soul did utterly forsake and aba^done this wicked world: whose high
perfection when I behold, I can not also but see mine own infirmities and
imperfection: very many of whom, did in a contemplative, and retired kind of
life much please God: and least by dealing with transitory business they might
have decayed in virtue, Gods goodenes voutsafed to fre the^ from the trobles
and affairs of this wretched world. But that which I have now said will be
far more plain, and the better perceived, if the residue of my speech be
dialogue wise distinguished, by setting down each of our names, you askinge
what you shall think convenient, and I byanswere, giving satisfaction to such
questions as you shall demand at my hands.

Peter. I do not remember any in Italye, that have been very famous for
virtue: and therefore ignorant I am, who they be, that comparinge your life to
there is, you should be so much inflamed to imitate their steps: for
although I make no doubt but that there have been many good men, yet do I
verily think that none of the^ wroughte any miracles, or at least they have
been hitherto so buried in silence that whether any such thing has been done
or no, not any one man can tell.


Gregorye. If I should Peter but report only those things, which my self alone
have understood by the relation of virtuous and credible persons: or else
learned by my self, concerning the life and miracles of perfect and holy men,
I should sooner in mine opinion lack day to talk in, then matter to speak of.


Peter. Desirous I am, that you would vouchsafe, to make me partaker of some
of them: and not to think much, if upon so good an occasion, you interrupt
your other study of inter pretinge the scripture, because no less edification
does grow by the relation of miracles: For as by the exposition of that, we
learn how virtue is to be found and kept: so by recountinge the miracles of
holy me^, we know how that which is found out and possessed, is declared and
made manifest to the world. And some there are that be sooner moved to the love
of God by virtuous The profit of saints liu^s.
examples then by godly sermons: and of^e^tymes by the lives of holy fathers,
the heart does reap a doble commoditye: for if by comparing of his own life
with theirs, he finds him self inflamed with the love of heaven, although
before he had happily a good opinion of him self yet seeing now how far
others do excel him, he becomes also more humble, and is brought to have a
more lowly conceipte of his own actions and virtue.


Gregory. Such things as venerable and holy men have told me, I will now
without any further delay make you partaker of, and that following the example
of sacred scripture: for sure I am that S. Luke and S. Marcke learned that
gospel which they wrote, not by sight, but by the relation of others: yet lest
any in reading should have occasion to doubt whether such things as I write
be true or no, I will set down by what means and of whom I have learned
them: yet in some of them you have to know that I remember not all the
particulars but only the matter: in other some both the matter and also the
words. And besides if I should have been so curious as to have kept in mind
each man's particular words, many uttered after the country manner, would
have made the style of my discourse nothing handsome nor semelye. That story
which I mean first to begin with, I had by the report of passinge reverent
men and of great years.


OF HONORATVS, ABBOT of the monastery of Funda.

CHAPTER I.
IN times past one Venantius a noble man, had a living in the country of
Samnium: the farmer whereof had a son called Honoratus, who from his very
childehode by the virtue of abstinence did thirste Abstinence.
after the joy; of heauene: and as in other things he lead an holy life, and
refrained from all idle talk, so did he much, as I said before, subdue his
body by means of abstinence. His parents upon a certain day had invited
their neighbors to a bancket which consilted altogether of flesh, whereof
because for the love of mortification he refused to eat, his father and mother
began to laughe at him, vvilling him to fall to that which they had, for can
we (quoth they) get yovve any fish here in these mountains, (for in that
place they used some times to hear of fish but seldom to see any) But whiles
they were thus iestinge, and mocking at there son, soddainly they lacked
water: where upon a servant with a wodden bucket (as the manner is there) went
to the well to fetch some: into which as he was a drawinge, a fish entered in,
which upon his return, together with the water he powered forth before them
all: And the fish was so great, that it served Honoratus very well for all
that day: At this strange chance all were stricken in admitation, and his
parents abstained now from further scoffinge at his virtue, and begun to have
him in reverence for his abstinence, whom before for that very cause they did
mock and scorn: and by this means, the fish brought miraculouslye from the
well discharged Gods servant from that shame, which he had e^dured, through
their uncivil jesting. Honoratus proceeding forwarce in virtue, at lenghte was
made fiee by the foresaid Lord Venantius: and afterward in that place, which
is called Funda he builte an Abbeye, wherein he was the father almost of two
hundred monckes: and he lived in so great holiness that he gave good example to
all the country round about. Upon a certain day, it fell so out, that a
stone of an huge greatness which was dug out of the mountain that hunge over
the top of his Abbeye tumbled down by the side of the hill, threatninge both
the ruin of the house and the death of all the moncks within: The sign of the
cross.
which danger the holy man saying ready to com upon them, called often upon
the name of Christ, and puttinge forth his right hand made against it the
sign of the cross, and by that means did he stay it, and pynne it fast to
the side of that steep hill: which thing Laurence a religious man affirms to
be most true, And by cause it found not there any place upon which it might
rest, it hangs at this time in such sort, that all which now look upon it,
do verily think that it would continually fall.

Peter. I suppose so notable a man as he was, and who afterward became
master to so many scollers, had him self some excellent teache^ of whom he
was instructed.


Gregory. I never heard that he was scoller to any: but the grace of the holy
Ghost is not tied to any law. The usual custom of virtuous men is, that
none should take upon him to rule, who first, has not learned to obey: nor
to command that obedience to his subjects, which before he has not given to
his own superiors. Yet some there be which are so inwardly taught by the
doctrine of Gods holy spirit, that although they have no man to instruct them
outvvardlye, yet do they not want the direction of an inward teacher: which
liberty of life notwithstanding is not to be taken for an example by such as
be vveake and infirm, least vvhiles each one does in like manner presume to be
full of the holy Ghost, and contemn to learn of any, they become them selves
erroneous masters. But that soul which is full of Gods holy spirit, has for
proof thereof most evident signs, to vvi^t the other vortues, and especially
hurnilitye, both which if they do perfectlye meet in one soul, apparent it
is, that they be testimonies of the presence of heavenly grace. And so we
read not, that John Baptist, had any master, nor yet that Christ who by his
corporal presence taught his Apostles took him in amongst the number of his
other disciples, but voutsafed to instruct him invvardlye, and left him as it
were in the sight of the world to his own liberty. So Moises likewise
was taught in the wilderness, and learned by the Angel, what God gave him
in charge, which by means of any mortal man he knevve not: but these things
as before has been said, are of weakelinges to be reverenced, and not by any
means to be followed.


Peter. I like very well of your opinion: yet I beseech you to tell me,
whether so notable a father as he was, left not some scholar behind him, that
did imitate his masters steps.


OF LIBERTINVS PRIOR of the same Abbey.

CHAPTER II.
Gregory. THe reverent man Libertinus who in the time of Totilas king of the
Goths, was Prior o^ the same Abbey of Funda, was brought up and taught by
him: of whom albeit the certain report of passinge many, has made his
sondrye virtues known to the world, yet the foresaid religious man Laurence,
who still l^ueth and that time had very familiar acquaintance with him, has
often told me many things, whereof some few which now com to my mind I will
here set down. In the same province of Samnium, as Libertinus was in his
iornye about business of the Abbey: it fell so out, that Darida, captain of the
Goths with his army met him, by whose soldiars the man of God was thrown
from his horse: which in iniurye he taking very patientlye offered them also
his whipp, saying: Take this, that you may make him the better to go: and
having said so, he betoke him self to his prayers. The army marched on very
fast, and quickly came to the river called Vulturnus, where they began to
beat there horses both with their lances, and also to spurr them, till the
blood came, and all this to make them take the water: but yet no beating nor
spurring, cold enforce the^ forward: for they were as much afraid to enter
the river as though it had been some deep downfall. At length when they
were all vvearied with beating, one a mongest the rest said, that the reason
why they were thus punished was, for taking away the horse from Gods
servant: whereupon returninge straighte ways back, they found Libertinus
prostrat at his prayers: and calling upon him to rise, and take his horse: he
bad them go on a Gods name saying, that he needed him not, but for all that
they alighted and set him perforce upon his own beast and so in all have
departed, and returning back to the river they passed over so quickly as
though in the channel there bad been no water at all: and so it fell out
that Gods servant having resti^ution made him of his one horse, that all the
soldiars came likewise to enjoye the use of their own.

At the same time one Buccellinus entered Campania with an army of French men,
and dycause it was commonly said, that the Abbey in which the holy man lived,
had great store of monye, the French men very gredy of so good a booty came
thither, and with raginge minds went into his oratory (where he lay prostrat
at his prayers) seekinge and cryinge out for Libertinus: an^ a strange thing
it was, for though they came in and stumbled upon him, yet cold they not see
him, and so deceived through their own blindenes away thy departed as empty
as they came.

At an other time likewise upon business of the monasterye, at the commandment
of the Abbote who succeeded his master Honoratus, he took his iornye to Rauenna.
And for the great love which he bare to venerable Honoratus, always did he
bear about him in his bosom, one of his stockinges. Being in his way it sell
Relicke^.
so out that a certain woman was carrying the corpe of her dead son: who no
sooner saw the servant of God but for the love of her child she laid hold
upon his bridle, protesting with a solemn oathe, that he should not depart,
before he had raised up her dead son. The holy man not acquai^ted with so
strange a miracle, was much affraide to hear he^ make such a request, and
willinge to have got away, yet saying no means how to effect his desir,
greatly did he doubt what was best to be done: Here it is worth the noting to
consider what a conflicte he had in his soul: humility and the mothers pietye
striuinge together: fear to presume upon so unusual a mirac^e, and grief not
to help the desola^ mother: at length, to the greater glory of God, piety and
compassion ouercam that virtuous soul, which therformay trutlie be called
in^incible, because it did yield and was conquered: for a virtuous soul it had
not been, if piety and compassion had not ouercom it: wherefore lightinge from
his horse, he fell upon his knees, lift up his hands to heauene, drew the
stockinge out of his bosom, laid it upon the breast of the dead corpse: and
behold whiles he was at his prayers, the soul of the child returned in to
the body, which he perceiuinge, took it by the hand and delivered it alive to
his sorrowful mother, and so went on the rest of his iorny.


Peter. What is to be said in this case? for was it the merit of Honoratus,
or the prayers of Libertinus that wroughte this miracle?


Gregorye. In the worckinge of so notable a miracle, together with the faith of
the woman, the virtue of both did concur: and therefore in mine opinion,
Libertinus had power to raise up that dead child, because he had learned to
trust more upon the virtue of his master then his own: for when he laid his
stocking upon the childs breast, no doubt but he Saints in heaven pray for
us. 4. reg. 20.
thought, that his soul did obtain that, for which he did the^ pray. For we
read the like of Heliseus, who carryinge his masters cloak, and coming to
the river of Iordane, stroke the waters once, and yet divided them not: but
when straighte after he said, Where is now the god of Helias? and then stroke
the river with the same cloak, he made a way open for him self to pass
through: Whereby you perceive Peter how much humility avails for the
worckinge of miracles, for then the merit of the master, had force to do that
which he desired, when he called upon his name: and when with humilitye he did
submitt him self to his master, he wroughte the same miracle which his master
had done before him.


Peter. I am well pleased with your answer: but is there I pray you any
thing else of him yet remayninge, which may serve for our edisicatio^.


Gregory. Surely there is, if there be yet any that list to imitate so notable
an example: for I make no doubt, but that the patience of so worthy a man did
far excel all his signs and miracles, as you shall now hear. Upon a
certain day the Abbot, who succeeded Honoratus, fell so pitifully out with
venerable Libertinus, that he struck him with his sistes: and because he
could find never a staff, up he took a foot stole and with that did so
strike his head and his face, that they both swelled and became black and
blewe. Being thus unreasonably beaten, without giuinge any words, he went
quietly to bed. The next day, he was to go forth about business of the Abbey,
and therefore when mattins were ended, he came to his Abbotes beds side, and
humbly demanded of him leave. The Abbot knowinge how greatly all did honor
and love him, supposed that he would for the former injury have forsaken the
Abbey: and therefore he asked him, whether he meant to go, to whom he answered:
Father (quoth he) there is a certain matter concerning the Abbey to be
handled, where I must needs be, for yesterdaye I promised to come, and therefore
I am determined to trauail thither. Then the Abbot consideringe from the bottom
of his heart, his own austeritye and hard dealinge: and the humility and
meeknes of Libertinus, suddainlye leapt out of his bed, gat hold of his feet,
confessed that he had sinned, and done wickedlye, in presuminge to offer unto
so good and worthy a man, so cruel and contumelious an iniurye. Libertinus
on the contrary, prostrat upon the earth, fell down at his feet, attributinge
all that he had suffered, not to any cruelty of his, but to his own sins and
demerites. And by this means, the Abbot was brought to great meekenes: and the
humility of the scoller, becam a teacher to the master. Going afterward
abroad about the foresaid business of the Abbey, many gentlemen of his
acquaintance that had him in great reverence much maruailed, and diligently
enquired, by what means he came by such a swollen and black face, to whom he
answered: Yesterday quoth he at eueninge for punishment of my sins I met with
a foot stole, and gat this blow, which ye see: And thus the holy man
preseruinge both truth in his soul and the honor of his master, did neither
bevvraye the fault of his father, nor yet incurred the sin of lyinge.


Peter. Had not so venerable a man as this Libertinus was, of whom you have
told so many miracles, and strange things, in so great a convent, some that
did imitat his holy life and virtues.


OF A CERTAIN MONCKE, that was gardener to the same Abbeye.

CHAPTER III.
Gregory. FElix called also Coruus, one who^ you know very well, and who not
long since was Prior of the same Abbeye, told me diverse very strange
things, some of which I will pass over with silence, because I hasten to other,
but one there is which by no means I can ommitt. This it was.

In the same Abbey there lived a certain moncke very virtuous who was the
gardener. A theife likewise there was, that used to clyme over the hedge and so
to steal away the wortes. The holy man seeing that he did set many which
afterward he cold not find, and perceiuinge that some were trodden down, and
other stolen away, walked round about the gardaine to find the place where
the theife came in, which when he had found, by chance also as he was there he
light upon a snake, which he willed to follow him, and bringing him ^o the
place where the theife entered, gave him this charge: In the name of JESUS
(quoth he) I command thee to keep this passage, and not to suffer any theife
to come in: Whereupon the snake forthwith, obeying his commandment, laid it
self a cross in the way, and the monk returned to his cell. Afterward in
the heat of the day when all the monckes were at rest, the theife according
to his custom, came thither and as he was clyming over the hedge and had put
one leg on the other side, suddainlye he saw the snake, which stopped the
way, and for fear falling backewarde, he left his foot hanginge there by
the shoe upon a stake, and so he hunge with his head downewarde, until the
return of the gardener: who coming at his usual hour, found the theife
hanginge there in the hedge, whom when he saw, he spoke thus to the snake: God
be thancked, thowe have done what I bad the, and therefore go now thy way: upon
which liceuce, the snake by and by departed. Then coming to the theife, he
spoke thus unto him. What means this good brother, God has delivered you
as you see into mine hands: why have you been so bold as so often to robb away
the labor of the monckes?, and speakinge thus, he loosed his foot, without
doing him any harm, willing him also to follow him, who brought him to
the gardin gate and gave him those vvortes which he desired to have stolen,
speaking also to him in svvete manner after this sort. Go your way, and
steal no more, but when you have need, come hither to me, and what sinfully
you would take, that will I vvillinglye bestow upon yovve for Gods sake.


Peter. I have hitherto as I now perceive, lived in an error: for never did I
think, that there had been any holy men in Italy which had wrought
miracles.


OF EQVITIVS ABBOT IN THE province of Valeria.

CHAPTER IIII.
Gregory. BY the relation of venerable Fortunatus, Abbot of the monasterye
which is called Ciceroes bathe, and also of others reverent men, I have come
to the knowledge of that which now I mean to tell you. There was a
passinge holy man called Equitius, dvvellinge in the province of Valeria, who
for his virtuous life, was in great admiration with all men, with whom
Fortunatus was familiarlye acquainted. This Equitius by reason of his great
holiness of life, was the father and governor of many Abbeis in that Province.
In his younger years, many and sore carnal tentations he endured, which made
him more fervent and diligent in prayers and to persevere continually in that
holy exercise, which he did, craving most instantly of God to afforde him some
remedy. Lyring in that manner, it fell so out, that in vision upon a certain
night he saw an Angel come unto him, who made him an eunuch, and so
^eliuered him from all those carnal motions in such sort that never after he
felt any more, as though he had not been any man at all. Trusting now upon
this great grace receiue^ by the special goodenes of God, as before he was a
gouerner of men, so afterward he took charge likewise of we men, and yet for
all that, did he continually admonish his scollers not easily to credit them
selves herein, nor to follow his example, nor yet to trust upon that gift,
which they had not in them selves, least it turned to their own ruin and
destruction.

At such time as diverse witches were here in this city of Rome apprehended: one
Basilius that was ^ principal man in that wicked art, put Monckes apparel
different from others.
upon him the habit of a moncke, and so fled a way to Valeria: and coming to
the reverent Bishop of the city of Amirtin, he desired his help that he would
for the good of his soul commend him to Abbot Equitius. The Bishop went with
him to the Abbey, where he made suit to the servant of God, that he would
vouchsafe to receive into his convent that moncke which he brought, whom so
sone as the holy man beheld, he said to the Bishop. This man good brother
(quoth he) whom you commend unto me, seems in mine eyes to be a devil, and
not any moncke: whereunto the Bishop replied and said, that he sought excuses
not to grant his petition: Not so quoth the servant of God, but I do
denounce^ him to be such a one as I see him, and because, you shall not
think that I will be disobedient, what you command, I will perform:
Whereupon he was received into the Abbeye. Not many days after, Gods servant
travailed far of to preach unto the people in the country: after whose
departure, It fell out, that in the monasterye of virgins, which was under his
charge, one of them which in respect of her corruptible carcass seemed
bewtiful, fell into an ague, to be afflicted with sore fittes, and not so much
to speak as pitifully to cry out in this manner I shall die forth with, unless
Basilius com unto me, and by his skill in physic restore me to my health. But
in the abse^ce of their father, none of the mo^ckes durst presume to enter into
the monastery of virgins, much less was he permitted, that was yet but a
nouice, and whose life and conversation was not known to the rest of the
brethren. A messenger therefore with all speed was dispatched to the servant of
God Equitius, to let him understand how such a Nun was fallen into a terrible
burninge ague, and how she did earnestly desire to be visited of Basilius:
which news so sone as the holy man did hear, in an anger he smiled and said,
did I not say before hand that this companion was a devil and not a moncke?
go your ways and turn him out of the Abbeye: and as for the virgin that is
so sick of a fever, take no further care, for hereafter it shall not troble
her any more, nor she make any further inquisitio^ after Basilius. The moncke
that was the messenger returninge back, understood that the Nun was at that
very chowre restored to her health, in which the servant of God Equitius, far
distant, affirmed that she should, no question but by special miracle, like to
the example of our Savior, who being desired Joan. 4.
to visit the son of a Lord, did by his only word restore him to his
health, so that the father at his return knew his son to be restored to
life at that very hour in which he heard so much from the mouth of truth it
self. The monckes puttinge their fathers commandment in execution, turned
Basilius out of the Abbeye, who being so expulsed did often say, that he had
by his incantations hanged Equitius his cell in the air, and yet that he cold
not hurt any of his monckes: This wretch not long after in this city of Rome
through the zeal of good people for his wickedness was burnt, and so ended
his life.

Upon a certain day, one of the Nuns of the same monasterye, goinge into
the gardin saw a lettice that liked her, and forgettinge to bless it before
with the sign of the The sign of the cross used in blessinge.
cross, greedily did she eat it: where upon she was suddenly possessed with
the devil, fell down to the ground, and was pitifully tormented: word in
all have was carried to Equilius, desiring him quickly to visit the afflicted
woman, and to help her with his prayers: who so sone as he came into the
gardin, the devil that was entered, began by her tongue as it were to excuse
him self saying: what have I done? what have I done? I was sitting there upon
the lettice, and she came and did eat me: But the man of God in great zeal
commanded him to depart, and not to tarry any longer in the servant of
almightye God, who straighte ways went out, not presuminge any more to touch
her.

A certain noble man likewise called Felix, of the province of Nursia father
to Castorius, who now dwells here with us in Rome, vnde^standinge that
Equitius had not received holy orders, and yet that he did visit many places,
and preach unto d^uers, upon a day very boldly went and asked him, how he
durst presume to preach, not having received holy orders, nor yet license of
the Bishop of Rome, under whom he did live: upon which demand, the holy man
being thus compelled; gave him to understand by what means he had obtained
licens to preach; speaking thus unto him. What you say unto me, my self have
seriously thought upon: but on a certain night, a young man in vision stood
by me, and touched my tongue with such an instrument, as theie use in letting
of blood, saying: Behold I have put my word into thy mouth, go thy way and
preach. And since that day though I would, I can not but talk of God:


Peter. Desirous I am to know, what manner of life he ledd, who is said to
have received such gifts at Gods hand.


Gregory. The work Peter proceeds of the gift, and not the gift from the
work, otherwise grace were not grace; for Gods gifts do go Grace
increases by good works.
before all worckes of ours, although the gifts by the worckes which follow
do increase: but to the end that your may understand what life he led, which
was known to the reverent man Albinus Bishop of Reatino: and many there be yet
alive, which might very well remember the same. But what do you seek for
further worckes, when as his purity of life, was answerable to his diligence in
preachinge? for such a zeal to save souls had inflamed his heart, that albeit
he had the charge of many monasteries, yet did he diligently travail up and
down and visit churches, towns, villages, and particular men's houses, and all
this, to stir up the hearts of his auditors to the love of heavenly joys. The
apparel which he ware was so base, and contemptible; that such as knew him
not, would have thought scorn so much as to have saluted him, though him
self had first offered that courtesye. And whether so ever he went, his manner
was to ride, but that upon the most forlorn beast which could be found, his
bridle was but an halter, his saddle no better the^ plain shepes skins, His
books, of diu^ni^y were putt in to leather bags, and those he did carry him
self, some hanging on the right side of his horse, and some upon the left:
and to what place so over he came, he did so open the fountains of sacred
scripture, that he wa^tered their souls with the heavenly dew of his
sermons: Whose grace in preaching was so great, that the fame thereof came even
to Rome it self: and as the tongues of flatterers do with their glorious
words kill the souls of such as give them the hearing; at the same time,
some of the Roman clergy did in flatteringe sort complain unto the Bishop
of this Apostolic sea, saying, what manner of rusticall companion is this,
that has taken upon him authority to preach, and being without learning,
presumes to usurp unto him self the office of our Apostolical Lord? wherefore
if it please you, let him be sent for before your presence, that he may taste of
the severity of ecclesiastical discipline: And as it falls out, that he
which has much business, is overcome sometime by flattery, if that pleasing
venime be not spedilye dispatched from the soul, at the persuasion of his
clergy the Pope gave his consent that he should be sent for to Rome, to
understand what talent and gift he had received from God, and so one
Iulianus who afterward was made Bishop of Sa^inum was sent, having yet
commandment given him to br^nge him up with great honor, to thend that the
servant of God, might not thereby sustain any injury or detriment in his
fame: who to gratify the Popes clergy, went in post to the Abbey, and finding
there in his absence, certain antiquaties writing, demanded of them for the
Abbot, who told him, that he was in the valley at the bottom of the Abbey
mowinge of hay: Julian had a man very proud and stubborn, and such a one,
that he cold scarce rule him: This man he sent in all have for the Abbot, who
in an angrye mode went his way, and coming quickly into the medowe where
beholdinge all that were there cuttinge of grass, he demanded, which of them
was Equitius: and when they showed him where he was, being yet far of he fell
into a great fear, and became therewith so fainte, that he cold scarce go
upon his legs: tremblinge in that manner he came to the man of God, and
humbly bowinge down his head, he embraced his knees and kissed them, tellinge
him, that his master was desirous to speak with him. After Gods servant had
saluted him again, he willed him to take up some of the grass, and to carry
it home for their horse, and I will (quoth he) straighte ways come, when I
have dispatched this little work which remains.

In this mean time Iulianus much maruailed what the matter was, why his man
tarried so long, and saying him at length to come laden with grass upon his
neck, in great rage he cried out to him saying, Sirrah, what means this, I
sent you to fetch me the Abbot, and not to bring meat for mine horse. Sir
quoth his man he will come to you by and by: and forthwith the man of God came
in base apparel and a paier of shoes beaten full of nails, caryinge his sit
he upon his neck and being yet far of, his man told him, that he was the
Abbot. So sone as Iulianus beheld him attired in that base sort, he contemned
him, and devised with him self how to speak unto him in the most cross and
crooked manner he could. But when Gods servant drew nighe, such an
intolerable fear came upon Iulianus that he fell a tremblinge, and his tongue
so faltred, that he cold scarce deliver the messag for which he came.
whereupon he fell down at his feet, and desired that he would voutsafe to
pray for him: and withal gave him to understand, that his Apostolical father
the Pope was desirous to see him. Upon the receipte of which news the
venerable man Equitius, gave almighty God most The Pope, highest bishop.
hearty tha^ckes saying, that heavenly grace had visited him by means of the
highest Bishop: and straighte ways he called for some of his mo^ckes,
commandinge horse to be made ready in all have: but Iulianus wearye of his
iornye told him, that he could not travail so sone, but of necessitye must
res^ him self that night: I am very sorry for that quoth the holy man, for if
we go not to day, to morrow we shall not, and thus by reason of the others
wearines, he was enforced that night to remain in the Abbeye. The next
morninge about the davvning of the day came a post with a tired horse
bringing letters to Iulianus, commanding him not to pre^ume to molest or to
dravve the servant of God out of his monasterye. And when he required the
reason of this countercommande, the messenger told him that the next night
after his departure, the Pope was terribly frighted in a vision, for
presuminge to send for the man of God. whereupon Iulianus risinge suddenly
out of his bed, and commendinge him se^fe to the venerable man's prayers spoke
thus unto him. Our father desires you not to troble your self any further,
but to stay in your monastery: which when Gods servant heard, very sorry he
was and said, did not I tell you, that if we did not set forward on our iorny
by and by, that afterward we should not? Then upon charity he entertained his
messenger a little while with him in his Cloister, and though by all means he
refused, yet he enforced upon him a reward for the pains he had taken. See
therefore Peter how God does preserve and keep them, who in this life do
contemn them selves and how they are secretly honored of the citizens in
heaven, who are not ashamed outwardly to be little esteemed in this world: and
on the contrary, in the sight of God they be of no accounte, who in the eyes
of their own friends and neighbors do swell through desire of vain glory.
And therefore our Savior Christ who was truth it self said to certain: You
are they that iustisye Luc. 16.
your selves before men, but God knows your hearts, for that which is high
to men is ab^omminable in the sight of God.


Peter. I maruayle very much how so great a Bishopp cold be deceived in so
worthy a man.


Gregory. Why do you marvel Peter? for the reason why we are deceived is,
because we be men: what? have you forgotten how David who usually had the
spirit of prophecy pronounced sentence against innocent 2. Reg. ca. 16. and
cap. 19.
Miphiboseth the son of Ionathas when he gave credit to the lyinge words of
his servant Siba? which thing notwithstanding because i^ was done by David,
we both believe to be just in the secret judgment of God, and yet by humane
reason how it was just we can not perceive: what marvel then is it, if we
that be not prophets, be some times by lyinge tongues abused, and otherwise
transported, then charity and justice would: for it is much to be considered,
that every Bishop has his mind troubled with a world of business, and it
can not be, when the mind is distracted about many things, but that it is the
less able sufficientlye to examine those that be particular, and so much the
sooner is he deceived in some special case, by how much he is busied with
the multitude of many.


Peter. It is most true that you say.


Gregory. But I must not pass over with silence, that which the reverent man
Valentinus, sometime mine ab bot told me concerning Equitius. For he said,
that his body being buried in the oratorye of S. Laurence the martyr,
Churches dedicated to Saints.
a certain country man, set upon his grave a chest full of wheat, little
co^sideringe or respectinge how worthy and notable a man lay there buried:
Whereupon suddainlye a miraculous whirlewinde came and ouerthrevve that chest
and cast it far of, all other things remayninge still in their former places:
by which all did plainly perceive, of what worth and merit that man was, whose
body lay there buried.

To this must I also add an other thing, which I heard of venerable
Fortunatus, a man that does much please me for his years, life, and
simplicitye. At such time as the Lombardes came into the province of Valeria;
the monckes of the monastery of the reverent man Equitius fled from thence into
the oratorie, to the holy man's sepulcher, into which place the cruel men
entringe, they began by violence to pull the monckes forth, either to torment
them, or else with their swords to kill them. Amongst whom one sighthed and
for very bitter grief, cried out. Alas Invocation of saints and there
protection.
alas holy Equitius, is it thy pleasure, and art thou content, that we should
be thus miserably haled, and violently drawn forth, and do not thowe
voutsafe to defend us? which words were no sooner spoken, but a wicked spirit
possessed those savage soldiers in such sort that falling down upon the
ground, they were there so long tormented, until all the rest of the
Lombardes which were without, understood of the matter, to the end that none
should be so hardly as to presume to violate that holy place. And thus as the
holy man at that time, defended his own monckes, so did he likewise Pilgrimage
to saints bodies.
afterward succor and preserve many more that fled unto the same place.


OF CONSTANTIVS CLARCKE OF the Church of S. Steuene.

CHAPTER V.
THat which I entende now to tell you, I learned by the relation of one of my
fellow Bishops, who lived in a monckes vveede many The distinct habit of
Monckes.
years in the city of Ancona, and led there a good and religious life: Many
also of mine own friends who be now of good years and live in the same
parts, assirme it to be most true. Nere to the foresaid city of Ancona there
is a church of the blessed martyr S. Steue^, in which one called Co^sta^tius,
a man of venerable life, did serve there for clarcke, who for his virtue and
holiness, was famous far and nere being one that utterly despised all worldly
things, and with the whole power of his soul thirsted after the joys of
heauene. Upon a certain day it fell s out that there vvanted oil in the
church, by reason whereof the foresaid servant of God had not vvherwith to
light the lamps: where upon he filled them all with water, and as the
manner is, put a piece of paper in the midst, and then set thim on fire, and
the water did so burn in the lamps as though Burning lamppos in the church.
it had been very oil: by which you may gather Peter of what merit this man
was, who enforced by necessity, did change the nature of the element.

Peter. Very strange it is that you say, but desirous I am to know, what
humility he had invvardlye in his soul, who outwardly was so wonderful in the
eyes of the world.


Gregory. Among miracles very fitly do you enquire the inward state of the
mind: for it is almost incredible, how miracles wrough^te in the sight of
men, do with their tentation inwardly assalt the soul. But after you have
heard only one thing, which this venerable Co^stant^us did, you vvil
quickly perceive what an humble man he was.


Peter. Having now told me one of his miracles, it remains that yovve do
edifye me also with the humilytie of his soul.


Gregory. Because the report of his holy life was very much spread abroad,
many from diverse countries travailed to Ancona, being very desirous to see
him: and amongst others a certain country fellow was come far of, for that
very purpose: at which time it so chanced that the holy man, was standinge
upon a paier of vvodden staiers busying him self there in mending of lamppes.
A very little person he was of stature, with a thin face, and to the
outvvard view contemptible. This fellovv that came to see him, inquired
earnestly which was the man for whose sake he had travailed so long a
iornye. Those that knevv him, forth with told him, pointing to Constantius.
But as folishe souls do measure the merits of men, by the qualitye of their
bodies, so he beholdinge him so little and co^temptible, by no means could be
persuaded that they told him truth: for in the country fellows mind, there
fell out as it were a great conte^tion betwixt that which he had heard, and
that which he saw: and he verily persuaded him self, that he could not be so
little in his eyes, who was so great in his former conceipte: and therefore
when very many did constantly affirm that he was the man, the simple soul
despised him, and in scoffing manner said I verily believed that he had been a
goodly great man, but this fellow has not any thing at all in him that is
like a man: which words of his the servant of God Constantius hearing,
forthwith left his lamps which he was in hand with, and in great have came
merrily down the staiers, embraced the country clown, and of exceeding love,
held him fast in his arms, kissed him, gave him great thanckes, for having
that opinion, and spoke thus unto him. Thou only (quoth he) ha^t thine eyes
open, and do truly behold what I am: By which fact we may easily gather
what an humble man he was, that loved the country fellow the more for
contemninge him: for injurious words and contumelious usage, try what a man
is inwardly in his soul: for as proud men are glad of honor, so those that
be humble, for the most part rejoice in contempt and disgrace, and when they
behold them selves to be of no account in the opinion of others, glad they
are, because they see that to be confirmed by the judgment of others which
inwardly in their own souls they had of them selves.


Peter. This man as I perceive, was outwardly great in miracles, but yet
greater by his inward humility of soul.


OF MARCELLINVS BISSHOPPE of Ancona.

CHAPTER VI.
Gregory. MArcellinus also a man of holy life, was Bishopp of the same city
of Ancona: who was so sore trobled with the gowte, that being not able to go,
his servants were enforced to carry him in their hands: Upon a day by
negligence, the city was set on fire, and though many labored by throwinge on
of water to quench it, yet did it so increase and go forward, that the whole
city was in great danger: for it had laid hold of all the houses that were
next it, and consumed already a great part of the town, none being able to
help or withstand it: In so pitiful a necessity and great danger, the
Bishopp carried by his servants came thither and commanded him self to be
set down right against those furious flames, and in that very place, whether
the force of the fire did seem most to be^de: which being done, the fire
maruailous strangelye turned back into it self, and as it were cried out,
that it could not pass the Bishopp: and by this means, was it stopped from
goinge forward, went out of it self not being able to touch any other
buildinges. By which Peter yovve see what an argument of great holiness it was,
for a sick man to sit still, and by his prayers to quench those raging flames.


Peter. I do both see it, and much wonder at so notable a miracle.


OF NONNOSVS PRIOR OF the Abbey in mount Soracte.

CHAPTER VII.
Gregory. Now I intend to let you understand somewhat of a place not far
dista^t which I heard of the reverent Bishop Maximianus, and of the old
moncke Laurio, one whom you know: both which are yet living, and as for
Laurio he was brought up under that holy man Anastasius, in the Abbeye which
is hard by the city of Nepye: and Anastasius both by reason of the nerenes of
the place, equal love of virtue, and like profession of life, was dailye in
the company of holy Nonnosus Prior of the Abbey which is in mount Soracte.
This Nonnosus had for his Abbot a very sharp man, whose roughe conditions
notwithstanding he did always bear with wonderful patience, and did in such
sweet sort govern the monckes, that oftentimes by his humility he appeased the
Abbotes anger. The Abbey standinge in the topp of an hill had never an euene
and plain place fit for a gardin: one only little plott of ground there was,
in the side of the mountain, but that was taken up of a great stone which did
naturally grow there, so that by no means it could serve for a gardin: yet
venerable Nonnosus upon a day, began to thin^ke with him self that at least
that piece of ground would serve very well to set wortes, if by any means
that huge stone could be taken away: but then he likewise thought that five
hundred yoke of oxe^ would not be able to stir it: wherevpo^ despairinge of all
humane help, he betokehim self to Gods goodness, and in that very place gave
him self to prayer in the quiettyme of the night, and behold on the morninge
when the monks came thither they found that huge stone removed far of, and a
very fit plot of ground left to make them a gardin.

At an other time the same holy man being washinge of lamppes, made of
glass, one of them by chance fell out of his hands, and brake into many
pieces: who fearinge the great furye of the Abbot did forthwi^h gathere up all the fragmentes, laid them before the altar, and there with great sithinge fell
to his prayers: and afterward liftinge up his head he found the lamp entire
and whole. And thus in these two m^racles did he imitat two notable fathers, to
wit Gregory and Donatus: the first of which removed a mountain, and the other,
mad^ a broken chalice safe and sound.


Peter. We have as I perceive now miracles after the imitation of old saints.


Gregory. How say you? are your content also in the conversation of Nonnosus,
to hear how he did imitat the fact of the prophet Ileliseus:


Peter. Content I am, and most earnestly desire it.


Gregory. Upon a certain day, when the old oil was spent, and the time to
gather olives was now at hand: the Abbot because there own trees took not,
thought it best to send the monckes abroad to help strangers in the
gatheringe of theires, that for the recompe^se of their labor they might
bring home some oil for the necessities of their own house. This
determination, the man of God Nonnosus in great humility did hinder, least the
monckes goinge abroad from their cloister to get oil, might lose somewhat
in the devotion of their souls And therefore because he savve that their own
trees had yet a fevve olives, he willed those to be gathered and put into the
press and that oil which came forth, to be brought unto him, though it were
never so little: which being done, he set the little vessel before the
altar, and after their departure he offered his prayers to God, which being
ended he called for the monckes, commandinge them to take away the oil which
they brought and to power a little thereof into all the vessels which they had,
that each of them might have some of the benedictio^ of that oil: which
being done, he caused the vessels empty as they were to be close stopped, and
the next day they found them al full.


Peter. We find daily the words of our Savior to be verified, who says: My
father even to this time does work, and I do Joan. 5.
work.


OF ANASTASIVS ABBOT OF the Monastery, called Suppentonia.

CHAPTER VIII.
Gregory. AT the same time, the reverent man Anastasius, of whom I spoke
before, was notarye to the church of Rome, whereof by Gods providence I have
now the charge; who desirous, only to serve God, gave over his office and made
choice of a monastical life: and in that Abbeye which is called Suppentonia,
he lived many years virtuously, and governed that place with great care and
diligence: Over the Abbey there hangs an huge rock and beneath it, there is
a stiepe downfall. Upon a certain night, when God had determined to reward
the labors of venerable Anastasius, a voice was heard from the topp or that
rock, which very leisurely did cry out: Come away Anastasius: who being so
called, straighte after, seven other monks were severally called by their
names. And then the voice stayed for a little time, and then called again the
eighte moncke: Which strange voice the Conue^t hearing very plainelye, made no
doubt but that the death of them that were so called, was not far of:
wherefore not many days after before the rest Anastasius him self, and then
the others in order, departed this mortal life, as they were before called from
the topp of the rock. And that moncke who was called after some pausing, did a
little while survive the rest, and then he also ended his life: whereby it was
plain, that the stayinge of the voice, did signify that he should live a
little longer then the other. But a strange thing happened, for when holy
Anastasius lay upon his death bed, a certain monk there was in the Abbey,
that would needs dye with him, and therefore fell down at his feere, and there
began with tears to beg of him in this manner. For his love to whom you are
now goinge I beseech and adsure you, that I may not remain in this world
seven days after your departure: and indede it so fell out, that before the
seventh day was come, that he left this mortal life, and yet was not he that
night named by that voice amongst the rest, so that it appears plainelye
that it was only the intercession of Anastasius, vhich obtained that his
departure.


Peter. Saying that monk was not called amongst the other, and yet by the
intercession of that holy man was taken out of this life: what other thing
can we gather hereof, but that such as be of great merit, and in favor with
God, can sometime obtain those things which be not predestinate.


Gregory. Such things as be not predestinat by God ca^ not by any means be
obtained at his hands: but those things which holy men do by their prayers
effect, were from all eternitye predestinat to be obtained by prayers. For very
predestination it self to life everlasting, is so by almighty God disposed,
that Gods elect servants do through their labor come unto it, in that by
their prayers they do merit to receive that which almighty God determined
before all worlds to bestow upon them.


Peter. Desirous I am to have this point more plainly proved: to wit, that
predestination may by prayers be helped.


Gregory. That which I inferred Peter may quickly be proved: for ignorant you
are not that our Lord said to Abraham: In Isaac shall sede be called to the:
to whom also he said, I have appointed thee to be a father of many nations:
and again he Gen 21. Genesis 27. Genesis 22. and 26.
promised him saying: I will bless^hee, and multiplye thy sede as the stars
of the heaven, and as the sand of the sea: Out of which places it is plain
that almighty God, had predestinat to multiply the seed of Abraham by Isaac,
and yet the scripture Genesis 25.
says: Isaac did pray unto our Lord, for his wise because she was barren,
who did hear him, and Rebecca conceived: If then the increase of Abraham's
posteritye, was predestinat by Isaac, how came it to pass, that his wife was
barren? by which most certain it is, that predestination is fulfilled by
prayers, when as we see, that he by whom God had predestina^ to increase
Abraham's seed, obtained by prayer to have children.


Peter. Seeing reason has made that plain, which before I knew not, I have
not herein any further doubt.


Gregory. Shall I now tell you somewhat of such holy men as have been in
Tuscania; that you may be informed what notable persons have flourished in those
parts, and how greatly they were in the favor of almighty God?


Peter. Willing I am to give you the hearing: and therefore beseech you to
proceed forwards.


OF BONIFACIVS BISHOP OF Ferenti.

CHAPTER IX.
Gregory. A Man of holy life there was, called Bonifacius, Bishop of the city
of Ferenti, one that with his virtuous conversation did well discharge his
duty. Many miracles he did, which Gaudentius the priest who yet lives does
still report: and saying he was brought up under him, no question but by
reason of that his presence he is able to tell all things the more truly.

His Bishopric was passing poor (a thing which to good men is the
preserver of humilitye) for he had nothing else for his revenues, but only one
vineyarde, which was also a^ one time so spoiled with a tempest of hail, that
very few grapes did remain: Bonifacius coming in, and seeing what was
happened, gave God great thanckes, for that he had sent him further pouertye to
his former necessity. And when the time came that those few grapes which
remained were ripe, he appointed one according to the custom, to keep his
vineyard, comma^dinge him carefully to look well unto it. And upon a certain
day he willed Constantius who both was a Priest and his nephewe to make ready,
as before they were wont to do, all the barrels and wine vessels they had, which
thing when his nephevve the Priest understood, he maruailed much to hear
him command so mad a thing, as to make ready the vessels for wine, him self
having no wine at all to put in: yet durst he not inquire the reason why he
gave that charge, but did as he commanded, and made all the vessels and other
things ready as before they had always used to do. The^ the man of God,
caused the poor remnaunt of grapes to be gathered and carried to the
vvine-presse, and dispatching all others away, him self tarried there still
with a little boy whom he commanded to tread those grapes, and when he
perceived that a little wine began to run forth, the man of God took it, and
put it into a little vessel, and powered somewhat thereof into all the other
barrels and vessels which were made ready, as it were to bless them with that
little quantitye: when he had so done, he called straighte ways for the
Priest, commanding him to send for the poor, upon whose coming the wine in
the press began to increase and run out so plentifully, that it did fill all
the pottes and other vessels which they brought. Whe^they were all served, he
bad the boy to leave treadinge, and come down: then locking up the store
house, into which he had put his own vessels, and setting his own seal upon
the door, to the church he went, and three days after he called for
Constantius, and having said a few prayers, he opened the door, where he
found all the vessels into which he had before poured but a very little liquor
worckinge so plentifully, that if he had not then come, they had al run over
unto the floor. Then he straightly commanded the priest his kinseman not to
reveal this miracle to any, so long as he lived, fearinge least by means
thereof the outward opinion of men, might through vain glory inwardly have
hurt his soul: followinge therein the example of our master Christ, who to
teach us to walk in the pathe of humilitye, commanded his disciples
concerning him self, not to tell any what they had seen, until the son of
man was risen again from death.


Peter. Because fit occasion is now offered: desirous I am to know, what the
reason was, that when our Savior restored sight unto two blind mean, and
commanded them to tell no body: yet they after their departure made him
known throughout all that country. For had the only begotten son of God, who
is coeternal to his father, and the holy Ghost, a desire herein to do that
which he could not perform: to wit, that the miracle which he would have
kept secret, cold not yet be concealed.


Gregory. All that which our blessed Savior wroughte in his mortal body, he
did it for our example and instruction, to the end that followinge his stoppes
according to our poor abilitye, we might without offense pass over this
present life: and therefore when he did that miracle, he both commanded them to
conceal it, and yet it cold not be kept in, and all this, to teach ^is elect
servants to follow his doctrine, to wit that when they do any notable thing
whereof glory may arise to them selves, that they should have a desire not to
be spoken of, and yet for the good of others contrary to their own mind
they should be laid open and known: so that it proceed of their great
humility to desire that their worcks may be buried with silence, and yet for
the profit of others, it should fall so out, that they can not be concealed.
Wherefore our Lord would not have any thing done which he could not effect:
but what his servants ought to desire, and what also contrary to their minds
was convenient to be done, like a good master he taught us by his own example.


Peter. I am very well satissied with this your answer.


Gregory. For as much as we have now made mention of Bonifacius, let us
prosecute a few more of his acts, not yet spoken of. A^an other time upon the
feast day of S. Proculus the martyr, one Feast days of sa^inctes.
Fortunatus, a noble man that dwelt in that town: did heartily entreat the
Bishop that after he had done the sole^nitye of mass, he would voutsafe to
Saying of mass.
come unto his house to bles his meat, and dine with him. The man of God was
content to satisfye his request, so charitably was he invited: and therefore when
mass was done he vve^t thither: but before the table was yet blessed, suddenly
(as some me^ by such means get their living) one came to the gate with an
ape, who began to play upon an instrument, which the holy man hearing, was
discontented and said: Alas alas, this vvretched man is dead, this vvretched
man is dead. Behold I am come hither to dinner, and have not yet ope^d my
lips to praise God, and he is here with his ape playing upon his instrument.
Then he desired them to give him some meat and drink: yet I would have you
know (quoth he) that he is a dead man. when the unhappy wretch had filled
him self and was going out at the gate, a great stone fell from the house and
brake his head. Of which blow he fell down and was taken up half dead, and
being carried away the next day as the man of God had before said he departed
this life: wherein Peter we have to consider how holy men are with fear to be
reverenced: for they no question be the temples of God, and when an holy man is
enforced to anger, who is then moved but he that dwells in that temple:
wherefore we have so much the more cause to fear how we provoke such kind of
persons to wrath, seeing we know that he is present in their souls, who has
power and might sufficient to inflict what punishment him self best pleases.

At an other time, the foresaid Priest Constantius his nephew, had sold his
horse for twelve crounes, which money he laid up in his chest: and being abroad
about other busynes it so happened, that certain poor people pititully begged
of the holy Bishopp that he would vouchsafe to bestow some thing upon them
for the re^iefe of their necessity: The man of God not having any thing to
give them, was much grieved, to send them away emptye: whiles he was thus
trobled, suddenly it came to his mind, how his nephew had sold his horse,
and that the money was in his chest: whereupon in his absence by virtuous
violence, he brake open the lock, took away the twelve crowns and bestowed
them as best pleased him self upon the poor people: Constantius returninge
home and findinge his chest open, looked for his money and findinge it not, he
began to exclaim, and with great noise and furye to cry out against his uncle,
saying: All other can live here in quiet, only I can not. The Bishop hearing
him crying out in that manner came unto him, as also the rest of his family and
when he began with sweet speech to mitigat his furye: in great anger he replied
saying. All other can live with you, only I can not be suffered to be in
quiet, give me my money which you have taken out of my chest: The Bishop moved
at his words departed Churches dedicated to our Ladie^.
away, and went into the church of the blessed virgin Mary, where liftinge
up his hands with his vestiment upon them, he began standinge Prayer to our
Ladye^.
to pray, that she would help him to so much money, that he might quiet
the furye of the mad Priest: and castinge suddenly his eyes upon the garment
that lay between his arms stretched out, he found twelve crowns lyinge
there so fair and brighte, as though they had then newly come from the mint:
who forth with goinge out of the church, cast them to the raginge Priest
with these words. Lo there is your money which you have kept such a stir
for, but know you that after my death you shall never be Bishopp of this
place, and that for your covetous mind. By which true ce^sure of his we
gather, that the priest provided that money for the gettinge of the
Bishopric. But the words of the man of God did prevail for the same
Constantius ended his life without any further promotion then to the dignity
of Priesthood.

At an other time, two Goths came unto him for hospitalitye, saying that they
were trauailinge to Rauenna: unto whom he gave with his own hands a little
wodden bottle full of wine, enough happily for their dinner: of which
notwithstanding they drancke until they ca^ to Rauenna, and though they
staide Iorne days in that city, yet had they no other wine then that which
the holy man bestowed upon them, and so likewise they continued until they
returned back again to the same venerable Bishop, drincking dailye of the
same, and yet never lackinge wine to serve their necessity: as though in that
wodden bottell which he gave them, wine had grown and not there increased.

Not long si^hence there came from the same country, a certain old man that
is a clercke, who reports diverse notable things of him, which must not be
past over with silence. For he says that goinge upon a day into his gardin
he found it all full of caterpillars, and saying all his vvortes spoiled,
turninge him self to them he spoke thus: I adjure you in the name of our Lord
Jesus Christ, to depart from hence, and not to eat any more of these wortes:
after which words those worms did forthwith so vanish away that there was
not one to be found in all the whole gardin. But what great marvel is it, to
hear such things reported of him that was now a Bishopp, being then both by
reason of his orders, and also holy conversation of life, grown into favor
with almighty God, saying those are more to be admired which this old clergy
man said that he did, being yet but a little boy. For he affirms that at
such time as Bonifacius dwelt with his mother, and went abroad, that sometime
he came home without his shirte and oftentimes without his coat: for no sooner
did he see a naked man, but he gave away his clothes, and put them upon him, to
the end that him self might be clothed with a reward in the sight of God:
his mother rebuked him often for doing so, and told him that it was no reason
that being poor him self he should give away his apparel to other. Upon an
other day, goinge into the barn, she found almost all her wheat which she
had provided for the whole year giuene away by her son, to the poor: and as
she was for very grief thereof beatinge and tearinge of her self, the child
of God Bonifacius came, and with the best words he could began to comfort
his afflicted mother: but when by no means she would be quieted, he entreated
her to go out of the barn where the little wheat that remained was: when
she was departed the virtuous youth fell straighte way to his prayers: and
after a little while goinge out he brought his mother back again, where
she found it as full of wheat as before it was: at the sight of which miracle
she being touched in soul, exhorted him to give as he pleased, saying he
could so sone obtain at Gods hands what he asked. His mother also kept
hens before her door, which a fox that had his berye not far of used to carye
away, and upon a certain day, as the youth Bonifacius was standinge in the
entrye, the fox after his old manner came and took away one of the hens:
whereupon in all have he ran to the church, and prostrat there in prayer with
loud voice he spoke thus: Is it thy pleasure o Lord that I shall not eat of
my mothers hens, for behold the fox does devour them up: and rising from
his prayers, he went out of the church, and straighte ways the fox came back
again with the hen in his mouth, leaving it where he found it, and forthwith
fell down dead in the presence of Bonifacius.


Peter. It seems strange unto me, that God vouchsafes in such small things
to hear the prayers of them that put their trust in him.


Gregory. This falls out Peter by the great providence of our creator, to
the end that by little things which we receive at his hands, we should hoope
for greater: for the holy and simple ladd was heard in prayinge for small
matters, that by the^ he should learn how much he ought to trust in God,
when he prayed for things of greater importance.


Peter. What you say, pleases me very well.


OF FORTVNATVS BISHOP of the city of Tuderti.

CHAPTER X.
Gregory. AN other man also there was in the same parts called Fortunatus,
Bishopp of Tuderti, who had a most singular grace in castinge out of devils, in
so much that sometime he did cast out of possessed bodies whole legions; and
by the continual exercise of prayer, he ouercam all thiere tentations:
Iulianus who had an office here in our church, and not long since died in this
city, was familiarly acquainted with him, by whose relation I learned that
which I will now tell you, for by reason of his great and in ward familiarity,
often was he present at such miracles as he wroughte, and did diverse times
talk of him to our instruction, and his own comfort.

A certain noble matrone there was, dwellinge in the hither parts of
Tuscania, that had a daughter in law, which not long after the marriage of
her son, was together with he^ mother in law, invited to the dedication of
the oratory of the blessed martyr S. Sebastian: and the night before this
Dedication of churches.
solemnitye, overcome with carnal pleasure, she could not abstain from her
husband: and though in the morninge her former delighte trobled her
conscience, yet shame drove her Processio^.
forth to the procession, being more ashamed of men, then fearinge the
judgment of God, and therefore thither she went together with her mother in
law. And behold, straighte upon the bringing of the relics of S. Sebastian
Translation of ^eli^es.
the martyr into the oratorye, a wicked spirit possessed the foresaid matrons
dawghter in law, and pitifully tormented her before all the people. The Priest
of the oratory beholdinge her so terribly vexed and lifted up, took a white
lynninge cloth and cast upon her; and forth with the devil also entered into
him, and because he presumed, above his strength, enforced also he was by his
own vexation, to know what him self was. Those that were present took up
the young getle woman in thiere hands, and carried her home to her own house:
And for as much as she was by the enemy continually and cruelly tormented,
her kinsfolk that carnally loved her, and with thiere love did persecut her,
caused her, caused her to be carried for help to certain witches: so utterly
to cast away her soul, whose body they went about by sorcerye for a time to
relieve. Coming into thiere hands, she was by them brought to a river, and
there washed in the water, the sorcerers laboring a long time by their
inchantementes to cast out the devil, that had possessed her body: but by the
wonderful judgment of almightye God it fell ou^, that whiles one by unlawful
art was expelled, suddenly a whole legion did enter in. And from that time
forward, she began to be tossed with so many varieties of motions, to shrike
out in so many sundry tunes, as there were devils in her body. Then her
parents consultinge together, and confessing thiere own wickedness, carried her
to the venerable Bishop Fortunatus and with him they left her: who having
taken her to his charge, fell to his prayers many days and nights, and he
prayed so much the more earnestly, because ^he had against him in one body, an
whole army of devils: and many days passed not, before he made her so safe and
^ounde, as though the devil had never had any power or interest in her body.

At an other time, the fame servant of almighty God, cast forth a devil out of
one that was possessed: which wicked spirit when it was no we night and saw
few men stirring in the streets, taking upon him the shape of a stranger,
began to go up and down the city crying out: O holy Bishop Fortunatus,
behold what he has done, he has turned a stranger out of his lodginge, and
now I seek for a place to rest in, and in his whole city can find none. A
certain man sittinge in his house by the fire, with his wife and his little
son, hearing one to cry out in that manner, went forth, and enquired what
the Bishop had done, and withal invited him to his house, where he caused him
to set with them by the fire: and as they were among them selves discoursinge
of diverse matters, the same wicked spirit on a sudc^ain entered into his little
child, cast him into the fire, and forth with killed him: then the wretched
father by the loss of his son in this manner, knew full well, whom he had
entertained, and the Bishopp turned out of his lodginge.


Peter. What was the cause, that the old enemy presumed to kill his son, in
his own house: who thinckinge him to be a stranger, voursafed him of lodging
and entertaynement.


Gregory. Many things Peter seem to be good and yet are not, because they be
not done with a good mind and intention: and therefore our Savior says in the
gospel: If they eye be naught, al thy Math. 6.
body shall be darcke: for when the intention is wicked, all the work that
follows is naught, although it seem to be never so good: and therefore this
man who lost his child, though he seemed to give hospitalitye, yet I think
that he took not any pleasure in that work of mercy, but rather in the
detraction and infamy of the Bishop: for the punnisheme^t which followed, did
declare that his entertainment goinge before, was not void of sin: for some
there be, which are careful to do good worckes, to the end they may obscure
the virtue of an other man's life; neither take they pleasure in the good thing
which they do, but in the conceit of that hurt which thereby they imagine
reclou^deth to others: and therefore I verilye suppose, that this man which gave
entertainment to the devil, was more desirous to seem to do a good work
then to do it in deed: to the end that he mighteseme more charitable then the
Bishop, in that he entertained him, whom the man of God Fortunarus had thrust
out of his house.


Peter. It is verilye so as you say: for the end of the work declared, that
the intent of the doer was not good.


Gregory. At an other time likewise, one that had lost his eysighte was brought
unto him, who craved his intercession and obtained it: for so sone as the man
of God had prayed for him, and made A miracle of the sign of the cross.
the sign of the cross upon his eyes, straighte ways he received his sight.
Beside this, a certain soldiars horse became so mad, that he cold scant be
holden by many, and so cruel he was that he rent and tare the flesh of all such
as he could reach with his tethe: at length as well as they could they tied
him with roopes, and so brought him to the man of God: who puttinge An other
miracle of the sign of the cross.
forth his hand, made upon his head the sign of the cross, and forth with
all his madness departed in such sort, that he became more gentle then ever he
was before. Then the soldiar seeing his horse so miraculously cured, determined
to bestow him upon the Bishop: which because he refused, and yet the other
instantly entreated, that he would not reject his poor gift, the holy man
took the middle way, and yielded so to the soldiars request, that yet he would
not take any reward for the doing of that miracle: for he gave him first so
much money as the horse was worth, and then received him: for perceiving that
the soldiar would have been grieved, if he had refused his courteous offer,
upon charity he boughte that, whereof he had then no need.

Neither must I pass over with silence, that which I heard almost twelve
days since: for a certain poor old man, was brought unto me (because I
loved always to talk with such kind of men) of whom I inquired his country:
and understanding that he was of the city of Tuderti, I asked him whether he
knew the good old father, Bishop Fortunatus: to which he answered that he
knew him, and that very well. Then I beseech you (quoth I) tell me whether you
know of any miracles which he did, and because I am very desirous, let me
understand what manner of man he was. This man (quoth he) was far different
from all those which live in our days, for he obtained at Gods hands
whatsoever he requested: One of his miracles which comes to my mind, I
will now tell you.

Certain Goths upon a day travailing not far from the city of Tuderti, as
they were in thiere iorny to Rauenna, carried away with them two little
boys from a place which belonged to the said city. Nevves hereof being
brought to the holy Bishop Fortunatus, he sent straight ways, desiryng those
Goths to com unto him: to whom he spoke very courteouslye, being vvilling by
fair speech to pacifye th^ere fierce and cruel natures: and afterward told
them that they should have what money they desired, so they would make
restitution of the children: and therefore I beseech you (quoth he) gratifye my
request in this thing. Then he which seemed to be the chief of the^ two told
him, that whatsoever else he commanded, they were ready to perform, but as
for the boys by no means they would let them go. To whom the venerable man
(threatninge in sweet sort) spoke unto him in this manner: You grieve me good
son to see that you will not be ruled by your father; but give me not any
such cause of grief, for it is not good that you do: But for all this the
Gothe continewing still hard hearted, denied his request, and so went his way,
yet coming again the next day, the holy man renewed his former suit,
concerning the children: but when he saw that by no means he cold persuade
him, in sorrowful manner he spoke thus: well I know that it is not good for
you to depart in this manner, and leave me thus afflicted. But the Goth not
esteming his words, returned to his inn, set those children on horseback,
and sent them before with his servants, and straighte ways him self took
horse and followed after: and as he was ridinge in the same city by the
church of S. Peter the Apostle, Dedicatio^ of churches to Saints.
his horse stumbling, fell down and brake his thighe in such sort that the
bone was quite a sunder: up was he taken, and carried back again to his Inn:
who in all have sent after his servants, and caused the boys to be brought
back again. Then he sent one to venerable Fortunatus with this message: I
beseech you father to send unto me your deacon, who when he was come unto him
lying in his bed, he made those boys which before upon no entreaty he would
restore to be brought forth, and delivered them to him saying. Go and tell my
Lord the Bishop: Behold you have cursed me and I am punnished, but I have now
sent you those children which before you required, take them, and I beseech you
to pray for me: The deacon received the children, and carried them to the
Bishop: whereupon the holy manforth with gave his deacon some holy water,
saying. Go quickelye and cast it upon him where he lies, who went his way
and coming to the Goth, he sprinkled all his body with holy water: and o A
miracle wroughte by holy water.
strange and admirable thing, the holy water no sooner touched his thighe but
all the rupture was so healed, and him self so perfectly restored to his
former health, that he forsook his bed that very hour, took his horse, and
went on his iornye, as though he had never been hurt at all: and thus it
fell out, that he which refused for money and upon obedience to restore the
children, was by punnisheme^t enforced to do it for nothing. When the old man
had told me this strange storye, ready he was to proceed unto other: but
because I was at that time to make an exhortation to some that expected me,
and the day was well spe^te, I could not at that time hear any more of the
notable acts of venerable Fortunatus; and yet if I might, never would I do
any thing else, then give ear to such excellent stories.

The next day, the same old man reported a thing far more wonderful: for he
said that in the same city of Tuderti, there dwelt a good virtuous man called
Marcellus, together with two of his sisters, who fallinge sick, somewhat late
upon Easter even departed this life: and because he was to be carried far of, he
could not be buried that day. His sisters having now longer respit for his
burial, with heavy hearts ran weeping unto the Bishop: where they began to
cry out aloud in this manner: we know that thou leadest an Apostolical life,
that thou do heal leapers, restore sight to the blind: come therefore we
beseech you, and raise up our dead brother. The venerable man hearing of
their brothers death, began him self likewise to weep, desired them to
depart, and not to make any such petition unto him, for it is our Lords
pleasure (quoth he) which no man can resist: when they were gone, the
Bishop continued still sad and sorrowful for the good man's death, and the
next day being the solemn ^east of Easter, very earlye in the morninge he
went with two of his deacons to Marcellus house, and coming to the place
where his dead body lay, he fell to his prayers: and when he had made an
end, he rose up and satt down by the corpse and with a low voice called the
dead man by his name saying, Brother Marcellus: whereat, as though he had
been lightely a sleep, and awaked with that voice, he rose up, opened his eyes,
and lokinge upon the Bishop said. O what have you done? o what have you done?
to whom the Bishop answered saying, what have I done? Marye (quoth he)
Yesterdaye there came two unto me, and discharged my soul out of my body, and
carried me away to a good place, and this day one was sent, who bad them
carry me back again, because Bishop Fortunatus was gone to mine house. And
when he had spoken these words, straighte ways he recovered of his sickness,
and lived long after. And yet for all this we must not think that he lost
that place which he had, because there is no doubt, but that he might by the
prayers of his in^ercessor, live yet more virtuously after his death, who had
a care before he died to please almightye God.

But why do I spend so many words in discoursinge of his wonderful life,
when as we have so many miracles Visitation of relickes or Pilgrimag^.
even at these days wroughte at his body: for as he was wont to do when he
lived upon earth, so does he now continually at his dead bones disposess
devils, and heal such as be sick, so often as men pray for such graces,
with faith and devotion. But I mean now to return to the province of
Valeria, of which I have heard most notable miracles, from the mouth of
Venerable Fortunatus, of whom long before I have made mention, who coming
often to visit me, whiles he teporteth olde^stories, continually he brings me
new delighte.


OF MARTIRIVS A MONCKE in the province of Valeria.

CHAPTER XI.
A Certain man lived in that province called Martirius, who was a very devout
servant of almightye God, and gave this testimony of his virtuous life. For
upon a certain day the other monks his brethren made an harth-cake
forgettinge to make upon it the sign of the cross: for in The sign of the
cross.
that country they use to make a cross upon their loaves, diuidinge them so
into four parts: when the servant of God came, they told^ him that it was
not marked: who saying it covered with ashes and coals, asked why they did
not sign it, and speaking so, he made the sign of the cross with his hand
against the coals: which thing vvhiles he was in doing, the cake gave a
great crack, as though the pan had been broken with the fire: after it was
baked and taken out, they found it marked with the sign of the cross, which
yet not any corporal touching, but the faith of Martirius had imprinted.

OF SEVERUS A PRIEST in the same Province.

CHAPTER XII.
IN the same country there is a valley, which is called of the plain people
Interocrina: in which there lived a certain man of a rare life, called.
Seuerus, who was a Parish priest of the church of our blessed Lad^e the
mother of God and perpetual virgin. One that lay at the point of death, sent
for him in great have, desiringe him to come with all speed, and by his prayers
to make intercession for him, that doing penance for his wickedness, and loosed
from his sins, he might depart this life. So it chanced, that the Priest
at that time, was busye in pruninge of his vines; and therefore he bad them that
came for him to go on before, and I will (quoth he) come after by and by: for
seeing he had but a little to do, he stayed a pretty while to make an end of
that, and when it was dispatched, away he went to visit the sick man: but as
he was goinge, the former messengers met with him saying: Father, why have
you staiede so long? Go not now any further, for the man is dead: at which
news the good man fell a tremblinge, and cried out aloude that he had killed
him: whereupon he fell a weeping, and in that manner came to the dead corpse,
where before the bedel he fell prostrat upon the earth, powringe out of tears.
Lyinge there weepinge very pitifully, beatinge his head against the ground,
and crying out, that he was guiltye of his death, suddenly the dead man
returned to life: which many that were present beholdinge cried out, and began
to weep more plentifully for joy, demandinge of him where he had been, and by
what means he came back again: to whom he said, Certain cruel men (quoth
he) did carry me away: out of whose mouth and nosetrills fire came forth, which
I could not endure: and as they were leadinge me through darcke places,
suddenly a bevvtifull young man with others met us, who said unto them
that were dravvinge me forwards. Carry him back again, for Seuerus the
priest lamenteth his death, and our Lord for his tears has given him longer
life. Then Seuerus rose up from the earth, and by his intercession did assist
him in doing of penance. And when the sick man that revived, had done
penance for his sins by the space of seven days, upon the eighte with a
cherefull countenance he departed this life. Consider Peter I pray you how
dearly our lord loved this Seuerus, that would not suffer him to be grieved
for a little time.

Peter. They be maruailous strange things which you report; and which before
this time I never heard of: but what is the reason that in these days there
be not any such men now living.


Gregory. I make no doubt Peter: but that there be many such holy men now
living, for though they work not the like miracles, yet for all that, may
they be as virtuous and as holy. For true judgment of ones life, is to be
taken from his virtuous conversation, and not from the worckinge of miracles,
for many there be who although they do not any any such strange things, yet
are they not in virtue inferior to them that do them.


Peter. How I beseech you can it be maintained for true, that there be some
that work not any miracles, and yet be as virtuous as they which work them.


Gregory. Suer I am that you know very Peter chief of the Apostles.
well, that the Apostle S. Paul, is brother to S. Peter, chief of the Apostles
in Apostolical principality.


Peter. I know that in deed, for no doubt can be made thereof: for though he
were the least of the Apostles, yet did he labor more then all they.


Gregory. Peter as you well remember, walked with his feet upon the sea: Paul
in the sea suffered shipwreck. And in one and the same element, where Paul
could not pass with a shipp, Peter went upon his feet: by which apparent it
is, that though thiere virtue in worckinge of miracles was not alike, yet
thiere merit is alike in the kingdom of heaven.


Peter. I confess that I am well pleased with that you say, for I know most
assuredlye that the life, and not the miracles are to be considered: but yet
saying such miracles as be wroughte do give testimony of a good life, I
beseech you if any more be yet remayninge, that you would with the examples and
virtuous lives of holy men fcede mine hungrye soul.


Gregory. Desirous I am to the honor of our blessed Savior, to tell you some
things now concerning the miracles of the man of God venerable S. Bennet: but
to do it as it ought, this day is not sufficient wherefore we will here make
a pause, and to handle this matter more plentifully, take an other beginning.


The end of the first book.
THE SECOND BOOK. OF THE LIFE AND MIRACLES of S. Bennet.
THE CHAPTERS.
1. HOw a ceue was broken and mad sound by S. Bennet. 2. How he overcame a
great carn^l tentation. 3. How he brake a glass with the sign of the cross. 4.
How he cured a moncke that had an idle and wandering mind. 5. How by prayer, he
mad water to spring out of a rock, in the topp of a mountain. 6. How he
caused an iron bill, to come again into the handle, from the bottom of the
water. 7. How his scholar Maurus walked upon the water. 8. How he mad a crow,
to carye a loaf far of that was poisoned. 9. How he removed an huge stone by
his prayers. 10. Of the fantastical fire of the k^tchin. 11. How a little boy
a moncke, was slain with the ruin of a wall and restored to life. 12. Of
certain monckes that eat meat contrary to thiere rule. 13. How the ho^ye
man, knew by revelation that the brother of Vale^tinian the monk, had eaten
in his iornye. 14. How the cou^ter faitinge of king Totilas was discovered.
15. How the holy man did prophecye to the same king. 16. How he dispossessed a
clergy man of a devil. 17. How he did prophecye of the destruction of his own
Abbey. 18. How by revelation he understood of the stolen slaggon of wine. 19.
How by revelation he knew that a monk had received certain napkins. 20. How
he likewise knew the proud thought of one of his own monks. 21. How in the
time of a dearthe, two hundred busshels of meal, was found before his cell.
22. How by vision he gave order for the buildinge of the Abbey of Terracina.
23. How certain Nuns were absolved after thiere death. 24. How a certain
monk was cast out of his grave. 25. How a monk forsakinge his Abbey was
encountered by a dragon. 26. How he cured one of a leprosye. 27. How
miraculously he provided money for one that was in debte. 28. How a cruet of
glass was thrown upon the stones and not broken. 29. How an emptye barrel was
miraculouslye filled with oil. 30. How a monk was dispossessed of a devil.
31. How a country man pinioned, was by his only sight loosed. 32. How a dead
man was restored to life. 33. Of a miracle wroughte by his sister Scolastica.
34. How and in what manner, he saw his sisters soul goinge out of her body.
35. How in vision he saw the world represented before his eyes: and of the
soul of Germanus Bishope of Capua. 36. How he wrote the rule of his order. 37.
How he fortolde the time of his death. 38. How a mad woman, lyinge in his cave
was cured.
THE SECOND BOOK
OF THE LIFE AND MIRACLES OF S. Bennet.
THERE was a man of Benedictus signifies. Blessed.
venerable life, blessed by grace, and blessed in name, for he was called
Benedictus or Bennet: who from his younger years carried always the mind of an
old man: for his age was inferior to his virtue: all vain pleasure he
contemned, and though he were in the world, and might freelye have enjoyed
such commodities as it yeldeth, yet did he nothing esteem it, nor the vanities
thereof. He was borne in the province of Nursia of Honorable Parentage, and
brought up at Rome in the study of humanitye. But for as much as he saw many
by reason of such learning to fall to dissolut and and leude life, he drew
back his foot, which he had as it were now set forth into the world, least
entering to far in acquaintance therewith, he likewise might have fallen into
that dangerous and godless gulphe: wherefore giuinge over his book, and
forsakinge his fathers house and wealth, with a resolute mind only to serve
God, he sought for some place, where he might attain to the desire of his
holy purpose: and in this sort he departed, instructed with learned ignorance,
and furnished with unlearned wisdom. All the notable things and acts of his
life I could not learn: but those few, which I mind now to report* I had
by the relation of four of his disciples: to wit of Constantinus, a most rare
and reverent man, who was next Abbot after him. Of Valentinianus, who many
years had the charge of the Lateran Abbey. Of Simplicius, who was the third
General of his order: and lastly of Honoratus, who is now Abbote of that
monastery, in which he first began his holy life.

HOW HE MADE A BROKEN su^ue hole and found.

CHAPTER I.
BEnnet having now given over the schole, with a resolute mind to lead his
life in the wilderness: his nurse alone which did tenderly love him, woloe not
by any means give him over. Coming therefore to a place called Enside and
remaining there in the church of S. Peter, in the company of other virtuous
men, which for charity ^iued in that place, it fell so out, that his nurse
borrowed of the neighbors a sieue to make clean wheat, which being left
negligently upon the table, by chance it was broken in two pieces: whereupon
she fell pitifully a weepinge, because she had borrowed it. The devout and
religious youth Bennet, seeing his nurse so lamenting, moved with compassion,
took away with him both the pieces of the sieue, and with tears fell to his
prayers: and after he had done, rising up he found it so whole, that the
place could not be seen where before it was broken: and coming straight to
his nurse, and comforting her with good words, he delivered her the sieue
safe and sound: which miracle was known to all the inhabitants thereabout,
and so much admired, that the townese-men for a perpetual memory, did hang
it up at the church door, to the end that not only me^ then living, but also
thiere posteritye might understand, how greatly ^ods grace did worck with
him, upon his first renouncinge of the world. The s^eue co^tinewed there many
years after eue^ to these very troubles of the Lombardes, where it did hang
over the church door.

But Bennet desiringe rather the miseries of the world, then the praises of
men: rather to be wearied with labor for Gods sake, then to be exalted with
transitorye commendation: fled privily from his nurse, and went into a deserte
place called Sublacum, distant almost fourtye miles from Rome: in which there
was a fountain springinge forth cool and clear water: the abundance whereof
does first in a broad place make a lake, and afterward runninge forward,
comes to be a river. As he was trauailinge to this place, a certain monk
called Romanus met him, and demanded whether he went, and understanding his
purpose, Habit of monks.
he both kept it close, furthered him what he might, vested him with the habit
of holy conversation, and as he could, did minister and serve him.

The man of God Bennet coming to this foresaid place, lined there in a An
Hermiteslife.
straighte cave, where he continewed three years unknown to all men, except to
Romanus, who lived not far of, under the rule of Abbot Theodacus, and very
vertuouslye did steal certain hours, and likewise sometime a loaf given for
his own provision, which he didcarry to Be^net. And because from Romanus cell
to that cave there was not any way, by reason of an high rock which did
hang over it: Romanus from the top thereof upon a long rope did let down the
loase, upon which also with a band he tied a little bell, that by the ringinge
thereof, the man of God might know when he came with his bread, and so be
ready to take it. But the old enemy of mankind, envying at the charity of
the one, and the refection of the other, seeing a loaf upon a certain day let
down, threvve a stone and brake the bell: but yet for all that, Romanus gave
not over to serve him by all the possible means he could.

At length when almighty God was determined to ease Romanus of his pains,
and to have Bennets life, for an example known to the world, that such a
candle set upon a candlestick, might shine and give light to the church of
God, our Lord voutsafed, to appear unto a certain Priest dwelling a good
way of, who had made ready his dinner for Easter day, and spoke thus unto
him. Thou have provided good chere for thy self, and my servant in such a
place is afflicted with hunger: who hearing this, forth with rose up, and
upon Easter day it self, with such meat as he had prepared, went to the
place, where he sought for the man of God amongst the steep hills, the low
valleis and hollovve pittes, and at length found him in his cave: where after
they had prayed together, and sittinge dovyne, had given God thanckes, and had
much spiritual talk, then the Priest said unto him: Rise up brother, and let
us dine, because to day is the feast of Easter. To whom the man of God
ansvvered, and said, I know that it is Easter with me and a great feast,
having found so much fauox at Gods hands, as this day to enjoy your
company (for by reason of his long absence from men, he knevve not that it
was great solemnitye of Easter) But the reverent Priest again did assure him
saying. Verily to day is the feast of our Lords resurrection, and therefore
meet it is not, that you should keep abstinence, and besides I am sent to
that end, that we might eat together of such provision as Gods goodenes
has sent us: whereupon they said grace, and fell to thiere meat, and after
they had dined, and bestovved some time in talkinge, the Priest returned to his
church.

About the same time likewise, certain sheepheardes found him in that same
cave: and at the first, when they espied him through the bushes, and saw his
apparel made of skins, they verily thought that it had been some beast:
but after they were acquainted with the seruante of God, many of them were by
his means, converted from thiere beastlye life to grace, piety, and devotion.
And thus his name in the country there about became famous, and many after this
went to visit him, and for corporal meat which they brought him, they
carried away spiritual food for thiere souls.

HOW HE OVERCAME A GREAT tentation of the flesh.

CHAPTER II.
Upon a certain day being alone, the temptor was at hand: for a little
black bird commonly called a mearle or an owzell began to fly about his
face and that so nere, as the holy man if he would might have taken it with
his hand: but after he had blessed him self with the sign of the cross, the
bird flow away: Blessing with the sign of the ^rosse.
and forthwith the holy man was assalted with such a terrible tentation of the
flesh, as he never felt the like in all his life. A certain woman there was
which some time he had seen, the memory of which, the wicked spirit put into
his mind, and by the representation of her, did so mightily inflame with
concupiscens the soul of Gods servant, which did so increase, that almost
ouercomc with pleasure, he was of mind to have forsaken the wilderness. But
suddenly asisted with Gods grace he came to him self, and seeinge many thick
briers and net^le bushes to grow hard by: of he cast his apparel, and
threw him self into the midst of them, and there wallovved so long that
when he rose up, all his flesh was pit^fully torn: and so by the wounds
of his body, he cured the wound of his soul, in that he turned pleasure
into pain, and by the outvvarde burninge of extreme smarte, quenched that fire
which being nourished before with the fuel of carnal cogitations, did
inwardly burn in his soul: and by this means he overcame the sin, because
he made a change of the fire. From which time forwards as him self did
afterward report unto his disciples, he found all tentation of pleasure so
subdued, that he never felt any such thing. Many after this began to abandon
the world, and to become his scholars. For being now freed from the malady
of tentation, vvorthily and with great reason is he made a master of virtue:
for which cause in Exodus, commandment is given by Moses, that the Levites
from five and twenty years and vpvvard should serve, but after they came to
fiftye, that thy should be ordained keepers of the holy vessel.

Peter. Somewhat I understand of this testimony alleged: but yet I beseech you
to tell me the meaning thereof more fullye.


Gregory. It is plain Peter, that in youth the tentation of the flesh is
hot: but after fifty years the heat of the body waxes cold, and the souls
of faithefull people become holy vessels. Wherefore necessary it is that Gods
elect servants, whiles they are yet in the heat of tentation, should live in
obedience, serve, and be wearied with labor and pains. But when by reason of
age the heat of tentation is past, they become keepers of holy vessel: because
they then are made the doctors of men's souls.


Peter. I can not deny, but that your words have given me full satisfaction:
wherefore seeinge you have now expounded the meaning of the former text
alleged, prosecute I pray as you have begone the rest of the holy man's life.


HOW BENNET BY THE sign of the holy cross, brake a drinckinge glass in
pieces.

CHAPTER III.
Gregory. When this great tentation was thus overcome, the man of God like
unto a piece of ground well tilled and weeded: of the sede of virtue, brought
forth plentiful store of fruit: and by reason of the great report of his
wonderful holy life, his name became very famous. Not far from the place
where he remained there was a monasterye, the Abbot whereof was dead:
whereupon the whole Convent came unto the venerable man Bennet, intreatinge him
very earnestly, that he would vouchesafe to take upon him, the charge and
government of thiere Abbey: long time he denied the^, saying that thiere
manners were diverse from his, and therefore that they should never agree
together: yet at length overcome with thiere intreatye, he gave his consent.
Having now taken upon him the charge of the Abbey, he took order that
regular life should be observed, so that none of the^ could as before they
used, through unlawful acts decline from the pathe of holy conversation,
either on the one side, or on the other: which the monks perceiuinge, they
fell into a great rage, accusinge the^ selves that ever they desired hi^ to be
thiere Abbot, seeing thiere crooked conditions could not e^dure his virtuous
kind of government: and therefore when they savve that under him they could
not live in unlawful sort, and were loath to leave thiere former conversation,
and found it hard to be in forced with old minds, to meditate and think
upon nevve things: and because the life of virtuous men, is always grievous
to those that be of wicked conditions, some of them begane to devise, how
they might ridd him out of the way: and therefore taking counsel together,
they agreed to poison his wine: which being done, and the glass wherein that
wine was, according to the custom offered to the Abbot to bless, he putting
forth his hand made the sign of the cross, and straighte A miracle by the
sign of che cross
way the glass that was holden far of brake in pieces, as though the sign of
the cross had been a stone thrown against it: upon which accide^t the man of
God by and by perceived, that the glass had in it the drink of death, which
could not endure the sign of life: and thersore risinge up, with a mild
countenance, and quiet mind, he called the monks together, and spoke thus
unto them. Almightye God have mercy upon you, and forgive you: why have you
used me in this manner? did not I tell you before hand, that our manner of
living could never agree together? Go your ways, and seek ye out some
other father suitable to your own conditions, for I in tend not now to stay
any longer a mongest you: when he had thus discharged him self, he returned
back to the wilderness which so much he loved, and dwelt alone with him self,
in the fight of his creator, who beholds the hearts of all men.


Peter. I understand not very well, what you mean when you say, that he
dwelt with him self.


Gregory. If the holy man had longer contrary to his own mind, contine wed
his government over those monks, who had all conspired against him, and were
far unlike to him in life and conversation: perhaps he should have diminished
his own devotion, and somewhat withdrawn the eyes of his soul from the light
of contemplation: and being wearied dailye with correcting of thiere faults,
he should have had the less care of him self, and so happily it might have
fallen out, that he should both have lost him self, and yet not found them:
for so often as by infectious motion we are carried too far from our selves, we
remain the same men that we were before, and yet be not with our selves as
we were before: because we ar wandringe about other men's affairs, little
consideringe and lookinge into the state of our own soul: For shall we say
that he was with him self, who went into a far country, and after he had,
as we read in the Gospel, Luc. 15.
prodigally spent that portion which he received of his father, was glad to
serve a citizen, to keep his hogs, and would willinglye have filled his
hungrye belly, with the husks which they did eat: who notwithstanding
afterward, when he thought with him self of those goods which he had lost,
it is written of him that returninge into him self he said: How many hired
men in my fathers house do abound with bread? If then before he were with him
self, from whence did he return home unto him self? and therefore I said
that this venerable man did dwell with him self, because carryinge him self
circumspectlye and carefully in the sight of his creator, always consideringe
his own actions, always examininge him self, never did he turn the eyes of
his soul from him self, to behold ought else whatsoever.


Peter. Why then is it written of the Apostle S. Peter, after he was by the
Angel delivered out of prison, that returninge to him self he said: Now I
know verilye, Act. 12.
that our Lord has sent his Angel, and has delivered me from the hand of
Herod, and from all the expectation of the people of the Jews.


Gregory. We are two manner of ways Peter carried out of our selves, for either
we fall under our selves by sinful cogitation: or else we are by the grace of
contemplation lifted above our selves: for he that kept hogge^, through
wa^dringe of his mind and unclean thou^^tes, fell under him self: But he
whom the Angel delivered out of prison, being also rapt by the Angel into an
ecstasye, was in truth out of him self, but yet above him self: Both of
them therefore did return unto them selves, the one when he recollected him
self, and forsook his lewd kind of life: and the other from the top of
contemplation, to have that usual judgment and understanding, which before
he had: wherefore venerable Bennet in that solitary wilderness dwelt with him
self, because he kept him self, and retired his cogitations within the closet
of his own soul: for when the greatness of contemplation rapt him up alofte:
out of all question he did then leave him self, under him self.


Peter. Your discourse does very well content me: yet I beseech you to answer
me this question, whether he could in conscience give over those monks, whose
government he had now taken upon him.


Gregory. In mine opinion Peter evil men may with good conscience be
tolerated in that co^munitye, where there be some good that may be helped and
reap commoditye. But where there be none good at all, that may receive
spiritual profitt, often times all labor is lost, that is bestowed in bringing
of such to good order, especially if other occasions be offered of doing God
presently better service else where: for whose good then, should the holy man
have expected, seeing them all to persecute him with one consent: and (that
which is not to be passed over with silence) those that be perfect, carry
always this mind, that when they perceive thiere labor to be fructelesse in
one place, to remove straighte to an other, where more good may be done. And
for this cause, that notable preacher of the world, who was desirous to be
dissolved, and to be with Christ, unto whom to live is Christ and to Philip.
1. cap. v. 21.
dye is gain: and who not only desired him self to suffer persecution, but
did also animate and incourgae others to suffer the same: yet being him self
in persecution at Damascus, got a rope and a basket to pass over the wall, and
was privily let down: what then? shall we say that Paul was affraide of
death, when as him self said, that he desired it for Christ's sake? not so:
but when he perceived, that in that place little good was to be done by great
labor, he reserved him self to further labor, where more fruit, and better
success might be expected: and therefore the valiant soldiar of Christ, would
not be kept within walls, but sought for a larger field where he might more
freely labor for his master. And so in like manner you shall quickly perceive
if you marcke well, that venerable Be^net forsook not so many in one place,
that were unwilling to be taught, as he did in sundry other places raise up
from the death of soul many more, that were willing to be instructed.


Peter. It is so as you say, and plain reason teaches it, and the example of
S. Paul alleged does confirm it. But I beseech you to return unto your
former purpose, and to prosecut the life of the holy man.


Gregory. When as Gods servant daily increased in virtue, and became
continually more famous for miracles: many were by him in the same place,
drawn to the service of almighty God, so that by Christ's assistance he built
there twelve Abbeis: over which Building of Abbeis
he appointed governors, and in each of them placed twelve monks, and a few
he kept with him self, namely such as he thought would more profitt, and^ be
better instructed by his own presence. At that time also many noble and
religious men of Rome Young children brought up in a monastical life.
came unto him, and committed thiere children to be btoughte up under him, for
the service of God. Then also Euicius delivered him Maurus: and Tertullius the
Senator, brought Placidus, being thiere sons of great hoope and towardnes:
of which two, Maurus grovvinge to great virtue, began to be his masters
coadiutor: but Placidus, as yet was but a boy of tender years.


HOW BENNET REFORMED A monk, that would not stay at his prayers

CHAPTER IIII.
IN one of the monasteries which he had built in those parts, a monk there
was, which could not co^tinewe at prayers: for when the other monks kneeled
down to serve God, his manner was to go forth, and there with wandering mind
to busy him self about some earthly and transitorye things. And when he had
been often by his Abbot admonished of this fault without any amendment, at
length he was sent to the man of God, who did likewise very much rebuke him
for his folly, yet notwithstanding returning back again, he did scarce two
days follow the holy man's admonition: for upon the third day, he fell again
to his old custom, and would not abide within at the time of prayer: word
whereof being once more sent to the man of God by the father of the Abbey who^
he had there appointed, he returned him answer that he would come him self, and
reform what was amiss, which he did accordingly: and it fell so out, that
when the singinge of psalms was ended, and the hour come, in which the monks
betook them selves to prayer: the holy man perceived, that the monk which
used at that time to go forth, was by a little black boy drawn out by the
skirte of his garment: upon which sight, he spoke secretly to Pompeianus,
father of the Abbey, and also to Maurus saying. Do you not see who it is, that
draws this monk from his prayers? and they answered him, that they did not.
Then let us pray (quoth he) unto God, that you also may behold whom this monk
does follow: and after two days Maurus did see him, but Pompeianus could
not. Upon an other day, when the man of God had ended his devotions, he went
out of the oratorye, where he found the foresaid monk standinge idle, whom
for the blindenes of his heart he struck with a little wand, and from that day
forwards, he was so freed from all allurement of the little black boy, that
he remained quietly at his prayers, as other of the monks did: for the old
enemy was so terrified, that he durst not any more suggest any such
cogitations: as though by that blow, not the monk, but him self had been
strooken.

OF A FOVNTAINE THAT sprunge forth in the topp of a mountain, by the prayers
of the man of God:

CHAPTER V.
Amongst the monasteries which he had built in those parts, three of them
were situated upon the rocks of a mountain, so that very painful it was,
for the monks to go down and fetch water, especially because the side of the
hill was so steep, that there was great fear of danger: and therefore the
monks of those Abbeis with one consent came unto the servant of God Bennet,
giuinge him to understand, how laborious it was for them daily to go down
unto the lake for water; and therefore they added, that it was very necessary
to have them removed to some other places. The man of God comfortinge them with
sweet words, caused them to return back again: and the next night having
with him only the little boy Placidus (of whom we spoke before) he ascended up
to the rock of that mountain, and continewed there a long time in prayer,
and when he had done, he took three stones, and laid them in the same place
for a marcke, and so none of them being privy to that he had done, he returned
back to his own Abbey. And the next day when the foresaid monks came
again about thiere former business, he said thus unto them: Go your way to
the rock, and in the place where you find three stones laid one upon an
other, dig a little hole, for almighty God is able to bring forth water in
the topp of that mountain, and so to ease you of that great labor which you
take in fetching it so far: away they went, and came to the rock of the
mountain according to his direction, which they found as i^ were svveating
drops of water, and after they had with a spade made an hollovve place, it
was straighte ways filled, and water flovved out so abundantly, that it
does plentifully even to this day, spring out and run down from the topp,
to the very bottom of that hill.

HOW THE IRON HEAD OF a bill, from the bottom of the water, returned to the
handle again.

CHAPTER VI.
AT an other time, a certain Goth, poor of spirit, that gave over the world,
was received by the man of God: whom on a day he commanded to take a bill, and
to cleanse a certain plott of ground from briers, for the making of a gardin,
which ground was by the side of a lake. The Goth as he was there labouringe,
by chance the head of the bill slipped of, and fell into the water, which was so
deep, that there was no hope ever to get it again. The poor Gothe in great
fear, ran unto Maurus and told him what he had lost, confessing his own fault
and negligence: Maurus forth with went to the servant of God, giving him to
understand thereof, who came straighte ways to the lake: and took the handle
out of the Goths hand, and putt it into the water, and the iron head by and
by ascended from the bottom, and entered again into the handle of the bill,
which he delivered to the Gothe saying: Behold here is thy bill again,
work on and be sadd no more.

HOW MAVRVS VVALKED upon the water.

CHAPTER VII.
ON a certain day, as venerable Bennet was in his cell, the foresaid young
Placidus, the holy ma^s monk went out to take up water at the lake, and
putting down his paile careleslye fell in him self after it, whom the water
forth with carried away from the land so far as one may shote an arrowe. The
man of God being in his cell by and by knew this, and called in have for
Maurus saying. Brother Maurus run as fast as you can, for Placidus that went
to the lake to fetch water is fallen in, and is carried a good way of. A
strange thing and since the time of Peter the Apostle never heard of: Maurus
craving his fathers blessinge, and departing in all have at his commandment,
ran to that place upon the water, to which the young lad was carried by force
thereof, thinckinge that he had all that while gone upon the land: and taking
fast hold of him by the hear of his head, in all have he returned back
again: and so sone as he was at land, coming to him self he looked behind
him, and then knew very well that he had before run upon the water: and that
which before he durst not have presumed, being now done and past, he both
maruailed, and was afraid at that which he had done. Coming back to the
father, and telling him what had happened: the venerable man did not attribut
this to his own merits, but to the obedience of Maurus: but Maurus on the
contrary, said that it was clone only upon his commandment, and that he had
nothing to do in that miracle, not knovving at that time what hat he did. But
the frie^dly contention procedinge of mutual humility, the young youth him
self that was saved from drovvninge did determyne: for he said that he saw
when he was drawn out of the water, the Abbotes garment upon his head,
affirming that it was he that had delivered him from that great danger.

Peter. Certainly they be wonderful things which you report, and such as may
serve for the edification of many: for mine own part, the more that I hear
of his miracles, the more do I still desire.


HOW A LOAF WAS POIsoned, and carried far of by a crow.

CHAPTER VIII.
When as the foresaid monasteries were zealous in the love of our Lord Jesus
Christ: and thiere fame dispersed far and nere, and many gave over the secular
life, and subdued the passions of thiere soul, under the light yoke of our
Savior: then (as the manner of wicked people is, to envy at that virtue,
which them selves desire not to follow) one Florentius Priest of a church
hard by, and grandfather to Florentius our subdeacon, possessed with
diabolical malice, began to envy the holy man's virtues, to backebite his
manner of living, and to withdraw as many as he could from going to visit him:
and when he saw that he could not hinder his virtuous procedinges, but that
on the contrary, the fame of his holy life increased, and many dailye upon the
very report of his sanctitye, did betake them selves to a better state of
life: burning more and more with the coals of envy he became far worse: and
though he desired not to imitate his commendable life, yet feign he would have
had the reputation of his virtuous conversation. In conclusion so much did
malicious envy blind him, and so far did he wade in that sin, that he
poisoned a loaf, and sent it to the servant of almightye God, as it were for
an holy present. The man of God received it with great thanckes, yet not
ignorant of that which was hidden within. At diner time a crow, daily used to
come unto him from the next wood, which took bread at his hands: coming
that day after his manner, the man of God threw him the loaf which the Priest
had sent him, giuinge him this charge. In the name of Jesus Christ our Lord,
take up that loaf, and leave it in some such place, where no man may find
it. Then the crow openinge his mouth, and lifting up his wings, began to
hopp up and down about the loaf, and after his manner to cry out, as though
he would have said, that he was willing to obey, and yet could not do what
he was commanded. The man of God again and again bad him saying: Take it up
without fear, and throw it where no man may find it. At length with much
adoo the crow took it up, and flewe away, and after three hours, having
dispatched the loaf, he returned back again, and received his usual
allowance from the man of God.

But the venerable father perceiuinge the Priest so wickedly bent against his
life, was far more sorry for him, then grieved for him self. And Florentius
seeing that he could not kill the body of the master, labors now what he
can, to destroy the souls of of his disciples: and for that purpose he sent
into the yard of the Abbey before thiere eyes, seuene naked young women,
which did there take hands together, play and dance a long time before them,
to the end that by this means, they might inflame thiere minds to sinful
lust: which damnable sight the holy man beholdinge out of his cell, and
fearinge the danger, which thereby might enseewe to his younger monks, and
consideringe that all this was done only for the persecutiuge of him self, he
gave place to envy: and therefore after he had for those Abbeyes and oratories
which he had there built appointed governors, and left some under thiere
charge, him self in the company of a fevve monckes removed to an other place.
And thus the man of God upon humility, gave place to the others malice: but yet
almighty God of justice did severely punnishe his wickedness. For when the
foresaid Priest being in his chamber, understood of the departure of holy
Bennet, and was very glad of that news, behold (the whole house besides,
continewing safe and sound) that chamber alone in which he was, fell down,
and so killed him: which strange accident the holy man's disciple Maurus
understanding, straighte-wayes sent him word, he being as yet scarce ten
miles of, desitinge him to return again, because the Priest that did persecut
him, was slain: which thing when Bennet heard, he was passing sorrowful and
lamented much: both because his enemy died in such sort, and also for that
one of his monks reioiced thereat: and therefore he gave him penance, for that
sending such news, he presumed to rejoice at his enemies death.

Peter. The things you report be strange, and much to be wondered at: for in
making the rock to yield forth water, I see Moises: and in the iron, which
came from the bottom of the lake, I behold Heliseus: in the walkinge of Maurus
upon the water, I perceive Peter: in the obedience of the crow, I contemplat
Helias: and in lamenting the death of his enemy, I acknowledge David: and
therefore in mine opinion, this one man was full of the spirit of all good men.


Gregory. The man of God Bennet had the spirit of the one true God, who by the
grace of our redemption, has filled the hearts of his elect servants, of
whom S. Iohne says. He was the true Ioh. 1.
light, which does lighten every man coming into this world. Of whom again,
we Ibidem.
find it written: Of his fulness we have all received. For Gods holy servants
might receive virtues of our Lord, but to bestow them upon others they
could not: and therefore it was he that gave the signs of miracles to his
servants, who promised to give the sign of Jonas, to his enemies: so that he
Math. 12. v. 40.
vouchsafed to dye in the sight of the proud, and to rise again before the
eyes of the humble: to the end, that they might behoulde, what they contemned,
and those see that, which they ought to worshipp and love: by reason of which
misterye i^ comes to pass, that whereas the proud cast thiere eyes upon
the contempt of his death: the humble contrariwise against death, lay hold of
the glory of his power and might.


Peter. To what places I pray you after this, did the holy man go: and
whether did he afterward in them vvorcke any miracles or no?


Gregory. The holy man changinge his place, did not for all that change his
enemy. For afterward he endured so much the more grievous battles, by how
much he had now the master of all wickedness fightinge openly against him.
For the town which is called Cassino, stands upon the side of an high
mountain, which contains as it were in the lapp thereof, the foresaid
town, and afterward so rises in height the space of three miles, that the
top thereof, seems to touch the very heavens: in this place there was an
ancient chapel in which the ^olishe and simple country people, according
to the custom of the old gentiles, worshipped the God Apollo: Round about it
likewise upon all sides, there were woods for the service of the devils, in
which euene to that very time, the mad multitude of infidels, did offer most
wicked sacrifice: The man of God coming thither, beat in pieces the idol,
ouerthrewe the altar, set fire on the woods, and in the temple of Apollo, he
built Dedication of oratories to Saints.
the oratory of S. Martin, and where the altar of the same Apollo was, he made
an oratory of S. John's and by his continual preaching, he brought the people
dwelling in those parts, to embrace the faith of Christ. The old enemy of
mankind, not taking this in good part, did not now privily or in a dream,
but in open sight present him self to the eyes of that holy father, and with
great outcries complained that he had offered him violence. The noise which he
made, the monks did hear, but him self they could not see: but as the
venerable father told them, he appeared visibly unto him most fell and cruel,
and as though with his fiery mouth, and flaminge eyes, he would have ^orne him
in pieces: what the devil said unto him, all the monks did hear: for first
he would call him by his name, and because the man of God voutsafed him not any
answer: then would he fall a reuilinge and railinge at him: for when he cried
out calling him, Blessed Bennet: and yet sound that he gave him no answer,
straighte-waies he would turn his tune and say: Cursed Bennet Maledicte: non
Benedicte
and not blessed: what have thowe to do with me? and why do thowe thus
persecut me? wherefore new battles of the old enemy against the servant of God
are to be looked for, against who^ willingly did he make war, but agianst his
will, did he give him occasion of many notable victories.


HOW VENERABLE BENNET by his prayer, removed an huge stone.

CHAPTER IX.
Upon a certain day, when the monks ^ere buildinge up the ce^les of the
(...)bey, there lave a stone which they meant to employe about that business: and
when two or three were not able to remove it, they called for more company, but
all in vain, for it remained so immovable, as though it had grown to the
very earth: whereby they plainly perceived that the devil him self did sit
upon it, seeing so many men's hands could not so much as once move it:
wherefore finding that thiere own labors could do nothing, they sent for the
man of God, to help them with his prayers against the devil, who hindered the
remouinge of that stone. The holy man came, and after some praying, he gave it
his blessinge, and then they carried it away so quickly, as though it had
been of no waighte at all.

OF THE FANTASTICAL fire, which burnte the kitchen.

CHAPTER X.
THen the man of God thought good that they should presently before his
departure, dig up the ground in the same place, which being done, and a deep
hole made, the monks ^ounde there an idol of brass, which being for a
little while by chance cast into the kitchen, they beheld fire su^dainly to
come from it, which to all thiere sight, seemed to set the whole kitchen on
fire: for the quenching whereof, the monks by casting on of water made su^^ a
noise, that the man of God hearing it, came to see what the matter was: and
him self beholdinge not any fire at all, which they said that they did, he
boowed down his head forthwith to his prayers, and then he perceived, that
they were deluded with fantastical fire, and therefore bad them bless thiere
eyes, that they might behold the kitchen safe and sound, and not those
fantastical flames, which the devil had falsely devised.

HOW VENERABLE BENNET revived a boy, crusshed to death with the ruin of a wall.

CHAPTER XI.
A Gain as the monks were making of a certain wallsom what higher, because
that was requisite: the man of God in the mean time was in his cell at his
prayers. To whom the old enemy appeared in an insulting manner, tellinge him,
that he was now goinge to his monks, that were a worckinge: whereof the man of
God, in all have gave them warninge, wishing them to look unto them selves,
because the devil was at that time coming amongst them. The message was
scarce delivered, when as the wicked spirit ouerthrewe the new wall which they
were a buildinge, and with the fall, slew a little young child Children
received into religion.
a monk, who was the son of a certain courtier. At which pitiful chance,
all were passinge sorry and exceedingly grieved, not so much for the loss of
the wall, as for the death of thiere btother: and in all have they sent this
heavy news to the venerable man Bennet: who commanded them to bring unto him
the young boy, mangled and maimed as he was, which they did, but yet they could
not carry him any otherwise then in a sack: for the stones of the wall had not
only broken his lymmes, but also his very bones: being in that manner brought
unto the man of God, he bad them to lay him in his cell, and in that place upon
which he used to pray: and then puttinge them all forth, he shu^t the door,
and fell more instantly to his prayers, then he used at other times: And o
strange miracle, for the very same hour he made him sound, and as liuelye as
ever he was besore: and sent him again to his former work, that he also
might help the monks to make an end of that wall, of whose death the old
serpent thought he should have insulted over Bennet, and gre^tlye tryumphed.

HOW BY REVELATION VEnerable Bennet knew, that his monks had eaten out of
the monastery.

CHAPTER XII.
Among other miracles which the man of God did: he began also to be famous for
the spirit of prophecye: as to foretell what was to happen, and to relate unto
them that were present, such things as were done in absence. The order of his
Abbey was, that when the monks went abroad (to deliver any message,) never to
eat or drink any thing out of thiere cloister: and this being diligently
observed, according to the prescription of thiere rule, upon a certain day
some of the monks went for the upon such business: and being enforced about the
dispatch thereof, to tarry somewhat long abroad, it fell so out, that they
stayed at the house of a religious woman, where they did eat and refresh them
selves. And being late before they came back to the Abbey, they went as the
manner was, and asked thiere fathers blessinge: of whom he demanded where they
had eaten: and they said no where: why do you (quoth he) tell an untruth: for
did you not go into such a woman's house? and eat such and such kind of
meat, and drink so many cups? when they heard him recount so in
particular, both where they had stayed, what kind of meat they had eaten, and
how often they had druncke, and perceived well that he knew all whatsoever
they had done, they fell down tremblinge at his feet, and confessed that they
had done wickedlye: who straight ways pardoned them for that fault,
persvvadinge him self, that they would not any more in his absence presume to
do any such thing, seeinge they now perceived, that he was present with
them in spirit.

OF THE BROTHER OF VAlentinian the monk, whom the man of God blamed for
eatinge in his iorny.

CHAPTER XIII.
A brother also of Valentinian the monk, of whom I made mention before, was
a lay man, but devout and religious: who used every year, as well to desire
the prayers of Gods servant, as also to visit his natural brother, to
travail from his own house to the Abbeye: and his manner was, not to eat
any thing all that day before he came thither: Being therefore upon a time in
h^s iornye, he light into the company of an other, that carried meat about
him to eat by the way: who after the day was well spent, spoke unto him
in this manner. Come brother (quoth he) let us refreshe our selves, that we
faint not in our iornye: to whom he ansvvered, God forbid: for eat I will
not by any means, seeing I am now goinge to the venerable father Bennet, and
my custom is to fast until I see him: the other upon this answer said no
more for the space of an hour: But afterward having travailed a little
further, again he was in hand with him to eat some thing: yet then
likewise he utterly refused, because he meant to go through fasting as he was.
His companion was content, and so went forward with him, without taking any
thing him self. But when they had now gone very far, and were well
wearied with long trauailinge: at length they came unto a medowe, where there
was a fountain, and all such other pleasant things, as use to refreshe men's
bodies. Then his companion said to him again: Behold here is water, a green
medowe and a very sweet place, in which we way refreshe our selves and rest a
little, that we may be the better able to dispatche the rest of our iornye:
which kind words bewitchinge his ears, and the pleasant place, flatteringe
his eyes, content he was to yield unto the motion, and so they fell to thiere
meat together: and coming after ward in the eueninge to the Abbey, they
brought him to the venerable father Bennet, of whom he desired his blessinge:
Then the holy man objected against him, what he had done in the way, speaking
to him in this manner. How fell it out brother (quoth he) that the devil
talkinge to you, by means of your companion could not at the first nor second
time persuade you: but yet he did at the third, and made you do, what best
pleased him? The good man hearing these words fell down at his feet,
confessinge the fault of his frailty: was grieved, and so much the more ashamed
of his sin, because he perceived that though he were absent, that yet he did
offend in the sigate of that venerable father.

Peter. I see well, that the holy man bad in his soul the spirit of Helizeus,
who was present with his servant Giezi, being then absent from him.


HOW THE DISSIMVLATION of king Totilas was discovered, and found out by
venerable Bennet.

CHAPTER XIIII.
Gregory. YOu must good Peter for a little while be silent, that you may
know matters yet far more important. For in the time of the Goths, when
To^ilas thiere king understood that the holy man had the spirit of prophecyc:
as he was goinge toward his monasterye, he remained in a place some what far
of, and before hand sent the father word of his coming: to whom answer was
returned, that he might come at his pleasure. The king as he was a man
wickedlye disposed, thought he would try whether the man of God were a
prophet, as it was reported or no. A certain man of his guard he had called
Riggo, upon who^ he caused his own shoes to be put and to be apparrelled with
his other princely roabes, co^ma^ding him to go as it were him self to the man
of God: and to give the better color to this devise: he sent three to attend
upon him, who especially were always about the king: to wit Vsiltericus,
Rudericus, and Blindinus: charging them that in the pre^ence of the servant of
God, they should be next about him, and behave them selves in such sort, as
though he had been king Totilas indeed: and that diligently they should do
unto him all other services, to the end that both by such dutiful kind of
behauior, as also by his purple roabes, he might verily be taken for the king
him self: Riggo furnished with that brave apparel, and accompained with many
courtiers came unto the Abbey: at which time, the man of God satt a little way
of, and when Riggo was come ^o nere that he might well understand what the man
of God said, then in the hearing of them all, he spoke thus. Put of my good
son, put of that apparel, for that which thou have on, is none of thine:
Riggo hearing this, fell straighte ways down to the ground, and was very
much affraide, for presuminge to go about to mock so worthy a man, and all
his attendantes and seruitours fell down likewise to the earth, and after
they were up again, they durst not approach any nerer to his presence: but
returned back to thiere king, rellinge him with fear, how quickly they
were discovered.


HOW VENERABLE BENNET prophesied to king Totilas: and also to the Bishop of
Camisina, such things as were afterward to fall out.

CHAPTER XV.
THen Totilas him self in person, went unto the man of God: and seeinge him
sitting a far of, he durst not come nere, but fell down to the ground: whom
the holy man (speaking to him twice or thrice) desired to rise up, and at
length came unto him, and with his own hands lift him up from the earth,
where he lay prostrat: and then entering into talk, he reprehended him for his
wicked deeds, and in few words told him all that which should befall him
saying. Much wickedness do you daily commit, and many great sins have
you done: now at length give over your sinful life: In to the city of Rome
shall you enter, and over the sea shall you pass: nine years shall you reign,
and in the tenth shall you leave this mortal life: The king hearing these
things was wonderfully affra^de, and desiring the holy man to commend him to
God in his prayers, he de parted: and from that time forward he was nothing so
cruel, as before he had been. Not long after he went to Rome, sailed over into
Sicily and in the tenthe year of his reign, he lost his kingdom together with
his life.

The Bishop also of Camisina used to visit the servant of God, whom the holy
man derely loved for his virtuous life. The Bishop therefore talkinge with him
of king Totilas, of his taking of Rome, and the destruction of that city,
said. This city will be so spoiled and ruyned by him, that it will never, be
more in habited. To whom the man of God answered: Rome (quoth he) shall not be
utterly destroyed by strangers: but shall be so shaken with te^pestes,
lightninges, whirlwindes, and earth quakes, that it will fall to decay He
seems to speak of the invasion of the Lombardes: se the third book cha.
xxxviij.
of it self. The mysteries of which prophecy, we now behold as clear as the
day: for we see before our eyes in this very city, by a strange whirlwinde
the world shaken, houses ruined, and churches overthrown, and buildinges
rotten with old age we behold daily to fall down: True it is that Honoratus
by whose relation I had this, says not that he received it from his own
mouth, but that he had it of other monks, which did hear it them selves.

OF A CERTAIN CLERGY man, whom venerable Bennet for a time delivered from a
devil.

CHAPTER XVI.
AT the same time a certain clergy man, that served in the church Pilgrimage
to the tombs of martirs. Martirs often help such as be devout unto them.
of Aquinum was possessed: whom the venerable man Constantius Bishope of the
same city, sent unto many places of holy martirs for help: but Gods holy
martirs, would not deliver him, to the end that the world might know, what
great grace was in the seruante of God Bennet: wherefore at length he was
brought unto him, who prayinge for help to Jesus Christ our Lord, did
forthwith cast the old enemy out of the possessed man's body, giving him this
charge: Go your way, and hereafter abstain from eating Abstine^ce from slesh
of flesh, and presume not to enter into holy orders, for when soever you shall
attempt any such thing, the devil again will have power over you. The man
departed safe and sound, and because punnishement fresh in memory, uses to
terrifye the mind, he observed for a time what the man of God had given him in
commandment. But after many years, when all his seniors were dead, and he
saw his iuniors preferred before him to holy orders, he neglected the words
of the man of God, as though forgotten through length of time, and took upon
him holy orders: whereupon straightewaies the devil that before had left him
entered again, and never gave over to torment him, until he had separated his
soul from his body.

Peter. This holy man as I perceive did know the secret counsel of God: for
he saw that this clergy man was delivered to the power of the devil, to the
end he should not presume to enter into holy orders.


Gregory. Why should he not know the secrets of God, who kept the
commandments of God: when as the scripture says. He that cleaves unto our
Lord, is one 1. Corint. 6.
spirit with him.


Peter. If he that cleaves unto our Lord be, one spirit with our Lord: what
is the meaning of that which the Apostle says: Who knows the sense of
Romans 11.
our Lord, or who has been his counselor? for it seems very inconvenient to
be ignorant of his sense, to whom being so united he is made one thing.


Gregory. Holy men in that they be one with our Lord, are not ignorant of his
sense: for the same Apostle says: for what 1. Cor. 2.
man knows those things which belong to man, but the spirit of man which is
in him. Even so, the things which belong to God, no man knows, but the
spirit of God: and to show also that he knew such things as belong to God,
he adds straighte after. But we Ibidem.
have not received the spirit of this world, but the spirit which is of God:
And for this cause, again he says: that eye has not seen, Ibidem.
nor ear heard, nor it has ascended into the heart of man, those things
which God has prepared for them that love him, but God has revealed to us by
his spirit.


Peter. If then the mysteries of God, were revealed to the same Apostle by the
spirit of God, why did he then entreatinge of this question set down these
words before hand saying. O the depthe of the riches of the wisdom and Romans
11.
knowledge of God: how incomprehensible be his judgments, and his ways
inuestigable. And again whiles I am thus speaking of this matter, an other
question comes to my mind: for the prophet David says to our Lord: with my
lips Psalm. 118.
have I uttered all the judgments of thy mouth. Wherefore seeinge it is less
to know, then to utter: what is the reason that S. Paul affirms the
judgments of God to be incomprehensible: and yet David says, that he did not
only know them, but also with his lips pronounce them.


Gregory. To both these questions I have already briefly answered, when I
said that holy men in that they be one with our Lord, are not ignorant of the
sense of our Lord: For all such, as do devoutly follow our Lord, be also by
devotion one with our Lord: and yet sor all this, in that they are laden with
the burden of thiere corruptible flesh, theye be not with God: and so in that
they be joined with him, they know the secret judgments of God, and in that
they be separated from God, they know them not: for seeing they do not as yet
perfectly penetrate his secret mysteries they give testimony that his
judgments be incomprehensible: But those that do with thiere soul adhere
unto him, and cleaving unto the sayings of the holy scripture, or to secret
revelations, acknovvledge what they receive: such persons both know these
things, and do utter them: for those judgments which God does conceal they
know not, and those which he does utter they know: and therefore the
prophet David when he had said: I have with my lips uttered all the
judgments, he adds immediately of thy mouth: as though he should plainly
say. Those judgments Psalm. 118.
I may both know and utter, which I knevve thovve did speak, for those
things which thovve do not speak, without all question, thou do
conceal from our knowledge. Wherefore the saying of David and S. Paul agree
together: for the judgments of God, are incomprehensible: and yet those
which him self with his own mouth vouchesafeth to speak, are uttered
with men's tongues: because men may come to the knowledge of them, and being
revealed, they may be uttered and by no means can be kept secret.


Gregory. Now I see the answer to my question. But I pray you to proceed,
if any thing yet remains to be told of his virtue and miracles.


HOW THE MAN OF GOD BENnet did foretell the suppression of one of his own
Abbeyes.

CHAPTER XVII.
Gregory. A Certain noble man called Theoprobus, was by the good counsel of
holy Bennet converted: who for his virtue and merit of life, was very
intrinsecall and familiar with him. This man upon a day coming into his
cell, found him vveepinge very bitterlye. And having expected a good while,
and yet not seeing him to make an end (for the man of God used not in his
prayers to weep, but rather to be sadd) he demanded the cause of that his so
great heaviness, to whom he ansvvered straightevvaye saying: All this Abbey
which I have builte, and all such things as I have made ready for my
brethren, are by the judgment of almighty God, delivered to the gentiles, to be
spoiled and overthrown: and scarce could I obtain of God to have thiere
lives spared, that should then live in it. His words Theoprobus then heard, but
we see them to be proved most true, who know that very Abbey to be now
suppressed by the Lombardes. For not long since in the night time, when the
monks were a sleep, they entered in, and spoiled al things, but yet not one
man could they retain there, and so almighty God fulfilled what he promised
to his faithful servant: for though he gave them the house and all the goods,
yet did he preserve thiere lives: In which thing I see that Bennet imitated
Act. 21.
S. Paul: whose shipp though it lost all the goods, yet for his comfort he
had the lives of all that were in his company bestowed upon him, so that no one
man was cast away.


HOW BLESSED BENNET knew the hidinge away of a flag on of wine.

CHAPTER XVIII.
Upon a certain time Exhilaratus our monk a lay brother, whom you know, was
sent by his master to the monastery of the man of God, to carry him two wooden
bottles commonly called flagons, full of wine: who in the way as he was
goinge, hidd one of them in a bushe for him self, and presented the other to
venerable Bennet: who took it very tha^ckefullye, and when the man was going
away, he gave him this warninge. Take heed my son (quoth he) that thowe
drinckest not of that flagon which thou have hidden in the bushe: but first be
careful to boowe it down, and thowe shall find what is with in it: the poor
man thus pitifully confounded by the man of God, went his way, and coming
back to the place where the flagon was hidden, and desirous to try the truth
of that was told him, as he was boovvinge it down a snake straighte ways
leaped forth. Then Exhilaratus perceiuinge what was gotten into the wine,
began to be affraide of that wickedness which he had committed.

HOW THE MAN OF GOD knew that one of his monks had received certain
handkerchefs.

CHAPTER XIX.
NOt far from his Abbey, there was a village, in which very many men had by
the sermons of Bennet, been converted from idolatrye to the true faith of
Christ. Certain Nuns also there were in the same town, to whom he did
often send some of his monks to preach unto them, for the good of thiere
souls. Upon a day one that was sent, after he had made an end of his
exhortation, by the entreaty of the Nuns took certain small napkins, and
hid them for his own use in his bosom: whom upon his return to the Abbey,
the man of God very sharply rebuked, saying. How comes it to pass
brother, that sin is entered into your bosom? At which words the monk was
much amazed: for he had quite forgotten, what he had putt there: and therefore
knevve not any cause why he should deserve that reprehension: whereupon the
holy man spoke to him in plain terms and said: was not I present when you
took the hand-kercheffes of the Nuns, and put them up in your bosom for
your own private use. The monk hearing this, fell down at his feet, and
was sorry that he had behaved him self so indiscretly: forth he drew those
napkins from his bosom, and three we them all away.

HOW HOLY BENNET KNEVVE the proud thought of one of his monks.

CHAPTER XX.
Upon a time, vvhiles the venerable Father was at supper, one of his monk;
who was the son of a great man, held the candle: and as he was standing
there, and the other at his meat, he began to entertayne a proud cogitation
in his mind, and to speak thus within him self: who is he, that I thus wait
upon at supper, and hold him the candle? and who am I, that I should do him any
such service? Upon which thought straighte ways the holy man turned him
self, and with severe reprehension spoke thus unto him. Sign your heart
brother, for what is it that you say? sign your heart: and forthwith he called
an other of the monks, and bad him take the candle out of his hands, and
commanded him to give over his waitinge, and to repose him self: who being
demanded of the monks, what it was that he thought, told them, how in If
Saints in mortal flesh, may know the thoughts of our heart: much more the
immortal Saints in heaven
wardelye he swelled with pride, and what he spoke against the man of God,
secretlye in his own heart. Then they all saw very well that nothing could
be hidden from venerable Be^net, seeinge the very sound of men's inward
thoughts, came unto his ears.

OF TWO HUNDRED BVSSHELS of meal, found before the man of Gods cell.

CHAPTER XXI.
AT an other time, there was a great dearche in the same country of Campania:
so that all kind of people tasted of the miserye: and all the wheat of Bennets
monasterye was spent, and likewise all the bread, so that there remained no
more then five loaves for dinner: The venerable man beholdinge the monks sad,
both rebuked the^ modestly for thiere pusillanimitye, and again did comfort
them with this promise: why (quoth he) are you so grieved in your minds for
lack of bread? Indede too day some want there is, but to morrow you shall
have plentye: and so it fell out, for the next day two hundred busshells of
meal was found in sackes before his cell door, which almighty God sent them:
but by whom, or what means, that is unknown to this very day: which miracle
when the monks saw, they gave God thanckes, and by this learned in want, not
to make any doubt of plenty.

Peter. Tell me I pray you, whether this servant of God had always the
spirit of prophecye, when him self pleased, or only at certain times.


Gregory. The spirit of prophecy does not always illuminate the minds of the
prophets: because as it is written of the holy Ghost, that he breaths where
Ioh. 3.
he will: so we are also to know, that he does breathe likewise for what
cause, and when he pleases. And hereof it comes, that when king David
demanded of Nathan whether he might 1. Paralip. 17.
build a temple for the honor of God, the prophet Nathan gave his consent:
and yet afterward utterly for bad it. From hence likewise it proceeds, that
when Helizeus saw the woman weeping, and knew not the cause, he said to his
servant, that did trouble her: Let 4. Reg. 4.
her alone, for her soul is in grief, and God has concealed it from me, and
has not told me. Which thing almightye God of great pietye so disposes: for
giuinge at some times, the spirit of prophecye, and at other times withdrawinge
it, he does both lift up the prophets minds on high, and yet does preserve
them in humilitye: that by the gift of the spirit, they may know what they
are by Gods grace: and at other times destitute of the same spirit, may
understand what they are of them selves.


Peter. There is very great reason for that you say. But I pray you, let me
hear more of the venerable man Bennet, if there be any thing else that comes
to your remembrance.


HOW BY VISION, VENERABLE Bennet disposed the buildinge of the Abbey of
Taracina.

CHAPTER XXII.
Gregory. AT an other time he was desired by a certa^ne virtuous man, to bulide
an Abbeye for his monks upon his ground, not far from the city of Taracina.
The holy man was content, and appointed an abbot and Prior, with diverse monks
under them: and when they were departinge he promised that upon such a day, he
would come and show them in what place the oratory should be made, and where
the refectorye should stand, and all the other necessary rooms: and so they
taking his blessinge went there way: and against the day appointed, which
they greatly expected, they made all such things ready as were necessary to
entertain him, and those that should come in his company. But the very
night before, the man of God in sleep appeared to the Abbot and the Prior,
and particularly described unto them, where each place and office was to be
builded. And when they were both risen, they conferred together what either of
them had seen in thiere sleep: but yet not giving full credit to that vision,
they expected the man of God him self in person, according to his promise.
But when they savve that he came not, they returned back unto him very
sorovvfullye, saying: we expected father that you should have come according
to promise, and told us where each place should have been built, which yet
you did not. To whom he ansvvered, why say you so good brethren? Did not I
come as I promised you? and when they asked at what time it was: why (quoth
he) did not I appear to either of you in your sleep, and appointed how and
where every place was to be builded. Go your way and according to that
plat-forme which you then ^awe build up the Abbey. At which words they much
maruailed, and returninge back, they caused it to b^ builded in such sort, as
they had been taught of him by revelation.


Peter. Gladly would I learn, by what means, that could be done, to wit, that
he should go so far to tell them that thing in thiere sleep, which they
should both hear and know by vision.


Gregory. Why do you Peter seek out and doubt, in what manner this thing was
done? For certain it is, that the soul is of a more noble nature then the
body. And by authority of scripture we know, that the prophet Abacuck was
carried from Judea, with that dinner which he had, and was suddainlye set in
Chaldea: by which meat the prophet Daniel was relieved: and presentlye Daniel.
cap. 14.
after was brought back again to Judea. If then Abacuck could in a moment
with his body go so far, and carrye provision for an other man's dinner: what
marvel is it, if the holy father Bennet obtained grace to go in spirit and
to inform the souls of his brethren that were a sleep, co^cerninge such
things as were necessary: and that as Abacuck about corporal meat went
corporally, so Bennet should go spiritually about the dispatche of spiritual
business.


Peter. I confess that your words have satisfied my doubtful mind. But I
would know what manner of man he was in his ordinary talk and conversation.


OF CERTAIN NVNNES absolved after thiere death.

CHAPTER XXIII.
HIs common talk Peter was vsuallye full of virtue: for his heart conuersed so
above in heaven, that no words could in vain proceed from his mouth. And
if at any time he spoke ought, yet not as one that determined what was best
to be done, but only in a threatnnige manner, his speech in that case was so
effectual and forcible, as though he had not doubtfully or uncertainly, but
assuredly pronounced and given sentence^. For not far from his Abbey there
lived two Nuns in a place by them selves, borne of worshipful parentage:
whom a religious good man did serve for the dispatche of thiere outvvarde
business. But as nobility of family, does in some breed ignobility of mind,
and mak^th them in conversation to shevve less humilitye, because they
remember still what superiority they had above others: even so was it with
these Nuns: for they had not yet learned to temper thiere tongues, and keep
them under with The habit of Nuns
the bridle of thiere habit: for often did they by thiere indiscret speech
provoke the foresaid religious man to anger: who having borne with them a
long time, at length he complained to the man of God, and told him with what
reprochefull words they ^ntreated him: where upon he sent them by and by this
message saying. Amend your tongues, otherwise I do excommunicat you: which
sentence of excommunication notwithstanding he did not then presentlye
pronounce against them, but only threatened if they amended not them selves:
But they for all this, changed thiere conditions nothing at all: both which not
long after departed this life, and were buried in the church: and when
Solemn mass.
solemn mass was celebrated in the same church, and the Deacon according to
custom said with loud voice, if any there be that do not communicate let
them depart: the nurse which used to give unto our Lord an Offering for the
dead.
offringe for them, beheld them at that time to rise out of thiere graves and
to depart the church. Having often times, at those words of the Deacon seen
them leave the church, and that they could not tarry within, she remembered
what message the man of God sent them wh^les they were yet alive. For he told
them, that he did deprive them of the communion, unless they did amend their
tongues and conditions. Then with great sorrow, the whole matter was signified
to the man of God, who straight-waies with his own hands gave an oblation
saying Go your ways and cause this to be offered Oblation for the dead.
unto our Lord for them, and they shall not remain any longer excommunicat:
which oblation being offered for them, and the Deacon as he used, crying out,
that such as did not communicate should depart, they were not seen any more to
go out of the church: whereby it was certain that seeinge they did not
depart with the^ which did not communicate, that they had received the
communion of our Lord, by the hands of his servant.

Peter. It is very strange that you report: for how could he though a
venerable and most holy man, yet living in mortal body, loose those souls
which stood now before the invisible judgment of God.


Gregory. Was he not yet Peter mortal, that heard from our Savior:
whatsoever Math. 16
thowe shall bind upon earth, it shall be bound also in the heavens: and
whatsoever thowe shall loose in earth, shall be loosed also in the heavens.
whose place of bindinge and loosinge those have at this time, which by faith
and virtuous life possess the place of holy government: and to be stowe such
power upon earthly men, the creator of heaven and earth, desconded from heaven
to earth: and that flesh might judge of spiritual things, God who for man's
sake was made flesh, vouchesafed to bestow upon him: for from thence our
weakness did rise up above it self, from whence the strength of God was
weakened under it self.


Peter. For the virtue of his miracles, your words do yield a very good
reason.


OF A BOY THAT AFTER HIS burial was cast out of his grave.

CHAPTER XXIIII.
Gregory. Upon a certain day, a young boy that was a monk, louinge his
parents more then reason would, went from the Abbey to thiere house, not
crauinge the fathers blessinge before hand: and the same day that he came home
unto them, he departed this life. And being buried, his body the next day
after, was found cast out of the grave: which they caused again to be put in,
and again the day following, they found it as before. Then in great have
they went to the man of God, sell down at his feet, and with many tears
beseeched him, that he would vouchsafe him that was dead of his favor. To
whom the man of God with his own hands delivered the holy communion of our
Lords body saying: Go and lay with great The Sacrament was not buried with
him, but only laid upon his breast and taken of again
reverence this our Lords body upon his breast, and so burye him: which when
they had done, the dead corpse after that remained quietly in the grave. By
which you perceive Peter of what merit he was with our Lord Jesus Christ,
seeinge the earth would not give entertainment to his body, who departed this
world out of Bennets favor.


Peter. I perceive it very well, and do wonderfully admire it.


HOW A MONK FORESAKING the Abbey, met with a dragon in the way.

CHAPTER XXV.
Gregory. A Certain monk there was so inconstant and fickle of mind, that he
would needs give over the Abbey: for which fault of his, the man of God d^d
daily rebuke him, and often times give him good admonitions: but yet for all
this, by no means would he tarry amongst them, and therefore continual suit he
made that he might be discharged. The venerable man upon a time wearied with
his importunitye, in anger bad him depart, who was no sooner out of the Abbey
gate, but he found a dragon in the way expecting him with open mouth, which
being about to devour him, he began in great fear and tremblinge to cry out
aloude, saying. Help, help: for this dragon will eat me up. At which noise
the monks running out, dragon they saw non, but finding him there shaking and
tre^bling, they brought him back again to the Abbey, who forth with promised
that he would never more forsake the monasterye, and so ever after he continued
in his profession: for by the prayers of the holy man, he saw the dragon
coming against him, whom before when he savve not, he did willingly follow.


HOW HOLY BENNET CVRED a boy of the leprosy.

CHAPTER XXVI.
But I must not here pass over with silence, that which I had by relation of
the honorable man Anthonye, who said that his fathers boy was so pitifully
punnished with a leprosy, that all his hear fell of, his body swelled, and
filthy corruption did openly come forth. Who being sent by his father to the
man of God, he was by him quickly restored to his former health.

HOW BENNET FOUND MONEY miraculously to relieve a poor man.

CHAPTER XXVIII.
NEither is that to be ommitted, which one of his disciples called Peregrinus
used to tell: for he said that upon a certain day, an honest man who was in
debt, found no other means to help him self, but thought it his best way,
to acquaint the man of God with his necessitye: whereupon he came to the Abbey,
and findinge the servant of almighty God, gave him to understand, how he was
troubled by his creditor fortwelue shillinges which he did owe him: To whom the
venerable man said, that him self had not so much money, yet giuinge him
comfortable words he said: Go your ways, and after two days come to me
again, for I can not presently help you: in which two days after his manner
he bestowed him self in prayer: and when upon the third day the poor man
came back, there were found suddenly upon the chest of the Abbey which was
full of corn thirtene shillinges: which the man of God caused to be given to
him that required but twelve, both to discharge his debte, and also to defraye
his own charges. But now will I return to speak of such things, as I had
from the mouth of his own scollers, mentioned before in the beginning of
this book. A certain man there was who had an enemy that did notably spite
and malign him, whose damnable hatred proceeded so far, that he poisoned his
drink, which although it killed him not, yet did it change his skin in
such sort, that it was of many colors, as though he had been infected with a
leprosy: but the man of God restored him to his former health: for so sone as
he touched him, forthwith all that varietye of colors departed from his body.

HOW A CRVET OF GLASS was thrown upon the stones, and not broken.

CHAPTER XXVIII.
AT such time as there was a great dearthe in Campania, the man of God had
given away all the wealth of the Abbey to poor people, so that in the celler
there was no thing left but a little oil in a glass. A certain subdeacon
called Agapitus came unto him, instantly crauinge that he would bestow a
little oil upon him. Our Lords servant that was resolved to give away all
upon earth, that he might find all in heaven, commanded that oil to be given
him: but the monk that kep^e the celler heard what the father commanded, yet
did he not perform it^ Who inquiringe not long after whether he had given
that which he willed, the monk told him that he had not, adding that if he
had given it away, that there was not any left for the Conuer^t. Then in an
anger he commanded others to take that glass with the oil, and to throw it
out at the windovve, to the end that nothing might remain in the Abbey
contrary to obedience. The monks did so and threw it out at a window, under
which there was an huge downfall, full of roughe and craggye stones upon which
the glass did light, but yet continewed for all that so sound, as though it
had never been thrown out at all, for neither the glass was broken nor any of
the oil shed. Then the man of God did command it to be taken up again, and
whole as it was to be given unto him that desired it, and in the presence of
the other brethren he reprehended the disobedient monk, both for his
infidelity, and also for his proud mind.

HOW AN EMPTYE BARREL was filled with oil.

CHAPTER XXIX.
AFter which reprehension, with the rest of his brethren he sell to prayinge,
and in the place where they were, there stood an empty barrel with a cover
upon it: and as the holy man continewed in his prayers, the oil within did so
increase, that the cover began to be lifted up, and at length fell down, and
the oil that was now higher then the mouth of the barrel, began to run
over upon the pauiment, which so sone as the servant of God Bennet beheld,
forth with he gave over his prayers, and the oil likewise ceased to ouerflow
the barrel. Then did he more at large admonish that mistrustinge and
disobedient monk, that he would learn to have faith and humilitye, who upon
so wholesome an admonition was ashamed, because the venerable father had by
miracle shown, the power of almighty God, as before he told him when he did
first rebuke him: and so no cause there was why any should afterward doubt of
his promise, seeinge at one and the same time, for a small glass almost emptye
which he gave away, he bestowed upon them an whole barrel full of oil.

HOW BENNET DELIVERED a monk from a devil.

CHAPTER XXX.
Upon a certain time as he was goinge to the oratory of S. Iohne, which is in
the topp of the mountain: the old enemy of mankind upon a mule like a
physician, met him caryinge in his hand an horn and a mortar. And when he
demanded whether he was goinge. To your monks (quoth he) to give them a
drench. The venerable father went forward to his prayers, and when he had
done, he returned in all have, but the wicked spirit found an old monk
drawinge of water, in to whom he entered, and straight-waies cast him upon the
ground, and grievously tormented him. The man of God coming from his prayers,
and seeinge him in such pitiful case gave him only a little blow with his
hand, and at the same instant he cast out that cruel devil, so that he durst
not any more presume to enter in.

Peter. I would gladly know, whether he obtained always by prayer, to work
such notable miracles: or else sometimes did them only at his will and pleasure.


Gregory. Such as be the devout serua^ntes of God, when necessity require^^,
use to work miracles both manner of ways: so that sometime they estecte
wonderful things by their prayers, and sometime only by their power and
authority: for S. Iohne says. So John. 1.
many as received him, he gave them power to be made the sons of God. They
then that by power be the sons of God, what marvel is it if by power they
be able to do wonderful things. And that both ways they work miracles,
Act. 9. Act. 5.
we learn of S. Peter: who by his prayers did raise up Tabitha; and by his
sharp reprehension did sentence Ananias and Saphira to death for their
^yinge. For we read not, that in the death of them he prayed at all, but only
rebuked them for that sin which they had committed. Certain therefore it is,
that sometimes they do these things by power, and sometimes by prayer: for
Ananias and Saphira by a severe rebuke, S. Peter deprived of life: and by
prayer restored Tabitha to life. And for prooffe of this I will now tell you of
two miracles, which the faithful servant of God Bennet did, in which it shall
appear most plainlye, that he wroughte the one by that power which God gave
him: and obtained the other by virtue of his prayers.


OF A COUNTRY FELLOW, that with the only sight of the man of God, was loosed
from his bands.

CHAPTER XXXI.
A Certain Goth there was called Galla, an Arrian he retike, who in the time
of king Totilas, did with such monstrous crueltye persecute religious men of
the Catholic church, that what Priest or monk soever came in his presence he
never departed alive. This man on a certain day set upon rapin and pillage,
pitifully tormented a poor country man, to make him confess where his money
and wealth was: who overcome with extremity of pain said, that he had
committed all his substance to the custodye of Bennet, the servant of God: and
this he did, to the end that his tormenter giuinge credit to his words, might
at least for a while surcease from his horrible crueltye. Galla hearing this
tormented him no longer: but binding his arms fast with strong cords, drove
him before his horse, to bring him unto this Be^net, who as he said had his
wealth in keepinge. The country fellow thus pinyoned and runninge before him,
carried him to the holy man's Abbey, where he found him sittinge before the
gate, readinge upon a book: Then turninge back to Galla that came raginge
after, he said. This is father Bennet of whom I told you: who lookinge upon
him, in a great fury, thinckinge to deal as terribly with him, as he had with
others, cried out aloude to him saying. Rise up sirrah, rise up, and deliver
me quickelye such wealth as thowe have of this man's in keepinge. The man of
God hearing such a noise, straighte-waies lift up his eyes from readinge, and
beheld both him, and the country fellow: and turninge his eyes to his
bands, very straungelye they fell from his arms and that so quickelye, as no
man with any have could have undone them. Galla seeinge him so wonderfullye and
quickly loosed, fell straighte a trembling, and prostratinge him self upon
the earth, boowed down his cruel and stiff neck to the holy man's feet, and
with humilitye did commend him self to his prayers. But the venerable man for
all this rose not up from his readinge, but calling for some of his monks,
commanded them to have him in, and to give him some meat. And when he was
brought back again, he gave him a good lesson, admonishing him not to use
any more such rigor and cruel dealinge. His proud mind thus taken down,
away he went, but durst not demand after that any thing of the country
fellow, whom the man of God not with hands, but only with his eyes had loosed
from his bands. And this is that Peter which I told you, that those which in
a more familiar sort serve God, do sometime by a certain power and authority
bestowed upon them work miracles. For he that sittinge still did appease the
furye of that cruel Gothe, and unloose with his eyes those knottes and cords,
which did pinion the inocent man's arms, did plainelye show by the quickenes
of the miracle, that he had received power to work all that which he did. And
now will I likewise tell you of an other miracle, which by prayer he obtained
at Gods hands.

HOW BY PRAYER VENERABLE Bennet raised up a dead child.

CHAPTER XXXII.
Being upon a day gone out with his monks to work in the field, a country
man carrying the corpse of his dead son, came to the gate of the Abbey,
lamentinge the loss of his child: and inquiringe for holy Bennet, they told
him that he was abroad with his monks in the field. Down at the gate he laid
the dead body, and with great sorrow of soul ran in have to seek out the
venerable father. At the same time the man of God was returninge home ward from
work with his monks: whom so sone as he saw, he began to cry out, give me
my son, give me my son. The man of God amazed at these words, stood
still, and said: what have I taken away your son? No no quoth the
sorrowful father, but he is dead, come for Christ Jesus sake and restore him
to life. The servant of God, hearing him speak in that manner, and seeinge
his monks upon compassion to solicit the poor man's suit, with great sorrow
of mind he said. Away my good brethren, away: Such miracles are not for us
to work, but for the blessed Apostles why will you lay such a burden upon
me, as my weakness can not bear? But the poor man whom excessive grief
enforced, would not give over his petition, but swore that he would never
depart, except he did raise up his son. Where is he then quoth Gods
servant? he answered, that his body lay at the gate of the Abbey: to which
place when the man of God came with his monks, he kneeled down and lay upon
the body of the little child, and rising, he held up his hands toward
heaven, and said: Behold not o Lord my sins, but the faith of this man,
than desires to have his son raised to life, and restore that soul to the
body, which thowe have taken away. He had scarce spoken these words, and
behold the soul returned back again, and there with the childs body began
to tremble in such sort that all which were present, did behold it in strange
manner to pant and shake. Then he took it by the hand and gave it to his
father, but alive and in health. Certain it is Peter, that this miracle was
not in his own power, for which prostrat upon the ground he prayed so
earnestly.

Peter. All is most true that before you said, for what you affirmed in
words, you have now verified by examples and worckes. But tell me I beseech
you, whether holy men can do all such things as they please, and obtain at
Gods hands whatsoever they desire.


OF A MIRACLE VVROVGHTE by his sister Scholastica.

CHAPTER XXXIII.
Gregory. What man is there Peter in this world, that is in greater favor
with God, then S. Paul was: who yet three times desired our Lord to be
delivered from the prick of the flesh, and obtained not his petition.
Concerning which point also I 2. Cor. 12.
must needs tell you, how there was one thing which the venerable father
Bennet would have done, and yet he could not. For his filter called
Scholastica, Young children dedicated to a religious life.
dedicated from her infancy to our Lord, used once a year to come and visit her
brother. To whom the man of God went not far from the gate, to a place that did
belong to the Abbey, there to give her intertainement. And she coming thither
on a time according to her custom, her venerable brother with his monks went
to meet her, where they spent the whole day in the praises of God and
spiritual talk: and when it was almost night they supped together, and as
they were yet sitting at the ^able talkinge of deuoin matters, and darcknes
came on, the-holy Nu^ne his sister entreated him to stay there all night, that
they might spend it in discoursinge of the joys of heaven. But by no
persuasion would he agree unto that, saying that he might not by any means
tarry all night out of his Abbey. At that time, the sky was so clear that no
cloud was to be seen. The Nun receiuinge this denial of her brother,
joining her hands together laid them upon the table: and so bowing down her
head upon them, she made her prayers to almighty God: and liftinge her head
from the table, there fell suddainlye such a tempest of lightninge and
thundringe, and such abundance of rain, that neither venerable Bennet, nor his
monks that were with him, could put their head out of door: for the holy
Nun restinge her head upon her hands, poured forth such a flod of tears
upon the table, that she drew the clear aier to a watrye sky, so that after
the end of her devotions, that storm of rain followed: and her prayer and the
rain did so meet together, that as she lifted up her head from the table,
the thunder began, so that in one and the very same instant, she lifted up
her head and brought down the rain. The man of God seeinge that he could not
by reason of such thunder and lighteninge and great abundance of rain
return back to his Abbey, began to be heavy and to complain of his sister,
saying. God forgive you, what have you done? to whom she answered: I desired
you to stay, and you would not hear me, I have desired our good Lord, and
he has vouchsafed to grant my petition: wherefore if you can now depart a Gods
name return to your monasterye, and leave me here alone. But the good father
being not able to go for the tarried there against his will, where willinglye
before he would not stay. And so by that means they watched all night, and
with spiritual and heavenly talk did mutuallye comfort one an other: and
therefore by this we see as I said before, that he would have had that thing,
which yet he could not: for if we respect the venerable man's mind, no
question but he would have had the same fair weather to have continewed as it
was, when he set forth, but he found that a miracle did prevent his desire,
which by the power of almighty God, a woman's prayers had, wrought. And it is
not a thing to be maruailed at, that a woman which of long time had not seen
her brother, might do more at that time the^ he could, seeing according to
the saying of S. John. 1. John: 4.
God is charity and therefore of right she did more which loved more.


Peter. I confess that I am wonderfully pleased with that which you tell me.


HOW BENNET SAVVE THE soul of his sister, ascend into heaven.

CHAPTER XXXIIII.
Gregory. THe next day, the venerable woman returned to her Nonnerye, and the
man of God to his Abbey: who three days after standinge in his cell, and
liftinge up his eyes to heaven, beheld the soul of his sister, (which was
departed from her body) in the likeness of a dove to ascend into heaven: who
reioysinge much to see her great glory, with hymns and lauds gave thanckes
to almighty God, and did imparte the news of this her death to his monks,
whom also he sent presentlye, to bring her corpse to his Abbey, to have it
buried in that grave, which he had provided for him self: by means whereof it
fell out that as their souls were always one in God whiles they lived, so
their bodies continued together after their death.


HOW HE SAVVE THE WHOLE world represented before his eyes: and also the
soul of Germanus, Bishop of Capua ascending to heaven.

CHAPTER XXXV.
AT an other time Seruandus the Deacon, and Abbot of that monasterye, which in
times past was founded by the noble man Liberius in the country of Campania,
used ordinarily to come and visit the man of God: and the reason why he came so
often was, because him self also was a man full of heavenly doctrine: and so
thy two had often together sp^rituall conference, to the end that albe it they
could not perfectly feed upon the celestial food of heaven, yet by means of
such sweet discourses, they might at least, with longing and fervent desire,
taste of those ^oyes and divine delights: When it was time to go to rest, the
venerable father Bennet reposed him self in the topp of a tower, at the foot
whereof Seruandus the Deacon was lodged, so that one paier of staiers went to
them both: before the ^ower there was a certain large room in which both
their disciples did lie. The man of God Bennet being diligent in watching,
rose early up before the time of mattins (his monks being yet at rest) and
came to the window of his chamber, where he offered up his prayers to almighty
God. Standinge there, all on a sudden in the dead of the night as he looked
forth, he saw a light, which bannished away the darckenes of the night, and
glittered with such brighenes, that the light which did shine in the midst
of darckenes, was far more clear them the light of the day. Upon this fight
a maruailous strange thing followed, for as him self did afterward report,
the whole world gathered as it were together under one beam of the sun was
presented before his eyes, and whiles the venerable father stood attentively
beholdinge the brightenes of that glitteringe light, he saw the soul of
Germanies Bishop of Capita, in a fierye globe to be carried up by Angels into
heaven. Then desirous to have some witness of this so notable a miracle, he
called with a very loud voice Seruandus the Deacon twice or thrice by his
name, who troubled at such an unusual cryinge out of the man of God, went up
in all have, and looking for the saw not any thing else, but a little remnant
of the light, but wondering at so great a miracle, the man of God told him all
in order, what he had seen, and sendinge by and by to the town of Cassino, he
commanded the religious man Theoprobus to dispatche one that night to the
city of Capua, to learn what was become of Germanus thiere Bishop: which
being done, the messe^ger found that reverend Prelat departed this life, and
enquiringe curiously the time, he understood that he died at that very
instant, in which the man of God beheld him ascending v^ to heaven.

Peter. A strange thing and very much to be admired: But whereas you say,
that the whole world as it were under one sun beam was presented before his
eyes, as I must needs confess that in my self I never had experience of any
such thing, so neither can I conceive, by what means the whole world can be
seen of any one man.


Gregory. Assure your self Peter of that which I speak: to wit that all
creatures be as it were nothing to that soul, which beholds the creator:
for though it see but a glympse of that light which is in the creator, yet
very small do all things seem that be created: for by means of that
supernatural light, the capacity of the inward soul is enlarged: and is in
God so extended, that it is far above the world: yea and the soul of him that
sees in this manner, is also above it self: for being rapt up in the light
of God, it is inwardly in it self enlarged above it self, and when it is so
exalted and looks downward, then does it comprehend how little all that is,
which before in former baseness it could not comprehend. The man of God
therefore who saw the fiery globe, and the Angels returninge to heaven, out of
all doubt could not see these things but in the light of God: what marvel
then is it, if he saw the world gathered together before him, who rap^ up in
the light of his soul, was at that time out of the world. But albeit we say,
that the world was gathered together besoore his eyes, yet were not heaven and
earth drawn into any lesser room then they be of them selves, but the soul
of the beholder was more enlarged, which rapt in God might without difficultye
see that which is under God, and therefore in that light which appeared to his
outward eyes, the inward light which was in his soul, ravished the mind of
the beholder to supernall things, and showed him how small all earthly
things were.


Peter. I perceive now that it was to my more profitt, that I understood you
not before: seeinge by reason of my slow capacitye, you have delivered so
notable an exposition. But now, because you have made me througlye to
understand these things, I beseech you to continewe on your former narration.


HOW HOLY BENNET WROTE a rule for his monks.

CHAPTER XXXVI.
DEsirous I am Peter to tell you many things of this venerable father, but
some of purpose I set pass, because I make have to entreat also of the acts
of other holy men: yet I would not have you to be ignorant, but that the man of
God amongst so many miracles, for which he was so famous in the world, was
also sufficiently learned in diuinitye: for he wrote a rule for his monks, both
excellent for discretion and also eloquent for the style. Of whose life and
conversation if any be curious to know further, he may in the institution of
that rule, understand al his manner of life and discipline: for the holy man
could not otherwise teach, then him self lived.

HOW VENERABLE BENNET did prophecye to his monks, the time of his own death.

CHAPTER XXXVII.
THe same year in which he departed this life, he told the day of his holy
death to his monks, some of which did live daily with him, and some dwelt far
of, willinge those that were present to keep it secret, and tellinge them that
were absent, by what token they should know that he was dead. Six days
before he left this world, he gave order to have his sepulcher opened, and
forthwith fallinge into an agewe, he began with burninge heat to wax fainte,
and when as the sickness daily increased, upon the sixth day he commanded his
monks to carry him into the oratory, where he did arm him self with
receiuinge the body and blood of our Savior Christ: and having his weak body
holden up betwixt the hands of his disciples, he stood with his own lift
up to heaven, and as he was in that manner praying, he gave up the Ghost. Upon
which day two monks, one being in his cell, and the other far distant, had
concerning him one and the self same vision: for thy saw all the way from
the holy man's cell, toward the east euene up to heauene, hunge and adorned
with tapestry, and shininge with an infinite number of lamps, at the topp
whereof a man reverently attired, stood and demanded if they knew who passed
that way, to whom they answered saying, that they knew not. Then he spoke thus
unto them: This is the way (quoth he) by which the beloved servant of God
Bennet is ascended up to heaven. And by this means as his monks that were
present knew of the death of the holy man, so likewise they which were absent
by the token which he foretold them, had intelligence of the same thing.
Buried he was in the oratory of S. Iohne Baptist which him self built, when he
ouerthrewe the altar of Apollo: who also in that cave in which he first
dwelled, euene to his very time, works miracles, if the faith of them that
pray, requires the same.

HOW A MAD WOMAN WAS cured in his cave.

CHAPTER XXXVIII.
FOr the thing which I mean now to rehearse fell out lately. A certain woman
fallinge mad, lost the use of reason so far, that she walked up and down day
and night, in mountains and valle is, in woods and fields, and rested only
in that place, where extreme wearines enforced her to stay: Upon a day it
fell so out, that albeit she wandered at randon, yet she missed not the right
way: for she came to the cave of the blessed man Bennet: and not knowinge any
thing, in she went, and reposed her self there that night, and rising up in
the morning, she departed as sound in sense and well in her wits, as though
she had never been distracted in her whole life, and so continewed always
after even to her dyinge day.

Peter. What is the reason that in the patronage of martirs we often times
find, that they do not afforde so great benefits by their bodies, as they do
by Saints relickes work miracles.
other of their relics: and do there work greater miracles, where them
selves be not present.


Gregory. Where the holy martirs lie in their bodies, there is no doubt Peter
but that they are able to work many miracles, yea and also do work infinite,
to such as seek them with a pure mind. But for as much as simple people
Saints in heaven hear our prayers. Prayer to Saints.
might have some doubt whether they be present, and do in those places hear
their prayers where their bodies be not, necessary it is, that they should
in those places show greater miracles, where weak souls may most doubt of
their presence. But he whose mind is fixed in God, has so much the greater
merit of his faith, in that he both knows that they rest not there in body,
and yet be there present to hear our prayers. And therefore our Savior him
self to increase the faith of his disciples said. If I do not depart, Ioh.
16.
the comforter will not come unto you: for seeinge certain it is, that the
comfortinge spirit does always proceed from the father and the son, why does
the son say, that he will depart that the comforter may come, who never is
absent from the son. But because the disciples beholdinge our Lord in flesh,
did always desire to see him with their corporal eyes, very well did he say
unto them, unless I do go away, the comforter will not come: as though he had
plainly told them: If I do not with draw my body, I can not let you
understand what the love of the spiritis: and except you give over to love my
carnal presence, never will you learn to affect me with true spiritual love.


Peter. That you say pleases me very well.


Gregory. Let us now for a while give over our discourse, to the end that if we
mean to prosecute the miracles of other Saints, we may through silence be
the more able to perform it.


The end of the second book.
THE CHAPTERS OF THE THIRD BOOK.
1. OF Paulinus Bisshoppe of the city of Nola. 2. of Pope John. 3. Of Pope
Agapitus. 4. Of Datius Bisshoppe of Millan. 5. Of Sabinus Bisshoppe of
Camisina. 6. Of Cassius Bisshoppe of Narni. 7. Of Andrewe Bisshoppe of Funda.
8. Of Constantius Bishop of Aquinunt. 9. Of Frigidianus Bishop of Luna. 10.
Of Sabinus Bishop of Placentia, who by his letters made the river of Poe, to
retire into his channel. 11. Of Cerbonius Bishop of Populonium. 12. Of
Fulgentius Bishop of Otricoly. 13. Of Herculanus Bishop of Perusium. 14. Of
the servant of God Isaac. 15. Of the servants of God, Euthitius and
Florentius. 16. Of Martius the monk of mount Marsico. 17. Of a monk dwelling
in the mountain called Arge^tario: who raised up, a dead man. 18. Of Bennet
the monk. 19. Of the church of S. Zeno the martyr, into which the swellinge
waters came not any further then to the door. 20. Of Steue^ a Priest in the
Proui^ce of Valeria 21. Of a Nun that with her only authority dispossessed a
devil. 22. Of a Priest in the province of Valeria that held a thiese at his
sepulcher. 23. Of the Abbot of mount Preneste and his Priest. 24. Of Theodorus
clarke of S. Peter's church in Rome. 25. Of Abundius clarcke of the same
church. 26. Of a solitarye moncke. 27. Of fourtye cou^trye men that were
martired, because they would not eat flesh sacrificed to Idols. 28. Of a
great multitude of captives, that were slain, because they would not adore a
goats head. 29. Of an Arrian Bishop strooken blind. 30. Of a church of the
Arrians, consecrated catholicklye in the city of Rome. 31. Of Ermigildus the
son of Liuigildus, king of the Visegothes put to death by his father, for
the catholic faith. 32. Of certain Bisshops of Africa, that had for defense
of the catholic faith, their tongues cut out by the Arrians: and yet spoke as
perfectly as they did before. 33. Of the servant of God Eleutherius. 34. How
many kind of compunctions there be. 35. Of Amantius a Priest in the country
of Tuscania. 36. Of Maximianus Bishop of Siracusa. 37. Of Sanctulus a Priest
in the province of Nursia. 38. Of a vision, which appeared to Redemptus Bishop
of Ferenti.
THE THIRD BOOK OF S. GREGORY'S DIALOGVES.
BEING careful to entreat of such fathers as lived not long since, I passed
over the worthy acts of those that were in former times: so that I had almost
forgot the miracle of Paulinus Bishop of Nolas who both for time was more
ancient, and for virtue more notable then many of those which I have spoken
of: wherefore I will now spenke of him, but as briefly as I can. For as the
life and actions of good men are soonest known to such as be like them, so
the famous name of Venerable Paulinus became known to mine holy elders, and
his admirable fact served for their instruction: Who for their gravity and
old years are as well to be credited, as if that which they reported, they had
seen with their own eyes.

OF S. PAVLINVS BISHOP of the city of Nola.

CHAPTER I.
When as in the time of the cruel Vandals, that part of Italy which is
called Campania, was ouerrunne and sacked, and many were from thence carried
captive into Affricke: then the servant of God Paulinus, bestowed all the
wealth of his Bishopric upon prisoners and poor people. And not having
now any thing more left, a certain widow came unto him, lamentinge how
her son was taken prisonner by one that was son in law to the king of the
Vandals, and by him carried away to be his slave: and therefore she besoughte
him, that he would vouchsafe to help her with a ransom for the redeeming of
her son: But the man of God seeking what he had to give the poor woman,
found nothing left but him self alone, and therefore he answered her in this
manner. Good woman nothing have I to help the withal but my self, and
therefore take me, and a Gods name say that I am your servant, and see whether
he will receive me for his slave, and so set your son at liberty: which
words she hearing from the mouth of so notable a man, took them rather for
a mock, then to proceed indeed from true compassion. But as he was an
eloquent man, and passinge well learned in humanitye, so did he quickly
persuade the doubtefull woman to give credit to his words, and not to be
affraide to offer a Bishop for the ransom of her son: whereupon away they
trauiled both into Asfricke. And when the kings son in law ca^e abroad,
the widow putt up her petition concerning her son, humbly beseeching him
that he would vouchesafe to set him now at liberty, and bestow him upon his
mother. But the barbarous man swellinge with pride and puffed up with the joy
of transitorye prosperitye, refused not only to do it, but disdayned also to
give any ear to her petition. This way therefore taking no success, the
desolat widow tried the next, and said unto him: Behold I give you here this
man in stead of him, only take compassion on me and restore me mine only
son: At which words he castinge his eyes upon Paulinus, and seeinge him to
have an honest and good face, asked him, of what occupation he was, to whom
the man of God answered: Trade or occupation I can none, but some skill I have
in keepinge of a gardin. This pleased the Pagan very well, whereupon he
admitted him for his servant, and restored the widow her son, with whom she
departed out of Affricke, and Paulinus took charge of the gardin. The kings
son in law coming often into the gardin, demanded certain questions of
his new man, and perceiving him to be very wise and of good judgment, he
began to give over the company of his old familiar friends, and conuersed much
with his gardener, taking great pleasure in his talk. Every day Paulinus
brought him to his table diverse sorts of grene herbs, and after dinner
returned to his gardin. After he had used this a long time: upon a day as his
master and he were in secret talk together, Paulinus spoke unto him in this
manner. Consider my Lord what is your best course, and how the kingdom of the
Vandals shall be disposed of, for the king is to dye shortly: which news
because he was in special grace with the king, he gave him to understand,
addinge that his gardener, who was a passinge wise man had told him so much.
The king hearing this, was desirous to see the man he spoke of: Your Majesty
(quoth he) shall see him, for his manner is to bring me in daily fresh herbs
for my dinner, and I will give order that he shall do it in your presence:
which direction being given, as the king satt at dinner, Paulinus came in,
bringing with him diverse sallettes and fresh herbs: whom so soon as the king
beheld he fell a trembling, and sending for Paulinus master, (who by the
marriage of his daughter was so nere allied unto him) acquainted him with that
secret which before he had concealed, saying. It is very true that which you
have heard, for the last night in a dream, I saw certain judges in their
seats sittinge upon me, amongst whom this man also sat for one: and by their
sentence that whipp was taken from me, which for the punnishment of others
some time I had. But inquire I pray you, what he is, for I do not think one
of so great merit to be an ordinary man, as he outwardly seems. Then the
kings son in law took Paulinus in secret, and asked him what he was: to
whom the man of God ansvvered: your servant I am (quoth he) whom you took
for the ransom of the widow son: but when he would not be satisfied
with that answer, but did instantly press him to tell, not what he was
now, but what he had been in his own country, and did urge him very often
to answer to this point: the man of God adiuered so strictlye, not bee^nge
able any longer to deny his request, told him that he was a Bishop: which
his master and Lord hearing became wonderfully affraide, and humbly offered
him saying: demand what you will, that you may be well rewardred of me,
and so return home to your country. To whom the man of God Paulinus said.
One thing there is where in you may much pleasure me, and that is, to set at
liberty all those that be of my city: which fute he obtained, for straighte
ways throughout Affricke all were sought out their ships laden with
wheat, and to give venerable Paulinus satisfaction, they were all discharged,
and in his company sent home: and not long after the king of the Vandals died,
and so he lost that whipp and severe government, which to his own
destruction, and the punnishement of Christians by Gods providence he had
before received. And thus it came to pass, that Paulinus the servant of
almightye God told truth, and he that voluntarilye alone made him self a
bondsman, returned not back alone, but with many from captivity: imitatinge him
who took upon him the form of a servant, that we should not be servants
to sin: for Paulinus followinge his example, became him self for a time a
servant alone, that afterward he might be made free with many.

Peter. When I hear that which I can not imitate, I desire rather to weep
then to say any thing.


Gregory. Concerning this holy man's death, it remains yet in the records of
his own church, how that he was with a pain of his side brought to the last
cast: and that whiles all the rest of the house stood sound, the chamber only
in which he lay sick, was shaken with an earth quake, and so his soul was
loosed from his body: and by this means it fell out, that they were all
strooke^ with a great fear that might have seen Paulinus departing this life.
But because his virtue by that which I spoke of before is sufficiently handled,
now if you please we will come to other miracles, which are both known to
many, and which I have heard by the relation of such persons, that I can make
no doubt but that they be most true.


OF SAINT JOHN THE Pope.

CHAPTER II.
IN the time of the Goths, when the most blessed man John Bishop of this
church of Rome, travailed to the Emperor Iustinia^ thelder, he came into the
country of Corinth, where he lacked an horse to ride upon: which a certain
noble man understanding, lent him that horse which because he was gentle, his
wife used for her own saddle, with order that when he came where he could
provide him self of an other, his wives horse should be sent back again. And
so the Bishop rodd upon him, until he came to a certain place where he got an
other, and then he returned that which he had borrowed. But afterward when his
wife came to take his back, as before she used, by no means could she do it,
because the horse having carried so great a Bishop, would not suffer a woman
to come any more upon his back, and therefore he began with monstrous snorting,
neying and continual stirringe, as it were in scorn, to show that he could
not bear any woman, upon whom the Pope him self had ridden: which thing her
husband wisely consideringe, straight ways sent him again to the holy man,
beseechi^g him to accept of that horse which by riding, he had dedicated to his
own service. Of the same man, an other miracle is also reported by our
auncetors, to wit that in Constantinople, when he came to the gate called
Aurea, where he was met with great numbers of people, in the presence of them
all, he restored sight to a blind man that did instantly crave it: for laying
his hand upon him, he bannished away that darcknes which possessed his eyes.

OF S. AGAPITVS THE Pope.

CHAPTER III.
NOt long after, about business concerning the Goths, the most blessed man
Agapitus Bishop of this holy church of Rome (in which by Gods providence I do
now serve) went to the Emperor Justinian. And as he was trauailinge through
Greece, a dumb and lame man was brought unto him for help. The holy man
carefully demanded of his kinsfolk, that brought him thither and stood there
weepinge, whether they did believe that it was in his power to cure him: who
answered, that they did firmly hope that he might help him in the virtue of
God by the authority of S. Peter: upon which words forthwith the venerable
man fell to his prayers, and beginning solemn The sacrifice of the mass.
mass, he offered sacrifice in the sight of almighty God: which being ended,
he came from the altar, took the lame man by the hand and straightwaies in
the presence and fight of all the people, he restored him to the use of his
legs: and after he had put our Lords body into his mouth, The real
presence.
that tongue which long time before had not spoken, was loosed. At which
miracle all did wonder and began to weep for joy: and forthwith both fear
and reverence possessed their minds, beholding what Agapitus could do in the
power of our Lord, by the help of S. Peter.

OF DATIVS BISHOP OF Millan.

CHAPTER IIII.
IN the time of the same Emperor, Datius Bishopp of Millan, about matters of
religion, travailed to Constantinople. And coming to C^rinthe he sought for
a large house to receive him and his company, and could scarce find any: at
length he saw a far of a fair great house, which he commanded to be provided
for him: and when the inhabitants of that place, told him that it was for many
years haunted by the devil, and therefore stood emptye: so much the sooner
quothe the venerable man, ought we to lodge in it, if the wicked spirit has
taken possession thereof, and will nor suffer men to dwell in it. Whereupon he
gave order to have it made ready: which being done, he went without al fear
to combat with the old enemy. In the dead of the night when the man of God
was a sleep, the devil began with an huge noise and great out^ry, to imitate
the roaringe of lyo^s, the bleatinge of sheep, the brayinge of asses, the
hissinge of serpents, the gruntinge of hogs, and the skreaking of rattes.
Darius suddenly awaked with the noise of so many beasts rose up, and in great
anger spoke aloude to the old serpent, and said: Thowe art served well thowe
wretched creature: thowe art he that did say, I will Isai. 14.
place my seat in the north, and I will be like to the highest: and now
through thy pride, see how thowe art become like unto hogs and rattes: and
thowe that would needs vnworthilye be like unto God, behold how thowe do
now according to thy deserts imitate brute beasts: At these words the
wicked serpent was as I may well term it ashamed, that he was so disgratiously
and baselye put down, for well may I say that he was ashamed, who never after
troubled that house with any such terrible and monstrous shapes as before he
did: for ever after that time, Christian men did inhabit the same: for so sone
as one man that was a true and faithful christian took possession thereof, the
lyinge and faith less spirit straight-waies did forsake it. But I will now
surcease from speaking of things done in former times, and come to such
miracles as have happened in our own days.

OF SABINVS BISHOP OF Camisina.

CHAPTER V.
Certain religious men well known in the province of Apulia, do report that
which many both far and nere know to be most true, and that is of Sabinus
Bishop of Camisina: who by reason of his great age was become so blind that
he saw nothing at all. And for as much as Totilas King of the Goths hearing
that he had the gift of prophecye, and would not believe it, but was desirous
to prove whether it were so or no, it fell so out, that coming into those
parts, the man of God did inuit him to dinner. And when the meat was
brought in, the King would not sit at the table, but satt beside at the
right hand of venerable Sabinus: and when the Bisshoppes man brought him as
he used to do a cupp of wine, the King softlye putt forth his hand, took
the cupp, and gave it him self to the Bishop, to try whether he could tell
who he was that gave him the wine: Then the man of God taking the cupp, but not
seeing him that did deliver it, said: Blessed be that hand. At which words
the King very merrily blushed, because albeit he was taken, yet did he find
that gift in the man of God, which before he desired to know. The same
reverent man to give good example of life to others, lived until he was
passinge old: which nothing pleased his archdeacon, that desired his
Bishopric: and therefore upon ambition he sought how to dispatche him with
poison, and for that purpose corrupted his cup bearer, who overcome with money,
offered the Bishop at dinner, that poison in his wine which he had received of
the Archdeacon. The holy man knowinge what he brought, willed him self to
drink that which he offered him: The wretch trembled at those words, and
perceiving his villainy to be derected, thought better to drink it, and so
quickly dispatch him self, then with shame to suffer torments for the sin
of so horrible a murder: but as he was puttinge the cup to his mouth, the man
of God hindered him saying: Do not take it, but give it me, and I will drink
it my self, but go thy way, and tell him that gave it the, that I will drinck
the poison, but yet shall he never live to be Bisshopp: And so blessinge the
Blessing with the sign of the cross.
cup with the sign of the cross he drunk it without any harm at all: at
which very time the Archdeacon being in an other place departed this life: as
though that poison had by the Bishops mouth passed to his Archdeacons
bowels: for although he had no corporal poison to kill him, yet the venim of
his own malice, did destroy him in the sight of the everlasting judge.

Peter. These be strange things, and much in our days to be wondered at: yet
the life of the man is such, that he which knows his holy conversation,
has no such cause to marvel at the miracle.


OF CASSIVS BISHOP OF Narny.

CHAPTER VI.
Gregory. NEither can I Peter pass over with silence that thing, which many of
the city of Narny, which be here present affirm to be most true. For in the
time of the same Goths, the foresaid King Totilas coming to Narnie,
Cassius a man of venerable life, Bishop of the same city went forth to meet
him, whom the king utterly contemned because his face was high colored,
thinking that it proceeded not from any other cause then drinking. But almighty
God, to show how worthy a man was despised, permitted a wicked spirit before
his whole army, in the fields of Narnie, where the King also him self was,
to possess one of his guard, and cruellye to torment him. Straight-waies was
he brought to the venerable man Cassius in the presence of the King: who
praying to God for him, and making the sign of the cross, forth with he The
virtue of the sign of the cross.
cast out the devil, so that never after he durst presume any more to enter
into his body. And by this means it fell out, that the barbarous King from
that day forward, did with his heart much reverence the servant of God, whom
before by his face he judged to be a man of no account: for seeing him now to
be one of such power and virtue, he gave over those proud thoughts which
before he had conceived.


OF ANDREW BISHOP of Funda.

CHAPTER VII.
But as I am thus busied in tellinge the acts of holy men, there comes to my
mind, what God of his great mercy did for Andrewe, Bishop of the city of
Funda: which no table storye I wish all so to read, that they which have
dedicated them selves to Bishopes dedicated to continencye.
continencye, presume not in any wise to dwell amongst women: least in time of
tentation, their soul per^she the sooner, by having that at hand, which is
unlawfully desired. Neither is the story which I report, either doubtful or
uncertain: for so many witnesses to iustifye the truth thereof may be
produced, as there be almost inhabitants in that city. When therefore this
venerable man Andrewe lived vertuouslye, and with diligent care, answerable to
his priestlie function, lead a continent and chaste life: he kept in his house a
certain Nun, which also had remained with him before he was preferred to that
dignitye: for assuringe him self of his own continencye, and nothing
doubtinge of hers, content he was to let her remain still in his house: which
thing the devil took as an occasion to assalte him with tentation: and so he
began to present before the eyes of his mind, the form of that woman, that by
such allurements he might have his heart wholly possessed with ungodly
thoughts. In the mean time it fell so out, that a Jew was trauailinge from
Campania to Rome, who drawinge nighe to the city of Funda, was so overtaken
with night, that he knew not where to Iodge, and therefore not findge any
better commoditye, he retired him self into a temple of the God Apollo, which
was not far of, meaning there to repose him self: but much affraide he was,
to The sign of the cross used in old time.
ly in so a wicked and sacrilegious a place: for which cause though he believed
not what we teach of the cross, yet he though good to arm him self with
that sign. About midnighte as he lay wakinge for very fear of that forlorn
and desert temple, and looked suddenly about him, he espied a troop of
wicked spirits walkinge before an other of greater authority: who coming in
took up his place, and satt down in the body of the temple: where he began
dilige^tlye to inquire of those his servants, how they had bestowed their
time, and what villanye they had done in the world. And when each one told
what he had done against Gods servants, out stepped a companion, and made
solemn relation, what a notable tentation of carnalitye, he had put into the
mind of Bishop Andrewe, concerning that Nun which he kept in his palace:
where unto whiles the master devil gave attentive ear, consideringe with him
self what a notable gain it would be, to undo the soul of so holy a man:
the former devil went on with his tale and said, that the very eueninge
before he assalted him so mightelye, that he drew him so far forth, that he
did merrily strike the said Nun upon the back. The wicked serpent and old
enemy of mankind hearing this joyful news, exhorted his agent with very
fair words, diligently to labor about the effecting of that thing, which he
had already so well begun, that for so notable a piece of service, as the
contriuing the spiritual ruin of that virtuous Prelat, he might have a
singular reward above all his fellows. The Jew who all this while lay wakinge,
and heard all that which they said, was wonderfully affraide: at length the
master devil sent some of his followers to see who he was, and how he durst
presume to lodge in their temple: when they were come, and had narrowlye
viewed him, they found that he was marked with the mystical sign of the
cross: whereat they maruailed and said. Alas alas, here is an empty vessel,
but The sign of the cross protected a Iowe.
yet it is signed: which news the res^ of those helhoundes hearing, suddenly
vanished away. The Jew who had seen all that, which then passed among them,
presently rose up, and in all have, sped him self to the Bishop, whom he
found in the church: and taking him a side, he demanded with what tentation
he was trobled: but shame so prevailed, that by no means he would confess the
truth. Then the Jew replied and told him, that he had cast his eyes wickedly
upon such a one of Gods servants: But the Bishop would not acknowledge that
there was any such thing: Why do you deny it quoth the Jew, for is it not so
true that yesternighte you were brought so far by sinful tentation, that you
did strike her on the back: When the Bishop by these particularities,
perceived that the matter was broken forth, he humbly confessed what before he
obstinately denied. Then the Jew moved with compassion to his soul, and
tenderinge his credit, told him by what means he came to the knowledge
thereof, and what he heard of him, in that assemblye of wicked spirits. The
Bishop hearing this, fell prostrat upon the earth, and betook him self to
his prayers: and straight after he discharged out of his house, not only that
Nun, but all other w^men that attended upon her. And not long after, he
converted the temple of Apollo, into an oratory of the blessed Churches
dedicated to Saints.
Apostle S. Andrewe: and never after was he trobled with that carnal
tentation: and the Jew by whose means he was so mercifully preserved, he
brought to everlasting salvation: for he baptized him, and made him a member
of holy church. And thus by Gods providence, the Jew having care of the
spiritual health of an other, attained also him self the singular benefit of
the same: and almightye God by the same means, brought one to embrace piety and
virtue, by which he preserved an other in an holy and godly life.

Peter. This historye which I have heard works in me fear, and yet withal
gives me cause of hoope.


Gregory. That is not amiss Peter, for necessary it is, that we should both
trust upon the mercy of God, and yet consideringe our own frailtye, be
affraide: for we have now heard how one of the cedars of Paradise was shaken,
and yet not blown down, to the end that knowing our own infirmitye, we
should both tremble at his shakinge, and yet conceive hoope, in that he was not
overthrown, but kept his standinge still.


OF CONSTANTIVS BISHOP of Aquinum.

CHAPTER VIII.
COnstantius likewise a man of holy life, was Bishop of Aquinum, who not long
since died, in the time of Pope Iohne of blessed memory, my predecessor: many
that knew him familiarly, say that he had the gift of prophecy. And amongst
diverse other things which he did, religious and honest men then present
report that lyinge upon his death bed, the citizens that stood about him wept
bitterly and asked him with tears, who should be their father and Bishop
after him. To whom by the spirit of prophecy he answered, saying: After
Constantius, you shall have a muletour, and after a muletour, a fuller of
cloth: and these men (quoth he) be now in the city of Aquinum: and having
spoken these prophetical words, he gave up the Ghost. After whose departure
one Andrewe his Deacon, was made Bishop: who in times past had kept mules and
post horses. And when he died, one Iouinus was preferred to that dignitye, who
in former times had been a fuller in the same city: in whose days all the
citizens were so wasted, some by the sword of barbarous people, and some by a
terrible plague: that after his death, neither could any be found to be made
Bishop, nor yet any people for whose sake he should be created. And so the
saying of the man of God was fulfilled, in that, his church after the death of
two that followed him, had no Bishopp at all.

OF FRIGIDIANVS BISHOP of Luca.

CHAPTER IX.
But I must not forget to tell you, what I heard of the reverent man
Venantius, Bishop of Luna, some two days ago: who said that there was nighe
unto him, a man of rare virtue called Frigidianus, Bishopp of Luca, who
wroughte a strange miracle, which as he says all the inhabitants of that
place do speak of, and it was this. Hard by the walls of the city, there
runs a river called Anser, which diverse times does so swell and ouerflowe
the banks, that it drowneth many acres of ground, and spoileth much corn
and fruit. The inhabitants enforced by necessity, seeinge that this did often
happen, went about by all means possible to turn the stream an other way:
but when they had bestowed much labor, yet could they not cause it to leave
the old channel. Whereupon the man of God Frigidianus, made a little rake,
and came to the river, where all alone he bestowed some time in prayer: and
then he commanded the river to follow him, and goinge before, he drew his
rake over such places as he thought good, and the whole river forsakinge the
old channel did follow him, and kept possession of that, which the holy man
by that sign of his rake had appointed: and so never afterward did it hurt
any more either corn or other things planted for the maintenance of men.

OF SABINVS BISHOP OF Placentia.

CHAPTER X.
THe same Venantius told me likewise an other miracle, done as he said in the
city of Placentia, which one John the servant of God, and a man of credit
living now here amongst us, and who was borne and brought up in that city,
affirms also to be most true. For in that town of Place^tia, they say that
there was a Bishopp of wonfull virtue, called Sabinus: who understanding by
one of his Deacons, that the great river of Poe was broken forth, and had
ouerflowed the land which belonged to the church, and done much harm, he
bad him go unto the river, and deliver it this message from him. The Bishop
commands you to retire, and keep your self within your own bounds. His
Deacon hearing these words, scornefully contemed to be employed in any such
business. Then the man of God Sabinus sent for a Notarye, and willed him to
write these words. Sabinus the servant of our Lord Jesus Christ, sends
admonition to Poe. I command the in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that
thou come not out of thy channel, nor presume any more to hurt the lands of
the church. This short letter he bad the Notary write, and when he had so
done, to go and cast it into the river. The Notary did as he bad him, and the
river obeyed the precept of the holy man, for straightwaies it withdrewe it
self from the churche-landes, returned to his own channel, and never
presumed any more to ouerflowe those grounds. By which fact Peter the pride
of disobedient men is confounded, seeinge that the very senseless element in
the name of Jesus, obeyed the holy man's commandment.

OF CERBONIVS BISHOP of Populonium.

CHAPTER XI.
CErbonius also a man of holy life, Bishop of Populonium, has made great
prooffe in our time of his rare virtue. For being much given to hospitality,
upon a certain day he gave entertainment to diverse soldiars, which for fear
of the Goths (that passed likewise by his house) he conveyed out of the way,
and so saved their lives from those wicked men. Totilas their impious king
having intelligence thereof, in great rage and cruelty commanded him to be
brought unto a place called Merulis, (eighte miles from Populonium) where he
remained with his whole army, and in the sight of the people to be cast unto
wild bears to be devoured. And because the wicked king would needs be
present him self, to behold the Bishop torn in pieces, great store of
people were likewise assembled, to see that pitiful pagent. The Bishop was
brought forth, and a terrible bear provided, that might in cruel manner
tear his body in pieces, so to satisfye the mind of that blodye King. Out
of his den was the beast let loose, who in great fury and have, set upon the
Bishop: but suddenly forgettinge all cruelty, with bowed neck and humble
head, he began to lick his feet: to give them al to understand, that men
carried toward the man of God the hearts of beasts, and the beast as it were
the heart of a man. At this sight the people with great showtinge and
outcries, declared how highely they did admire the holy man: and the King him
self was moved to have him in great reverence: and so by Gods providence it
fell out, that he which before refused to obey and follow God by saving the
Bishops life, was brought to do it by the miraculous meekenes of a cruel
bear. Many of them which were then present and saw it, be yet living, who do
all affirm this to be most true.

An other miracle concerning the same man I heard of Venantius, Bishop of
Luna, and it was this. Cerbonius had in the church of Populonium, a tomb
provided for him self: but when the Lombardes invaded Italy, and spoiled all
that country, he retired him self into the Island of Helba. Where fallinge
sore sick, before his death he commanded his chapleins to bury his body in
the foresaid tomb at Populonium: and when they told him how hard a thing
it was by reason of the Lombardes, which were Lords of the country, and did
range up and down in all places: Carry me thither (quoth he) securely and
fear nothing, but bury me in all have, and that being done come away as fast
as you can. For performinge of this his will they provided a shipp, and away
they went with his body toward Populonium: in which iornye there fell great
store of rain, but that the world might know whose body was transported in
that ship, in that twelve miles space which is betwixt the island and
Populonium, a great storm of rain fell upon both sides of the ship, but
not one drop within. When they were come to the place, they buried his body,
and according to his commandment, returned to their shipp with all speed:
and they were no sooner a board then there entered into the church, where the
Bishop was buried, a most cruel captain of the Lombardes called Gunmar. By
whose sudden coming to that place, it appeared planiely, that the man of
God, had the spirit of prophecye, when he willed them in all have to depart
from the place of his burial.

OF FVLGENTIVS BISHOP of Otricoly.

CHAPTER XII.
THe very same miracle, which I told you concerning the division of the
rain, happened likewise to the great veneration of an other Bishop. For a
certain old Priest who yet lives, was then present when it happened, and
says that Fulgentius Bishop of Otricoly, was in disgrace with that cruel
tyrant Totilas: and therefore as he was passing that way with his army, the
Bishop did carefully before hand by his Chaplins send him certain
presents, by that means if it were possible to mitigat his furious mind. But
the tyrant contemned them, and in great rage commanded his soldiars hardly to
bind the Bishop, and to keep him safe until he had heard his examination.
The merciless Goths executed his cruel commandment: and setting him upon a
piece of ground, they made a circle round about him, out of which they
commanded him not to stir his foot whiles the man of God stood there in great
extremity of heat, environed round about with those Goths, suddenly there
fell such thunder and lighteninge, and such plentye of rain, that his
keepers could not endure that terrible storm: and yet for all that, not one
drop fell within the circle, where the man of God Fulgentius stood. Which
strange news being told to that tyrannical king, his barbarous mind was
brought to have him in great reverence, whose torment before he desired and so
cruellye thirsted after his blood. Thus almighty God to bring down, the
loftye minds of carnal men, does work miracles by such as they most
contemn: that truth proceedinge from the mouth of his humble servants, may
subdue those, which of prid^ do extol and advance them selves against the
doctrine of truth.

OF HERCVLANVS BISHOP of Perusium.

CHAPTER XIII.
NOt long since, the virtuous Bishop Floridus, told me a notable miracle,
which was this. The great holy man (quoth he) Herculanus, who brought me up,
was Bishop of Perusium, exalted to that dignity from the state of a monk: in
whose time the perfidious king Totilas, besieged it for seuene yers together,
and the famine within was so great, that many of the townesemen forsook the
place: and before the seventh year was ended, the army of the Goths took the
city. The commander of his camp, dispatched messengers to Totilas, to know
his pleasure what he should do with the Bishop, and the rest of the
citizens: to whom he returned answer, that he should from the top of the
Bishops head to his very foot, cut of a thonge of his skin, and that
done to strike of his head: and as for the rest of the people, to putt them
all to the sword. When he had received this order, he commanded the reverent
Bishop Herculanus, to be carried to the walls, and there to have his head
strooken of, and when he was dead, that his skin should be cut from the very
crown, down to the very foot, as though in deed a thonge had been taken
from his body: after which barbarous fact theye threw his dead co^ps over
the wall. Then some upon pity, ioyninge the head to the body, did bury him
together with an infant that was there found dead. Fourtye days after
Totilas making proclamation, that the inhabitants, which were gone, should
without all fear come back again: those which upon extremity of hunger
departed, returned home to their houses, and calling to mind the holy life of
their Bishop, they sought for his body, that it might as he deserved be
buried in the church of S. Peter: And when they came to the place where it
lay, they dug, and found the body of the infant that was buried together
with him, putrified and full of worms, but the Bishops body was so sound,
as though it had been newly put into the earth, and that which is more to be
admired, and deserves greater reverence, his head was so fast joined to his
body, as though it had never been cut of, neither did any sign of his
beheading appear at all. Then they viewed likewise his back, whether that
were also whole and sound, and they found it so perfect and well, as though
never any knife had touched the same.

Peter. Who would not wonder at such miracles of them that be dead: wroughte
no question for the spiritual good of the living,


OF THE SERVANT OF God Isaac.

CHAPTER XIIII.
Gregory. AT such time as the Goths first invaded Italye, there was nere to
the city of Spoleto, a virtuous and holy man called Isaac: who lived almost to
the last days of the Goths, whom many did know, and especially the holy
virgin Gregoria, which now dwells in this city, hard by the church of the
blessed and perpetual virgin Marie: which woman in her younger years, desiring
to live a Nuns life, fled to the church from marriag, already agreed upon by
her freindes, and was by this man defended: and so through Gods providence,
obtained Nuns ware a peculiar habit, and lived unmarried.
to have that habitt, which so much she desired, and so leaving her spouse upon
earth, she merited a spouse in heaven. Many things also I had by the relation
of the reverent man Eleutherius, who was familiarly acquainted with him: and
his virtuous life does give credit to his words. This holy man Isaac was not
borne in Italye; and therefore I will only speak of such miracles as he did
living here in our country. At his first coming out of Syria to the city of
Spoleto, he went to the church, and desired the keepers, that he might have
free leave to pray there, and not to be enforced to depart when night came.
And so he began his devotions, and spent all that day in prayer, and likewise
the night followinge. The second day and night he bestowed in the same
manner, and remained there also the third day: which when one of the keepers
of the church perceived, who was a man of a proud spirit, he took scandal by
that, whereof he ought to have reaped great profitt. For he began to say that
he was an hyppocrite and cousining companion, who in the sight of the world
remained at his prayers three days and three nights together: and forth with
running upon the man of God, he struck him, to make him by that means with
shame to depart the church as an hyppocryte, and one that desired to be
reputed an holy man. But to revenge this iniurye, a wicked spirit did presently
possess his body, who cast him down at the feet of the man of God, and began
by his mouth to cry out: Isaac does cast me forth, Isaac does cast me forth.
For what name the strange man had, none at that time did know, but the wicked
spirit told it, when he cried out that he had power to cast him out.
Straighte-waies the man of God, laid him self upon his body, and the cursed
devil that was entered in, departed in all have: news of this was by and by
blown over the whole city, and men and women, rich and poor came runnynge,
every one striuinge to bring him home to their own house: Some for the
buildinge of an Abbey, did humbly offer him lands, other money, and some such
other helps as they could. But the servant of almighty God, refusyng to
accept any of their offers, departed out of the city, and not far of, he
found a desert place, where he builte a little cotage for him self: To whom
many repayringe, began by his example to be inflamed with the love of
everlasting life, and so under his discipline, and government, gave them
selves to the service of almighty God. And when his disciples would often
humbly insinuate, that it were good for the necessity of the Abbey, to take
such liuinges as were offered, he very careful to keep pouertye, told them
constantly, saying. A monk that seeks for liuinges upon earth is no monk:
for so fearful he was to loose the secure state of his pouertye, as covetous
rich men are careful, to preserve their corruptible wealth.

In that place therefore he became famous for the spirit of prophecye: and his
life was renoumed far and nere, for the notable miracles which he wroughte. For
upon a day, toward eueninge, he caused his monks to lay a certain number of
spades in the gardin. The night followinge, when according Mattens.
to custom they rose up to their prayers, he commanded them, saying. Go your
ways, and make potage for our worckemen, that it may be ready very early in
the morninge. And when it was day, he bad them bring the potage which they had
provided: and goinge with his monks into the gardin, he found there so many
men workinge, as he had commanded them to lay spades: for it fell so out, that
certain thieues were entered in to spoil and robb it: but God chaunginge
their minds, they took the spades which they found there, and so wrought
from the time of their first entrance, until the man of God came unto them:
and all such parts of the ground as before were not manured, they had dug
up and made ready. When the man of God was com, he saluted them in this wise.
God save you good brethren: you have labored long, wherefore now rest your
selves: then he caused such provision as he had brought, to be set before
them, and so after their labor and pains refreshed them. When they had eaten
that was sufficient, he spoke thus unto them. Do not hereafter any more harm:
but when you desire any thing that is in the gardin, come to the gate,
quietlye ask it, and take it a Gods blessinge, but steal no more: and so
bestowing upon them good store of wortes, he sent them away. And by this
means it fell out that they which came into the gardin to do harm, departed
thence not doing any damage at all, and besides had the reward of their
pains, and somewhat also of charity bestowed upon them.

At an other time, there came unto him certain strange men a begginge, so
torn and tattred, that they had scant any rags to cover them, humbly
beseechinge him to help them with some clothes. The man of God hearing
their demand gave them no answer: but secretly calling for one of his
monks, bad him go into such a wood, and in such a place of the wood to
seek for an hollow tree, and to bring unto him that apparel which he found
there. The monk went his way and brought closely to his master that which he
had found. Then the man of God called for those poor naked men, and gave them
that apparel, saying: Put on these clothes to cover your naked bodies
withal. They seeing their own garments, were wonderfully confounded: for
thincking by cunning to have gotten other men's apparel, with shame they
received only their own.

Again at another time, one there was, that commended him self to his
prayers, and sent him by his servant two basketes full of meat: one of the
which as he was in his iornye, he took away, and hidd in a bushe till his
return back again: and the other he presented to the man of God, telling him
how his master had sent him that, heartily commendinge him self to his prayers.
The holy man took that which was sent very kindelye, giving the messenger
this good lesson: I pray the my freinde to thancke they master, and take heed
how thowe do lay hand upon the basket, for a snake is crept in, and
therefore be careful, least otherwise it does stinge the. At these words the
messenger was pitifullye confounded, and though glad he was that by this means
he escaped death, yet some what grieved that he was put to that shame. Coming
back to the basket, very diligent and careful he was in touching it^ for as
the man of God had told him, a snake in very deed was got in. This holy man
therefore albeit he were inco^parably adorned with the virtue of abstinence,
contempt of worldly welthe, the spirit of prophecye, and perseverance in
prayer: yet one thing there was in him which seemed reprehensible, to wit,
that some time he would so exceed in mirthe, that if men had not known him to
have been so full of virtue, none would ever have thought it.


Peter. What I beseech you shall we say to that? for did he willingly give him
self sometime to such recreation: or else excelling in virtue, was he contrary
to his own mind drawn sometime to present mirthe?


Gregory. Gods providence Peter in bestowinge of his gifts is wonderful: for
often it falls out, that upon whom he vouchsafes the greater, he gives not
the less: to the end that always they may have somewhat to mislike in them
selves: so that desiringe to arrive unto perfection, and yet can not: and
labor inge about that which they have not obtained, and can not prevail: by
this means they become not proud of those gifts which they have received, but
do thereby learn, that they have not those greater graces of them selves, who
of them selves can not overcome small faults. And this was the cause, that
when God had brought his people into the land of promise, and destroyed all
their mighty and potent enemies, yet did he long time after reserve the
Philisteans and Chananites, that as it is written, he might Iudie. 3.
in them try Israel. For sometime as has been said, upon whom he bestows
great gifts, he leaves some small things, that be blameworthy, that always
they may have somewhat to fight against, and not to be proud, though their
great enemies be vanquished, seeing other adversaries in very small things do
putt them to great trouble: and therefore it falls out strangelye, that one
and the self same man is excellent for virtue, and yet of infirmitye sometime
do the offend, so that he may behold him self on the one side strong and
well furnished, and on an other open and not defended: that by the good thing
which he seeks for and is not able to procure, he may with humility preserve
that virtue, which already he has in possession. But what wonder is it that
we speak this concerning man, when as heaven it self, lost some of his
citizens, and other some conteynewed sound in Gods grace: that the elect
Angels of God, seeinge others through pride to fall from heaven, might stand
so much the more steadfast, by how much with humilitye they preserved Gods
grace received. They therefore took profitt by that loss which heaven then
had, and were thereby made to persevere more constantly in Gods service for all
eternity. In like manner it fares with each man's soul, which sometime for
preseruinge of humilitye, by a little loss it attaineth to great spiritual
perfection.


Peter. I am very well pleased with that you say.


OF THE SERVANTES OF God Euthicius and Florentius.

CHAPTER XV.
Gregory. NEither will pass over that with silence, which I heard from the
mouth of that reverent Priest Sanctulus, one of the same country: and of
whose report I am sure you make no doubt, for you know very well his life and
fidelitye.

At the same time in the province of Nursia there dwelt two men, obseruinge the
life and habit of holy Distinct habit of monks.
conversation: the one was called. Euthicius, and the other Florentius: of
which, Euthicius bestowed his time in spiritual zeal and feruor of virtue,
and labored much by his exhortations, to gain souls to God: but Florentius
lead his life in simplicitye, and devotion. Not far from the place where they
remained, there was an Abbey, the governor whereof was dead, and therefore the
monks made cho^e of Euthicius to take the charge thereof: who condescendinge
to their petition, governed the Abbey many years. And not to have his former
oratory utterly destitute, he left the reverent man Florentius to keep the
same: who dwelt there all alone, and upon a day, beeinge at his prayers, he^
besoughte almightye God to vouchsafe him of some comfort in that place: and
having ended his devotions, he went forth, where he found a bear standinge
before the door, which by the bowing down of his head to the ground, and
showing in the gesture of his body no sign of cruelty, gave the man of God
to understand, that he was come thither to do him service, and him self
likewise did forth with perceive it. And because he had in the house four or
five sheep, which had no keeper, he commanded the bear to take charge of
them, saying: Go and lead these sheep to the field, and at twelve of the
clock come back again: which charge he took upon him, and did dailye come
home at that hour: and so he performed the office of a good shepherd, and
those sheep which before time he used to devour, now fasting him self, he
took care to have them safely kept. And when Gods servant determined to fast
until three of the clock, then he commanded the bear to return with his
sheep at the same hour: but when he would not fast so long, to come at
twelve. And whatsoever he commanded his bear, that he did, so that bidden to
return at three of the clock, he would not come at twelve: and commanded to
return at twelve, he would not tarry till three. And when this had continewed
a good while, he began to be famous far and nere for his virtue and holy life.
But the old enemy of mankind by that means which he sees the good to come
unto glory, by the same does he draw the wicked through hatred to procure
their own misery: for four of Euthicius monks swellinge with envy, that
their master wroughte not any miracles, and that he who was left alone by him,
was famous for so notable a one, upon very spighte went and killed his bear.
And therefore when the poor beast came not at his appointed hour, Florentius
began to suspecte the matter: but expectinge yet until the eueninge, very
much grieved he was, that the bear whom in great simplicitye he called his
brother, came not home. The next day, he went to the field, to seek for his
sheep and his shepherd, whom he found there slain: and making dilligent
inquisition, he learned quickly who they were that had committed that
uncharitable fact. Then was he very sorye, bewailing yet more the malice of
the monks, then the death of his bear: whom the reverent man Euthicius sent
for, and did comfort him what he might: but the holy man Florentius
wonderfully grieved in mind, did in his presence curse them saying: I must in
almighty God, that they shall in this life, and in the sight of the world,
receive the reward of their malice, that have thus killed my bear which did
them no harm: whose words Gods vengeance did straighte follow, for the four
monks that killed the poor beast, were straighte so strooken with a leprosye,
that their limbs did rott away, and so they died miserably: whereat the man
of God Florentius was greatly affraide and much grieved, that he had so cursed
the monks: and all his life after he wept, for that his prayer was heard,
crying out that him self was cruel, and that he had murdered those men. Which
thing I suppose almighty God did, to the end that he should not beeinge a man
of great simplicity, upon any grief whatsoever, afterward presume to curse
any.


Peter. What? is it any great sin, if in our anger we curse others?


Gregory. Why do you ask me whether it be a great sin, when as S. Paul
says. Neither 1. Corint. 5.
cursers shall posses the kingdom of God. Think then how great the sin is,
which does exclude a man out of heaven.


Peter. What if a man happily not of malice, but of negligence in keepinge his
tongue, does curse his neighbor.


Gregory. If before the severe judge idle speech is reprehended: how much more
that which is hurtefull. Consider then how damnable those words be, which
proceed of malice, when that talk shall be punnished, which proceeds only
from idleness.


Peter. I grant it to be most true.


Gregory. The same man of God did an other thing which I must not forget. For
the report of his virtue reachinge far and nere, a certain Deacon that dwelt
many miles of, travailed unto him, to commend him self to his prayers. And
coming to his cell, he found it round about full of innumerable snakes: at
which sight beeinge wonderfully affraide, he cried out, desiringe Florentius
to pray: who came forth the sky beeinge then very clear, and lifted up his
eyes and his hands to heaven, desiringe God to take them away in such sort as
he best knew: Upon whose prayers suddenly it thundered, and that thunder
killed all those snakes. Florentius seeing them all dead, said unto God.
Behold o Lord thowe have destroyed them all, but who shall now carry them
away: and straighte as he had thus spoken, so many birds came, as there were
snakes killed, which took them al up, and carried them far of, discharginge
his habitation from those venomous creatures.


Peter. Certainly he was a man of great virtue and merit, whose prayers God did
so quickly hear.


Gregory. Puritye of heart and simplicity Peter, is of great force with
almighty God, who is in purity most singular, and of nature most simple: For
those servants of his, which do retire them selves from worldly affairs,
avoid idle words, labor not to lose their devotion, nor to defile their
soul with talkinge, do especially obtain to be heard of him, to whom, after
a certain manner, and as they may, they be like in purity and simplicitye of
heart. But we that live in the world, and speak oftentimes idle words, and
that which is worse, sometime those that be hurtefull: our words and prayers
are so much the farther of from God, as they be nere unto the world: for we
are drawn too much down toward the carthe, by continual talkinge of
secular business: which thing the prophet Esaye did very well reprehend in him
self, after he had beheld the king and Lord of armies, and was penitent,
cryinge out: woe be to me for being silent, Esai. 6.
because I am a man that have defiled lips: and he shows straighte after
the reason why his lips were defiled, when he says: I dwe^ in the midst
of a people, that has defiled lips. For sorye he was that his lips were
defiled, yet concealeth not from whence he had them, when he says, that he
dwelt in the midst of a people that had defiled lips. For very hard it is
that the tongues of secular men, should not defile their souls, with whom
they talk: for when we do sometime condescende to speak with them of
certain things, by little and little we get such a custom, that we hear
that spoken with pleasure, which is not meet to be heard at all, so that
afterward we are loath to give that over, to which at the first to gratify
others, we were brought against our wills. And by this means we fall from
idle words, to hurtefull speches: and from talk of small moment, to words of
great importance: and so it comes to pass, that our tongue is so much the
less respected of God when we pray, by how much we are more defiled with
folishe speech, because as it is written. He that turns away his ear
Proverb. 28.
that he hear not the law, his prayer shall be execrable: what marvel then
is it, if when we pray, God does slowely hear us, when as we hear Gods
commandemeuts, either slowly or not at all? And what marvel, if Florentius
when he prayed was quickly heard, who obeyed God in obseruinge his
commandments.


Peter. The reason alleged is so plain, that nothing with reason can be
said against it.

But Euthicius who was companion to Florentius in serving of God, was famous
also for miracles after his death. For the inhabitants of that city do
speak of many: but the principal is that which even to these times of the
Lombardes, almighty God has voutsafed to work by his coat: for when they
had any great drouth, the citizens gatheringe them selves together, did carry
that, and together with their prayers offer it in the sight of our Lord: And
when they went with The virtue of relickes.
that through he fields praying to God, forth with they had such plentye of
rain, as the drynes of the ground required: wherbye it was apparaunt, what
virtue and merits were in his soul, whose garment showed outwardlye, did
pacifye the anger of almighty God.


OF MARCIVS THE MONK of mount Marsico.

CHAPTER XVI.
NOt long since, there was a reverent man in Campania called Marcius who lived
a solitary life, in the mountain of Marsico: and many years together did he
contine we in a narrow and straighte cave: whom many of our acquaintance knew
very well, and were present at such miracles as he did, and many things
concerning him, have I heard from the mouth of Pope Pelagius of blessed
memory, my predecessor, and also of others, who be very religious men. His
first miracle was, that so sone as he made choice of that cave for his
habitation: there sprunge water out of the hollow rock, which was neither
more nor less, then served for his necessity: By which almighty God, did show
what great care he had of his servant, seeinge miraculously as in ancient
time he had before done to the children of Israel, he caused the hard rock to
yield forth water. But the old enemy of mankind, inuyinge at his virtues,
went about by his ancient slight to drive him from that place: for he entered
into a serpent his old friend, and so thought to have terrified him from
thence. For the serpent alone would come into the cave where he lived also
alone, and when he was at his prayers, it would cast it self before him, and
when he took his rest, it woldly down by his side: The holy man was nothing
at all dismaide at this: for sometime he would put his hand or leg to his
mouth, saying: If thowe have leave to stinge me, I hinder the not: and when he
had lived thus continually the space of three years, upon a day the old enemy
overcome with his heavenly courage, made a great hissinge, and tumblinge him
self down by the side of the mountain, he consumed all the bushes and
shrubbes with fire: in which fact by the power of God he was enforced to show
of what force he was, that departed with loss of the victory: Consider I pray
you then, in the top of what mountain this man of God stood, that continewed
three yers together with a serpent, without taking any harm at all.

Peter. I do consider it, and do tremble at the very hearing of the storye.


Gregory. This reverent man, when he first shutt him self up, was determined
never to behold women any more: not because he contemned them, but for that he
feared least their sight, might be the occasion of sinful tentation: which
resolution of his a certain woman understanding, up she went boldly to the
mountain, and forgettinge all modesty, impudentlye approached to his cave. He
seeinge her a good way of, and perceiuinge by the apparel that it was a
woman, he fell straighte to his prayers, with his face upon the earth, and
there he lay prostrat, until the shameless creature, wearied with staying at
his window, departed: and that very day after she was descended the mountain
she ended her life: to give all the world to understand, how highely she
displeased almighty God, in offendinge his servant with that her bold
enterprise.

At an other time, many of devotion goinge to visit him, a young boy, taking
little heed to his feet, and by reason the path^ was so straighte upon the
side of the mountain fell down, and tumbled until he came to the bottom of
the valley, which was very deep: for the mountain is so high, that huge
trees growing beneathe, seem to them that be above, nothing else but little
shrubbes. The people present, were at this chance much dismaide, and very
diligently did they seek, to see where they could find his dead body: for
who would have thought any otherwise but that he was slain, or once imagined,
that his body could ever have come safe to the ground, so many rocks being
in the way to rear it in pieces: yet for all this, he was found in the valley,
not only alive, but also without any harm at all. Then they perceived very
well, that the reason why he was not hurt was, because Marcius prayers did
preserve him in his fallinge.

Over his cave there was a great rock, which seemed to hang but by a little
piece unto the mountain, and therefore dailye was it feared that it would fall,
and so kill the servant of God. For preuentinge of which mischief, the
honorable man Mascarus nephewe to Armentarius, came thither with a great number
of country people, desiringe him to leave his cave so long, until they had
removed that rock, to the end he might afterward continewe there without any
danger: but the man of God could not by any means be persuaded to come
forth, bidding them notwithstanding do what they thought convenient, only he
retired him self to the furthest part of his cell: yet none made any doubt,
but that if so huge a rock as that was did fall, but that it would both spoil
his cave and kill him self. wherefore they labored what they might, to see if
they could remove that mighty stone without any danger to the man of God, and
forthwith in the sight of them all, a strange thing happened: for that rock
severed by their labor from the rest of the mountain, not touching Marcius
cave, did skipp clean over, and auoidinge as it were to hurt Gods servant, it
fell far of: which thing no man can doubt, but that it was done by the hands
of Angels, at the commandment of almighty God.

At such time as this holy man, came first to inhabit that mountain, and had
not yet made any door for his cave, he fastened the one end of an iron chain
to the stony wall, and the other he tied to his leg, to the end he might go
no further then the length of that chain did give him leave: which thing the
reverent man Bennet hearing of, sent him this word by one of his monks: if
thowe be Gods servant, let the chain of Christ, and not any chain of iron
hold the: upon this message, Marcius forthwith loosed his chain, yet did he
keep still the same compass, and go no further then he did before. Living
afterward in the same cave, he began to entertain certain disciples, which
dwelt apart from his cell, who having no other water, but that which with a
rope and a bucket they drew out of a well, great trouble they had, because
their rope did often break: and therefore they came unto him, crauinge that
chain which he had loosed from his leg, that they might tie the rope to
that, and fasten the bucket upon it: and from that time forward, though the
rope was daily wett with Virtue of relickes.
water, yet did it break no more: for having touched the holy man's chain, it
became strong like unto iron, so that the water did not wear it, nor do it
any harm.


Peter. These worthy acts of his, do please me, saying they are strange, and
that very much, because they were so lately done, and be yet fresh in memory.


HOW A MONK OF MOVNTE Argentario raised up a dead man.

CHAPTER XVII.
Gregory. NOt long since in our time, a certain man called Quadragessimus, was
Subdeaco^ in the church of Buxentin, who in times past kept a flock of sheep
in the same country of Aurelia: by whose faithful report, I understood a
maruailous strange thing, which is this. At such time as he lead a sheapherdes
life, there was an holy man that dwelt in the mountain of Argentario: whose
religious conversation, and inward virtue was answerable to Habit of monks.
the habit of a monk, which outwardly he did wear. Every year he travailed
Pilgrimage.
from his mountain, to the church of S. Peter, Prince of the Apostles: and S.
Peter Prince of the Apostles.
in the way took this Quadragessimus house for his lodginge, as him self did
tell me. Coming upon a day to his house, which was hard by the church: a
poor woman's husband died not far of, whom when they had as the manner is
washed, put on his garments, and made him ready to be buried, The manner of
burieng in Italye.
yet it was so late, that it could not be done that day: wherefore the desolat
widow, satt by the dead corpse, weepinge all night long, and to sasatisfye
her grief she did continually lament and cry out. The man of God seeinge her
so pitifully to weep, and never to give over, was nuche grieved, and said to
Quadragesimus the Subdeacon: my soul takes compassion of this woman's sorrow,
arise I beseech you, and let us pray: and thereupon, they went to the church,
which as I said was hard by, and fell to their devotions. And when thy had
prayed a good while, the servant of God desired Quadragessimus, to conclude
their prayer: which beeinge done, he took a little dust from the side of the
altar: and so came with Quadragessimus to the dead body: and there he began
again to pray, and when he continewed so a long time, he desirede him not as
he did before, to conclude their prayers, but him self gave the blessing and
so rose up: and because he had the dust in his right hand, with his left, he
took away the cloth that covered the dead man's face: which the woman seeing,
earnestly withstoode him, and maruailed much what he meant to do: when the
cloth was gone, he rubbed the dead man's face a good while with the dust,
which he had taken up: and at length, he that was dead received his soul
again, began to open his mouth, and his eyes, and to sit up, and as though
he had awaked from a deep sleep, maruailed what they did about him: which
when the woman that had weried her self with cryinge beheld, she began then a
fresh to weep for joy, and cry out far louder then she did before: but the
man of God modestlye forbad her saying. Peace good woman, and say nothing,
and if any demand how this happened, say only, that our Lord Jesus Christ,
has vouchsafed to work his pleasure. Thus he spoke, and forthwith he
departed from Quadragessimus, and never came to his house again. For desirous
to avoid all temporal honor, he so handled the matter, that they which saw
him work that miracle, did never see him more so long as he lived.


Peter. What other think I know not: but mine oplnion is, that it is a
miracle above all miracles, to raise up dead men, and secretlye to call back
their souls, to give life unto their bodies again.


Gregory. If we respect outward and visible things, of necessitye we must so
believe: but if we turn our eyes to invisible things, then certain it is,
that it is a greater miracle, by preaching of the word, and virtue of prayer,
to convert a sinner, then to raise up a dead man: for in the one, that flesh
is raised up, which again shall dye: but in the other he is brought from
death, which shall live for ever. For I will name you two, and tell me, in
which of them as you think the greater miracle was wroughte. The first is
Lazarus a true believer, whom our Lord raised up in flesh: the other is Saul,
whom our Lord raised in soul. For of Lazarus virtues after his resurrection
we read nothing: but after the raisinge up of the others soul, we are not
able to conceive, what wonderful things be in holy scripture spoken of his
virtues: as that his most cruel thoughts and designements were turned to the
bowels of piety and compassion: that he desired to die for his brethen, in whose
death before he took much pleasure: That knowinge the holy scriptures
perfectly, yet professed that he knew nothing else but Jesus Christ, and him
crucified. That he did willingly endure the bearing of rods for Christ: whom
before with sword he did persecute. That he was exalted to the dignitye of an
Apostle: and yet willingly became a little one in the midst of other
disciples. That he was rapte to the secrets of the third heaven, and yet did
turn his eye of compassion to dispose of the duty of married folks, saying:
Let the husband Corint.
render debt to the wife, and the wife likewise to the husband. That he was
busied in contemplatinge the quires of Angels: and yet contemned not to
think, and dispose of the factes of carnal men. That he reioysed in his
infirmities: and took pleasure in his reproaches. That for him to live is
Christ, and gain to dye. That although he lived in flesh, yet was he wholly
out of the flesh. Behold how this blessed Apostle lived, who from hell
returned in his soul to the life of virtue: wherefore less it is for one to be
raised up in body, except perchance by the reuiuinge thereof, he be also
brought to the life of his soul, and that the outward miracle do serve for
the giving of life to the inward spirit.


Peter. I thought that far inferior, which I perceive now to be incomparably
superior: but prosecute I beseech you, your former discourse, that we spend no
time without some spiritual profit to our souls.


OF BENNET THE monk.

CHAPTER XVIII.
Gregory. A Certain monk lived with me in mine Abbey, passinge cunninge in
holy scripture, who was elder then I, and of whom I learned many things which
before I knew not. By his report I understood that there was in Campania,
some forty miles from Rome, a man called Bennet, young in years, but old for
gravity: one that observed the rule of holy conversation very strictlye. When
the Goths in the time of king Totilas found him, they went about to burn
him, together with his cell: and fire for that end was putt too, which consumed
all things round about, but no hold would the fire take upon his cell: which
when the Goths saw, they became more mad, and with great cruelty drew him
out of that place, and espyinge not far of, an oven made hot to bake bread:
into those flames they threw him, and so stopped the mouth. But the next day
he was found so free from all harm, that not only his flesh, but his very
apparel also was not by the fire any thing touched at all.


Peter. I hear now the old miracle of the three children, which were thrown
into the fire: and yet were preserved Daniel. 3.
from those furious flames.


Gregory. That miracle in mine opinion was in some thing unlike to this: for
then the three children were bound hand and foot, and so thrown into the
fire, for whom the King lookinge the next day, found them walkinge in the
furnace, their garments being nothing hurt by those flames: whereby we
gather that the fire into which they were cast, and touched not their
apparel, did yet consume their bands, so that at one and the same time, for
the service of the just, the fire had force to bring them comfort, and yet
had none to procure them torment.


OF THE CHVRCHE OF, Blessed Zeno the martyr: in which the water ascended higher
then the door, and though it were open, yet entered not in.

CHAPTER XIX.
Gregory. LIke unto this ancient miracle we had in our days another, but yet
in a diverse element: for not long since Iohne the Tribune told me, that when
the Earl Pronulphus was there, and him self also with Antharicus the king:
how there happened at that time a strange miracle, and he affirms that him
self does know it to be true. For he said, that almost five years since when
the river of Tiber became so great, that it ran over the walls of Rome, and
ouerflowed many countries: at the same time in the city of Verona, the river
Athesis did so swell, that it came to the very church of the holy martyr and
Bishop Zeno: and though the church doors were open, yet did it not enter in.
At last it grew so high, that it came to the church windows, not far from the
very roof it self, and the water standinge in that manner, did close up the
entrance into the church, yet without running in: as though that thin and
liquid element, had been turned into a sound wall. And it fell so out, that
many at that time were surprised in the church, who not findinge any way how
to escape out, and fearinge least they might perish for want of meat and
drink: at length they came to the church door, and took of the water to
quench their thirst, which as I said, came up to the windows, and yet
entered not in: and so for their necessitye they took water, which yet
according to the nature of water ran not in: and in that manner it stood
there before the door, being water to them for their comfort, and yet not
water to invade the place: and all this to declare the great merit of Christ's
martyr. Which miracle Merit of martirs.
I said truly, that it was not unlike to that ancient one of the fire: which
burnt the three childrens bands, and yet touched not their garments.


Peter. Maruailous strange are these acts of Gods saints which you tell:
and much to be admired of us weak men, that live in these days. But because
I understand now by your relation, what a number of excellent and virtuous men
have been in Italy: desirous I am to know, whether they endured any assaults
of the deiull, and did thereby more profit in the service of God.


Gregory. Without labor and fightinge, none can obtain the crown of victory:
whence then come so many conquerors but from this, that they fought valiantly
and resisted the assaults of the old enemy? For the wicked spirit, does
continuallye watch our thoughts, words, and worckes: to find something,
whereof to accuse us before the eternal judge: For proffe whereof, I will now
let you understand, how ready he is always to intrapp and deceive us.


OF A PRIEST CALLED Steven, in the province of Valeria: whose stockinges the
devil would have drawn of.

CHAPTER XX.
SOme that are yet living with me, affirm this to be true which I will now
speak of. A man of holy life there was called Steuene, who was a Priest in the
province of Valeria: nighe of kindred to my Deacon Bonifacius: who coming home
upon a time from travail, spoke somewhat negligently to his servant saying.
Come Sir devil and pull of my hoof: at which words straighte-waies his
garters began to loose in great have, so that he plainly perceived, that the
devil indeed whom he named, was pulling of his stockinge: whereat being much
terrified, he cried out aloude and said. Away wretched caitiffe, away: I
spoke not to the but to my servant. Then the devil gave over, leaving his
garters almost quite of. By which we may learn, that if the devil be so
officious in things concerning our body, how ready and dililigent he is to
observe and note the cogitations of our soul.

Peter. A very painful thing it is and terrible, always to strive against
the tentations of the deiull: and as it were to stand continually armed ready
to fight.


Gregory. Not painful at all, if we attribute our preservation not to our
selves, but to Gods grace: yet so notwithstanding, that we be careful what we
may for our parts, and always vigilant under Gods protection. And it falls
out sometime by Gods goodness, that when the deiull is expelled from our soul,
that he is so little of us to be feared, that contrariwise, he is rather
terrrified by the virtuous and devout life of good people.


OF A NVNNE THAT BY HER only commandment dispossessed a devil.

CHAPTER XXI.
FOr the holy man, old father Eleutherius, of whom I spoke before, told me,
that which I will now tell you: and he was him self a witness of the truth
thereof: this it was. In the city of Spoleto, there was a certain worshipful
man's daughter for years mariagable, which had a great desire to lead an other
kind of life: whose purpose her father endeavored to ^inder: but she not
respectinge her fathers Habit of Nuns.
pleasure, took upon her the habit of holy conversation: for which cause her
father did disinherit her, and left her nothing else, but six little pieces of
grouude. By her example many Nuns dedicated their virginitye to God.
noble young maids began under her to be converted, to dedicat their
virginitye to almightye God, and to serve him. Upon a time the virtuous Abbot
Eleutherius, went to bestow upon her some good exhortation: and as he was
sittinge with her, discoursinge of spiritual matters, a country man, came
from that piece of ground, which her father had left her, bringinge a certain
present: and as he was standinge before them, suddenly a wicked spirit
possessed his body: so that straight-waies he fell down before them, and
began pitifully to cry and roar out. At this, the Nun rose up, and with
angrye countenance and loud voice commanded him to go forth, saying; depart
from him thowe vilde wretch, depart: if I depart (quoth the devil, speaking
by the mouth of the possessed man) into whom shall I go? By chance there was
at that time a little hog hard by: into which she gave him leave to enter,
which he did, and so killing it went his way.

Peter. I would gladly be informed, whether she might bestow so much as that
hog upon the devil.


Gregory. The actions of our Savior be a rule for us, according to which we
may direct our life: and we read in the scripture, how the legion of devils
that possessed a man said unto our Savior. If thou do cast us forth,
send us Math. 8.
into the heard of swine: Who cast them out, and permitted them to enter in as
they desired, and to drown that heard in the sea. By which fact of our
Savior we learn also this lesson, that except almighty God gives leave, the
devil can not have any power against man, seeing he can not so much as enter
into hogs, without our Saviors permission. Wherefore necessary it is, that we
be obedient to him, unto whom all our enemies be subject, that we may so much
the more be stronger then our enemies, by how much through humilitye we
become one with the author of all things. And what marvel is it, if Gods
chosen servants, living yet upon earth, can do many strange things when
as their very bones after they be dead, do often-tymes Relickes work
miracles.
work miracles?


OF A PRIEST IN THE Province of Valeria, who detained a thief an his grave.

CHAPTER XXII.
FOr in the province of Valeria, this strange miracle happened: which I had
from the mouth of Valentius mine Abbot, who was a blessed man. In that country
there was a Priest, who in the company of diverse other clerks served God, and
lead a virtuous and holy life: who when his time was come, departed this life,
and was buried before the church. Not far of, there belonged to the church,
certain shepe-coates: and the place where he lay buried, was the way to go
unto the sheep. Upon a night as the Priests were singinge within the
church, a thief came to the said place, took up a weather, and so departed
in all have: but as he passed where the man of God was buried, there he stayed,
and could go no further. Then he took the weather from his sholders, and
^olde feign have let it go, but by no means could he open his hand: and
therefore poor wretch there he stood fast bound, with his pray before him:
willingly would he have let the weather go, and could not: willinglye also
have carried it away, and was not able. And so very straungely the thief
that was affraide to be espied of living men, was held there against his will
by one that was dead: for his hands and feet were bound in such sort, that
away he could not go. When morning Singing of Mattens.
was come, and the Priests had ended their service, out they came: where they
found a stranger, with a weather in his hand. And at the first they were in
doubt, whether he had taken away one of theires, or else came to give them one
of his own: but he that was guilty of the theft, told them in what manner he
was punnished: Whereat they all wondered, to see a thief with his pray before
him, to stand there bound by the merits of the man of God. And
straighte-wayes they offered their prayers for his delivery, and scarce could
they obtain, that he which came to steal away their goods, might atleast
find so much favor, as to depart empty as he came: yet in conclusion the
thief that had long stood there with his stolen weather, was suffered to go
away free, leauinge his carriage behind him.

Peter. By such factes almighty God does declare, in what sweet manner he does
tender us, when he voutsafeth to work such pleasant miracles


OF THE ABBOT OF MOUNT Preneste, and his Priest.

CHAPTER XXIII.
Gregory. Above the city of Preneste there is a mountain, upon which stands
an Abbeye of the blessed Apostle S. Peter: of the monks of which place, whiles
I lived man Abbey my self, I heard this miracle: which those religious men
said, they knew to be very true. In that monastery they had an Abbot of holy
life, who brought up a certain monk that became very virtuous, whom he
perceiuinge to increase in the fear of God, he caused him in the same
monastery to be made Priest: who after his taking of orders, understood by
revelation, that his death was not far of: and therefore desired leave of the
Abbot, to make ready his sepulcher, who told him, that him self should die
before him: but yet for all that (quoth he) go your way, and make your grave
at your pleasure. Away he went, and did so. Not many days after, the old
Abbot fell sick of an age we, and drawinge nere to his end, he bad the
foresaid Priest that stood by him, to bury his body in that grave, which he
had made for him self: and when the other told him, that he was shortly to
follow after, and that the grave was not bygge enough for both: the Abbot
answered him in this wise, do as I have said, for that one grave shall
contain both our bodies. So he died, and according to his desire, was buried
in that grave which the Priest had provided for him self. Sraighte after, the
Priest fell sick, and lay not long before he departed this life: and when his
body was by the monks brought to the grave, which he had provided for him
self, they opened it, and saw that there was not any rome, because the Abbots
corpse filled the whole place: then one of them with a loud voice, said: O
father where is your promise, that this grave should hold you both? No sooner
had he spoken those words, then the Abbots body which lay with the face
upward, did in all their sight, turn it self upon one side, and so left
place enough for the burial of the Priest: and so after his death he
performed what he promised alive, concerning the lyinge of both their bodies
in that one grave. But because we have now made mention of S. Peter's Abbey in
the city of Preneste, where this miracle happened, are you content to hear
something of the S. Peter buried at Rome.
keepers of his church which is in this city where his most holy body
remains.


Peter. Most willinge I am, and beseech you that it may be so.


OF THEODORUS KEEPER OF S. Peter's church, in the city of Rome.

CHAPTER XXIIII.
Gregory. THere be yet some alive, that knew Theodorus keeper of that church:
by whose report a notable thing that befell him, came to my knowledge. For
risinge somewhat early one night to mende the lights that hunge by the door,
and was upon the ladder (as he used) to power oil Burning la^ppes in the
church.
into the lamppes, suddenly S. Peter the Apostle, in a white stoale standing
beneath upon the pauiment, appeared unto him, and spoke to him in this manner.
Theodorus why have thou risen so earlye? and when he had said so, he vanished
out of his sight: but such a fear came upon him, that all the strength of
his body did forsake him, so that he was not able to rise up from his bed for
many days after. By which apparition what meant the blessed Apostle else, but to
give those which serve him to understand by that his presence, that whatsoever
they do for his honor, him self for their reward does always behold it.


Peter. I marvel not so much at his apparition: as that beeinge before very
well, he fell sick upon that sight.


Gregory. What reason have you Peter to marvel at that: for have you
forgotten how the prophet Daniell, when he beheld that great and terrible
vision at which he trembled, speakethe thus of him self. I became weak, and
was sick for Daniel. 8.
very many days: for the flesh can not conceive such things as pertain to
the spirit, and therefore sometimes when a man's mind is carried to see somewhat
beyond it self, no remedy but this earthly and frail vessel of our, not
able to bear such a burden; must fall into weakness and infirmity.


Peter. Your reason has taken away that scruple which troubled my mind.


OF ABVNDIVS KEEPER OF the same church of S. Peter.

CHAPTER XXV.
Gregory. NOt very many years since (as old men say) there was an other
keeper of the same church, called Abundius, a grave man, and of great
humility: who served God so faithfullye, that the blessed Apostle S. Pe^er did
by miracle declare what opinion he had of his virtue. For a certain young maid
that frequented his church, was so pitifully sick of the palsy, that she
crept upon her hands, and for very weakness, drew her body upon the ground.
Long time had she prayed to S. Peter for help of this Prayer to Saints.
her infirmitye: who upon a night in a vision, stood by her and spoke thus:
Go unto Abundius, and desire his help, and he shall restore the to thine
health. The maid as she made no doubt of the vision, so not knowinge this
Abundius, up and down she crepte through the church, enquiringe for the man,
and suddenly met with him whom she ^oughte for: and askinge for him of him
self, he told her that he was Abundius. Then quoth she: Our pastor and patron
blessed S. Peter the Saints know how our necessities.
Apostle has sent me, that you should help me of this my disease. If you be
sent by him quoth Abundius, then rise up: and taking her by the hand, he
forthwith lifted her up upon her feet: and from that very hour, all the
synowes and parts of her body became so strong, that no sign of her former
malady remained. But if I should recount all the miracles in particular, which
are known to have been done in his church, questionless no time would be
left for the relation of any other: wherefore I will speak no more of them,
but come to such holy men, as have been famous in diverse other places of Italy.


OF A SOLITARYE MONK called Menas.

CHAPTER XXVI.
NOt long since in the province of Samnium, there was a reverent man, called
Menas, who some ten years since led a solitary life, and was known to many of
our friends: and for the truth of such his notable acts as I shall report,
I will no^ name any one author, because I have so many witnesses, as there be
men that know that province of Samnium. This holy man had no other wealth to
live upon, but a few hiues of bees, which a certain Lombarde would needs have
taken away: for which cause the holy man reprehended him, and by and by he
fell down before him, and was tormented of a devil: upon which accident, his
name became famous both to his neighbors, and also to that barbarous nation:
so that none durst after that but in humilitye come into his cell. Oftentimes
also there came certain bears out of the wood which was hard by, to devour
up his honey, whom he struck with a little stricke, which he carried in his
hand: and the bears so feared his stripes, that they would roar out and run
away, and they which little feared naked swords, were now affraide to be
beaten by him with a small ^ande. He desired not to possess ought in this
world, nor to seek for any thing: and his manner was, by heavenly talk to
inflame all such as of charity came to visit him, with the desire and love of
eternal life. And if at any time he understood that others had committed, any
great sin, he would never spare them, but with true love to their souls
reprehende them for their faults. His neighbors, and others also that dwelt
farther of, used upon a custom, every one upon certain days in the week to
send him their presents and offringes, to the end he might have somewhat to
bestow upon such as came to visit him. A certain man there was called
Carterius, who overcome of filthy concupiscence violently took away a Nun,
and Marriage of Nuns unlawful.
by unlawful matrimonye made her his wife: which thing so sone as the man of
God understood, he sent him by such as he could, that message which his fact
deserved. The man guiltye in his conscience of that wickedness which he had
committed, durst not him self go unto Gods servant, fearing least as his
manner was, he would sharply have rebuked him: and therefore he sent his
offringes among others, that at least through ignorance he might receive what
he sent him. But when all the offringes were brought before him, he satt
still, viewinge them all in particular, and layinge the rest aside, he took
those which Carterius sent, and cast them away, saying: Go and tell him.
Thowe have taken away Gods offringe, and do thowe send me thine? I will
none of thy offringe, because thou have taken from God that which was his. By
which fact all that were present fell into a great fear, perceiuinge that he
could certainly tell, what they did which were absent.

Peter. Many such men as he was, might in mine opinion have been martirs, if
they had lived in times of persecution.


Gregory. There be Peter, two kinds of martirdoms, the one secret, the other
open: for if a man has a burninge zeal in his mind to suffer death for
Christ, although he endures not any external persecution, yet has he in
secret the merit of martyrdom. For that one may be a martyr without suffringe
death openly, our Lord does teach us in the Gospel: who said unto the
sons of Zebedeus, desiringe as then through infirmitye of soul, the
principal places to sit upon, in his kingdom. Can you drink the chalice,
which Math. 20
I shall drink? and when they answered that they could, he said to them
both. My chalice verily shall you drink, but to sit at my right hand or
left, is not mine to give you: in which words what is signified else, by the
name of chalice, but the cupp of passion and death? And seeinge we know, that
James was put to death for Christ, and that Iohne died when the church
enjoyed, peace: undoubtedly we do gather, that one may be a martyr without
open suffringe: for as much as he is said to have drunk our Lords chalice,
who yet in persecution was not put to death. But concerning those notable and
excellent men of who^ I have made me^tio^ before, why may we not truly say,
that if they had fallen into a time of persecution, they might have been
martirs, when as by enduringe the secret assaults of the devil: and by
louinge their enemies in this world: by resistinge all carnal desires: and
in that they did in their heart sacrifice them selves to almighty God, they
were also martirs in the time of peace: seeing that now in our days we see
that mean men and of secular life, yea and even those of whom one would have
supposed, that they did little think of heaven, have by occasion of
persecution obtained the glorious crown of martyrdom.


OF FOVRTYE COUNTRY HUSBAND men that were slain by the Lombardes, because they
would not eat flesh sacrificed to idols.

CHAPTER XXVII.
FOr about fiftene years since, as they report who might very well have been
present, fourtye husband men of the country were taken prisonners by the
Lombardes, whom they would needs have enforced to eat of that which was
sacrificed to idols: but when they utterly refused so to do, or so much as
once to touch that wicked meat, then they threatened to kill them unless they
would eat it: but they louinge more eternal, then transitory life, continued
constant, and so they were all slain: What then were these men? what else, but
true martirs, that mad choice rather to die, then by eatinge of that which was
unlawful, to offend their creator?

OF A GREAT NVMBER OF prisoners (...), because they (...) goats head.

CHAPTER XXVIII.
AT the same time the Lombardes having almost four hundred prisoners in their
hands, did after their manner, sacrifice a goats head to the devil:
running round about with it in a circle, and by singing a most blasphemous
song did dedicate it to his service. And when they had them selves with bowed
heads adored it, then would they also have enforced their prisoners to do
the like. But a very great number of them chosinge rather by death to pass
unto immortal life, then by such abominable adoration to preserve their
mortal bodies, refused utterly to do, what they commanded them: and so would
not by any means bow down their heads to a creature, having always done
that service to their creator: whereat their enemies in whose hands they
were, fell into such an extreme rage, that they slew all them with their
swords, which would not join with them in that sacrilegious fact. What
marvel then is it, that those notable men before mentioned, might have come
to martirdom, had they lived in the days of persecution, who in the time of
peace by continual mortification, walked the straight way of martyrdom: when
as we see that in the storm of persecution, they merited to obtain the crown
of martyrdom, who the church being quiet, seemed to walk the broad way of
this world: yet that which we say concerning the elect servants of God, is
not to be holden for a general rule in all. For when open persecution
afflicts the church, as most true it is that many may ariue to martirdom,
who when no such tempest did blow seemed contemptible, and of no account: so
likewise sometimes they fall away for fear, who before persecution, and when
all was quiet, seemed to stand very constant: but such holy men as before have
been mentioned I dare boldlye say, that they might have been martirs, because
we gather so much by their happy deaths: for they could not have fallen in
open persecution, of whom it is certain, that to the very end of their
lives, they did continue in the profession of piet and virtue.

Peter. It is as you say: but I much wonder at the singular providence of
Gods mercy, which he shows to us unworthy wretches, in that he does so
moderate, and temper the crueltye of the Lombardes, that he suffers not their
wicked Priests, to persecute the faith of Christians: when as they see them
selves as it were the conquerors, and rulers of Christian people.


OF AN ARRIAN BISHOP that was miraculously strooken blind.

CHAPTER XXIX.
Gregory. MAny Peter have attempted that, but miracles from heaven have stayed
the course of their cruelty: and one will I now tell you, which I heard three
days since of Bonifacius, a monk of my Abbey, who until these four years
last past, remained amongst the Lombardes. An Arrian Bishop of theirs coming
to the city of Spoleto, and not having any place where to exercise his
religion, demanded a church of the Bishop of that town: which when he
constantly denied him, the Arian prelat told him, that the next day he would
by force take possession of S. Paul's church, which was hard by his lodginge.
The keeper of the church understanding this news in all have ran thither,
shutt the doors, and with locks and bolt^ made them as fast as he Lamps
burning ^n the ^hurche.
could and when (...) he put out all the (...), and (...) him self within.
The next morninge very earelye, the Arrian Bishop came thither with many in
his company: meaning by force to break open the doors. But suddainlye by
miracle the locks were cast far of, and the doors of them selves making a
great noise flewe open: and all the lamps, before putt out, were lightened
again by fire descendinge from heaven: and the Arrian Bishop that came to
enter the church by violence, was suddenly strooken blind, so that other men
were feign to lead him back again to his own lodginge. Which strange
accident, when the Lombardes there about understood, they durst not any more
presume to violate catholic places: and so it fell out wonderfully by Gods
providence, that for as much as the lamps in S. Paul's church, were by
reason of him put out: that at one and the self same time, both he lost the
light of his eyes, and the church received her former light again.


HOW A CHVRCHE OF THE Arrians in Rome, was hallowed according to the catholic
manner.

CHAPTER XXX.
NEither is that to be passed over in silence which God of his mercy
vouchsafed two yers since to show in this city, to the great condemnation of
the Arrian heresye: for part of that which I intend now to speak of, many
of the people know to be true: part the Priest and keepers of the church
affirm that they saw and heard. A church of the Arrians in that part of
the city, which is called Subura, remained until two years since with the doors
shut up: at which time, being desirous that it should be hallowed in the
catholic faith, we brought with us thither, the relics of the blessed
martirs S. Steuene and S. Reservation, translation, and reverence of relickes.
Agatha: and so with great multitudes of people, singing of praises to almighty
God, we entered the church: and when the solemnitye or mass was in
celebratinge; and the people by reason of the straighte place, thruste one an
other: some of them that stood without the chancell, heard an hog runninge
up and down through their legs, and each one perceiuinge it told it to
his next fellow: but the hog made toward the church door to go forth,
striking all those into great admiration by whom he passed: but though they
heard him, yet none there was that saw him: which strange thing God of pietye
vouchsafed to show, to the end we should understand how that the unclean
spirit which before possessed that place, was now departed and gone: when
mass Mass.
was done we went away, but the night followinge, such a noise was heard in
the top of the church, as though some body had there run up and down:
and the next night after that a far greater, and withal of a sudden, such a
terrible crack there was, as though the whole church had been quite fallling
down: which forthwith vanished away, and never after, was the church
troubled any more by the old enemy: but by the great stir which he kept
before his departure, he made it apparaunt, that he went very vnwillinglye from
that place, which so long time he had possessed.

Not many days after, in a passinge fair and clear day, a cloud
miraculouslye descended upon the altar of the same church: covering it as it
had been with a canopye: and filled the church with such a kind of terror
and sweetness, that though the doors were wide open, yet none durst presume to
enter in. The Priest also and the keepers of the church, and those which were
come thither to say mass, Saying of mass.
beheld the self same thing, yet could they not go in, although they felt
the sweetenes of that strange perfume.

Likewise upon an other day, the lamps hanginge without light, fire came
from heaven and set them a burninge: and a few days after when mass was
ended, and the keeper of the church had putt out the lamps, and was departed,
yet returninge back again, he found them burninge, which before he had putt
forth: but thinckinge that he had done it negligently, he did it now more
carefully the second time, and so departed the church, and shutt the door: but
returninge three hours after, he found them again burning as before: to the
end that by the very light the world might manifestly know, how that place
was from darckenes translated to light.

Peter. Although we be in great miseryes and tribulations, yet these strange
miracles which God vouchsafes to work, do plainly declare that he has not
utterly forsaken, and given us over.


Gregory. Albeit I was determined to recount unto you only such strange
things as were done in Italye: are you for all that content, to the further
condemnation of the said Arrian heresy, that I turn a little my speech to
Spain, and so by Africa return back again to Italye.


Peter. Go whether you will, willing^ye will I travail with you, and
ioyfullye return home again.


OF KING HERMIGILDVS, son to Leuigildus, king of the Visegothes: who was
for the catholic faith, put to death by his father.

CHAPTER XXXI.
Gregory. NOt long since as I have learned of many which came from Spain,
king Hermigildus son of Leuigildus king of the Visegothes, was from Arrian
heresye lately converted to the catholic faith, by the most reverent man
Leander Bishop of Seuill, with whom I was not long since familiarly
acquainted: which young Prince upon his conversion his father being an Arrian,
labored both by large promises and terrible threats, to draw again to his
former error: but when most constantlye his son answered, that he would never
forsake the true faith, which he had once embraced, his father in great a^ger,
took away his kingdom, and beside deprived him of all wealth and riches: and
perceiuinge, that with all this, his mind was nothing moved, he committed him
to straight prison, laying irons both upon his neck and hands. Upon this the
young king Hermigildus, began now to contemn his earthly kingdom, and to
seek with great desire after the kingdom of heaven: and VVearing of hear,
cloth.
lyinge in prison fast bound, he prayed to almighty God in hear cloth to
send him heavenly comfort: and so much the more did he despise the glory of
this transitory world, by how much he knew him self in that case that he
had now nothing that could be taken from him.

When the solemn feast of Easter The feast of Easter.
was come, his wicked father sent unto him in the dead of the night an Arrian
Bishop, to give him the communion of a sacrilegious consecration, that he
might thereby again recover his fathers grace and favor: but the man of God
as he ought, sharply reprehended that Arrian Bishop which came unto him, and
giving him such entertainment as his deserts required, utterly rejected him:
for albeit outwardly he lay there in bands, yet inwardly to him self he
stood secure in the height of his own soul. The father at the return of the
Arrian prelat understanding these news, fell into such a rage, that forthwith
he sent his officers of execution to putt to death that most constant
confessor, in the very prison where he lay: which unnatural and blody
commandment was performed accordingly: for so sone as they came into the
prison, they claue his brains with an hatchet, and so bereaved him of mortal
life, having only power to take that from him which the holy martyr made small
account of. Afterward for the publishinge of his true glory to the world,
there wanted not miracles from heaven: for in the night time singinge was
heard at his body: some also report, that in the night, burninge lamps,
were seen in that place: by reason whereof his body, as of him Worshippinge of
martirs bodies.
that was a martyr, was worthily worshipped of all christian people. But the
wicked father and murderer of his own son, albeit he was sorry that he had
put him to death, yet was not his grief of that qualitye, that it brought him
to the state of salvation. For although he knew very well, that the
catholic faith was the truth: yet for fear of his people, he never deserved
to be a professor thereof.

At length falling sick, a little before his death, he commended his sonue
Recharedus, who was to succeed him in the kingdom, and was yet an heretic,
unto Bishop Leander, whom before he had greatly persecuted: that by his
counsel and exhortation, he might likewise make him a member of the
catholic church, as he had before made his brother Hermigildus: and when he
had thus done he departed this life. After whose death Recharedus the king,
not followinge the steps of his wicked father, but his brother the martyr,
utterly renounced Arrianisme: and labored so earnestlye for the restoring of
religion, that he brought the whole nation of the Visegothes to the true
faith of Christ: and would not suffer any that was an heretic in his
country to bear arms and serve in the wars. And it is not to be admired,
that he became thus to be a preacher of the true faith, seeing he was the
brother of a martyr, whose Merit of martirs.
merits did help him to bring so many into the lapp of Gods church.
wherein we have to consider, tha^ he could never have effected all this, if
king Hermigildus had not died for the testimony of true religion: for as it is
written ^^les the grain of wheat fallinge Johan. 12. (...). 24.
into the earth does die, it self remains alone: but if it die, it brings
forth much fruit. This we see to prove true in the members, which before was
verified in the head:for one died amongst the Visegothes, that many might
live, and of one grain that was sown for the faith, a great croppe of
faithefull people sprunge up.


Peter. A wonderful thing, and much to be admired in these our days.


OF CERTAIN BISHOPS OF Africa who had their tongues cut out by the Vandals,
that were Arrian heretics, for the defense of the catholic faith: and yet
spoke ^til as perfe^tlye as they did before.

CHAPTER XXXII.
Gregory. LIkewise in the time of Justinian the Emper^r, when as the Vandals
that were Arrian heretics, did grievously per^ecute the catholic faith:
certain Bishops continewing constant, were ope^lye examined: whom when the
king of the Vandals saw that he could neither by any words or rewards
draw to embrace his heretical religion, yet he thought that by torments he
might do it: and therefore when he commanded them not to speak in defense of
truth, and they refused to obey his precept, least by silence they might seem
to give consent unto wicked heresie^ in a great fury he commanded their
tongues to be cut out by the roots. A miraculous thing and yet known to
many old men:they did as perfectlye afterward speak in defense of true
religion, as they did before, when they had their tongues safe and sound.


Peter. You tell me of a maruailous ^^range thing, and greatly to be admired.


Gregory. It is written Peter of the only son of the eternal father. In the
beginning Ioh. 1.
was the word, and the word was with God. Of whose virtue and power it
straighte ways follows. All things were made by him. Why then should we
marvel, if that eternal word could ^^eake without a tongue, which made the
tongue?


Peter. What you say, pleases me very well.


Gregory. These Bishopes therefore flyinge at that time from the persecution,
came unto the city of Constantinople: and at such time as my self about the
affairs of the church, was sent thither unto the Emperor, I found there a
Bishop of good years, who told me that he saw them him self speak without
tongues: for they opened their mouths and said. Behold and see how we have
no tongues, and yet do speak: for as he said, their tongues being cut of
by ^he roots there seemed as it were a deep hole in their throat: and yet
though their mouths were emp^ye, they pronounced their words very plain
and distinctlye. One of which falling afterward in that place into carnal
sin, was forthwith deprived of that supernatural gift: and that by the just
judgment of almighty God, seeing reason requires, that he which was careless
to preserve the continencye of his body which he had, should not any longer
utter the words of truth without the tongue of his body which he had not. But
because I have now spoken sufficient for the condemnation of Arrianisme,
therefore I will return to entreat of such other miracles, as have lately
fallen out here in Italy.


OF THE SERVANTE OF GOD Eleutherius.

CHAPTER XXXIII.
ELeutherius of whom I made mention before; father of the abbey of the
Evangelist S. Marcke, which is in the suburbs of the city of Spoleto, lived
long time together with me in this city in my monasterye, and there ended his
days. Of whom his monks do report, that by his tears he raised up one
that was dead: for he raised up one that was dead: for he was a man of such
simplicitye and compunction, that no doubt but those tears coming from his
humble and simple soul, were of force to obtain many things of almighty God.
One miracle of his I will now tell you, which him self being demanded by me,
did with great simplicity confess. As he was trauailinge upon a certain day,
and not findinge at might any other place to lodge in, he went to a Nunnery,
wherein there was a little boy, which the wicked spirit did usually every
night torment. The Nuns giuinge entertainment to the man of God, desired
him that the said little boy might remain with him all night: wherewith
he was well content. In the morninge, the Nuns diligently enquired of the
father, if the child had not been sore troubled and tormented that night: who
maruailinge why they asked that question answered, that he perceived not any
such thing. Then they told him, how a wicked spirit did every night
pitifully afflict the child, and earnestly desire^ him, that he would take him
home to his own Abbey, because their hearts could not endure to behold any
such misery. The old man yielded to their request, and so carried away the boy
home to his own monastery: where he remained long time safe and sound, the
devil not presuminge to touch him. Whereupon the old man seeinge him to
continue so well, was immoderatly glad thereof, and therefore in the presence of
the monks he spoke thus. The devil did dally with those sisters: but now he
has to do with the servants of God, he dare not come nere this boy. He
had scarce uttered these words, when as in that very instant, the poor
child was in the presence of them all possessed, an^ pitifully tormented:
which the old man beholdinge, straighte-waies lamented and fell a weepinge,
and perseueringe so a long time, the monks came to comfort him: but he
answered them, saying. Believe me (quoth he) none of you shall this day eat
any bread, unless this boy be dispossessed. Then with the rest of the
brethren, he fell prostrat to his prayers, and there they continewed so long,
until the boy was delivered from his former torments, and besides so
perfectly cured, that the wicked spirit never after presumed to molest him any
more.

Peter. I verily suppose that he sinned a little in vain glory: and that Gods
pleasure was, that the other monks should cooperate to the dispossessinge of
the devil.


Gregory. It is even so as you say: for seeing he could not alone bear the
burden of that miracle, it was divided amongst the rest of his brethren. Of
what force and efficacye this man's prayers were, I have found by experience in
my self: for being upon a time when I lived in the Abbey so sick, that I
often sounded: and was by means thereof with often panges, continually at
deaths door, and in such case, that unless I did continually eat some thing
my vital spirit was goinge away: Easter day was at hand, and therefore when
I saw that upon so sacred a vigill I could not refrain from often eating,
Prescript days of fasting.
in which not only old persons, but euene children use to fast, I was more
afflicted with grief, then grieved with mine infirmitye: yet at length my
sorrowful soul quickly found out a devise, and that was, to carrye the man
of God secretly into the oratorye, and there to entreat him that he would by his
prayer obtain^ for me of God so much strength and abilitye as to fast that
day: which fell out accordinglye: for so sone as we came into the oratorye,
with humilitye and tears he fell to his prayers, and after a while (having
made an end) he came forth, and upon the words of his blessed prayers, my
stomach grew so strong, that I did not so much as think of any meat, nor
feel any grief at all. Then I began to mar^aile at my self, and to think
in wha^ case I was before, and how I felt my self now: and when I thought
upon my former sickness, I found none of those panges, with which before I was
trobled: and when my mind was busied about the affairs of the Abbey, my
sycknes was quite out of my memory: yea, and as I said if I did th^ncke
thereof, yet feelinge myself so well and strong I began to doubt whether I
had eaten or no. When evening was come, I found my self so lustye, that I
could very well have fasted until the next day. And by this means having
experience of his prayers in my self, I made no doubt but those things also
were true which in other places he did, though my self was not then present.


Peter. Saying you told me that he was a man of great compunction, desirous I
am to be better informed touching the efficacye of compunction and tears: and
therefore I pray you, let me understand, how many kinds of compunction
there be.


OF THE DIVERSE KINDS of compunction.

CHAPTER XXXIIII.
Gregory. COmpunction is divided into many kinde^: to wit, when every sin is
of penitent men in particular bewaile^; whereof the prophet Ieremye in the
person of penitent sinners speaks thus. Mine eye has Thren. 3.
brought forth di^isions of waters. But speaking more properlye, there be
especially two kinds of compunction: for the soul that thirsts after God,
is first sorrowful in heart for fear, and afterward upon love. For first it
is grieved and weepeth, because calling to mind former sins committed, it
fears to endure for punnishment of them everlasting ^ormentes: but when
long anxiety and sorrow has bannished away that fear, then a certain
securitye of the hope of pardon does follow: and so the soul is inflamed with
the ^oue of heavenly delights, and whereas before it did weep for fear of
eternal pain: afterward it powers out tears, that it is kept from
everlasting joys. For the soul does then con^emplat those glitteringe quires
of Angels, that heavenly company of those blessed spirits, that great majesty
of the eternal beholdinge the face of God: and does lament so much more now,
because it wants that everlasting felicitye, then it wept before at the fear
of eternal punnishement. Which thing in scripture is mystically set down,
in an holy and true historye: for there we read, how Axa the daughter of
Caleb, riding upon an ass did sighe: and when her father demanded what the
matter was, she ansvvered him thus: Give me your blessinge, a southern Iosue 15.
and dry land you have given me, join also a wattery: and he gave her a
watterie ground above and beneath. For Axa then rides upon the ass, when our
soul does subdue and govern the sensual motions of the flesh: which
sighinge does crave wett ground of her father, when it does with contrition
and sorrow of heart desire of our creator the grace of tears and weeping. For
some there be, upon whom God has bestowed such a gift, that they will speak
freely in defense of justice, help them that be oppressed, give alms to the
poor, and be zealous in religion, but yet have they not obtained the grace of
tears: these be they, that have ground toward the South, and that which is
dry: but yet do they want that which is moist and wett: because albeit they be
diligent and fervent in good worckes, yet requisite it is, that they should
also either for fear of hell, or the love of heaven, bewail the sins of
their life past. But because as I said, there be two kinds of compunction,
therefore her father gave her that, which was wettaboue and also wett beneathe:
for our soul does then receive that which is wett above, when it is grieved,
and does weep for the desire of heaven: and it does then possess that which
is ^^ett beneath, when it is affraide, and pours forth tears for the fea^e
of hell fire: and albeit that which is ^^ett beneathe is bestowed upon our
s^ule, before that which is weet above, yet because the compunction of love is
the more excellent, convenient it was that the ground which was wett above,
sh^ulde be first named, and afterward that which was we^ beneath.


Peter. Your discourse pleases me very well: but saying you have now ^olde me
of that reverent man Eleutherius, and his great grace of compunction: desirous
I am to know, whether there be now any such men living in the world.


OF AMANTIVS A PRIEST in ^he province of Tuscania.

CHAPTER. XXXV.
Gregory. FLoridus Bishop of Tiuolye a man (as your sel^^ knows very well)
of holy life, and worthy to be credited, told me, that he had dwellinge with
him a certain Priest called Amantius, of maruailous simplicitye: who like unto
the Apostles had such a grace given him of God, that laying his hand upon them
that were sick, he restored them to their former health: and although the
disease were very great and dangerous, yet upon his touching did it
forthwith depart. Moreover he said that he had also this miraculous gi^te,
that wheresoever he found any serpe^tes or snakes, though never so cruel, yet
did he with the sign of the cross dispatch and kill them: for by virtue
Miracles wroug^te by the sign of the cross^^.
of the cross, which the man of God made with his hand, their bowels did
break, and they suddenly dye: and if by chance the snake ga^t into any hole,
then did he with the s^gn^ of the cross, bless the mouth thereof, and it
wroughte the same effect: for any might straighte-waies find it there dead.
My self having understanding of this great grace bestowed upon him, was
desirous to see him and when he was brought unto me, I caused him to be lodged
in a chamber amongst the sick men: thereby to try what his gift was in
curing of diseases. At that time, there was one amongst them beside him self,
being fallen into a phrensy: who one night did so cry out like a mad man,
that with his noise he disqu^eted all the rest that were sick, so that they
could not sleep or take any rest: and so it fe^l out very straungely, that
one being ill all the rest fared the worse. But as I had before learned of the
reverent Bishop Floridus, who was at that time there present with the said
Priest: and afterward also plainly understood of him, that attended that
night upon the sick persons: the foresaid venerable Priest risinge out of
his bed, went softlye to the place, where the mad man lay, and there prayed,
layinge his hands upon him: whereupon the man became somewhat better. Then he
carried him away, unto the higher part of the house into the oratorye: where
more plentifully he prayed unto God for his recouerye: and straight after he
brought him back again to his own bed safe and sound, so that he cried out
no more, neither troubled any of the other sick persons. By which one fact of
his, I had sufficient reason, to give credit to all the rest that before had
been told me.


Peter. A great edification it is, to see men worckinge such notable miracles:
and to behold as it were upon earth, heavenly Jerusalem in her citizens.


OF MAX^MIANVS BISHOP of Syracusis.

CHAPTER XXXVI.
Gregory. NEither ^s that miracle to be passed over with silen^e, which
almighty God vouchsa^ed to work by his servant Maximianus, now Bishop of
Syracusis, but then the father and governor nor of mine abbey. For at such time
as I was upon the commandment of my Bishop, sent to Constantinople to the
Emperor, about affairs of the churches: the same reverent man Maximianus upon
charity, with other of his monks came thither unto me: who in his return
homewarde to Rome, fell into a great tempest upon the Adriake sEa: in which both
him self, and all those that were in his company, after a most strange and
miraculous manner, tasted both of the indignation and favor of alighty God.
For the sea did so rage with the furye of the winds, that they had spent
their ^^ast: the sails floated upon the waves: and the ship beaten and torn
with boisterous billows, did leake water so fast, that it was now come to the
upper deck, in such sort, that the ship seemed not so much to be in the
waters, as the waters in the ship.

The mariners and passengers trobled with the fear of death, not as a thing
far of, but even present before their eyes, void of all hoope of this life,
prepared them selves for the Roseru^tion of the B. Sacrament.
next: and so mutual giving the pax or kiss of peace one to an other, they
received the body and blood of our Savior: commendinge them selves to
almighty God, that he would vouchsafe mercifully to receive their souls, who
had delivered their bodies to so fearful a death: but God who had
wonderfully terified their minds, did more wonderfully preserve their lives.
For the same ship although full of water, yet did it hold on her course for
eighte days together, and upon the ninthe, it arrived at the port of
Cothronum: and when all the rest were safely gone out, then last of all the
reverent man Maximianus went also forth: and no sooner was he upon land, then
the ship suncke in the hauene: as though by their departure, it had wanted
that which did preserve it: and whereas before being at sea it was full of men,
and carried also abundance of water, and yet sailed onwarde: now when
Maximianus with his monks were landed, it could not in the haven, carrye the
waters alone, whereby God gave them to understand, that when it was laden, him
self with his divine hand did govern and preserve it: seeing when it was
empty it could not for a small time continue above the water.


OF SANCTVLVS A PRIEST IN the Province of Nursia.

CHAPTER XXXVII.
ABout forty days since, you saw with me, one called Sanctulus, a reverent
Priest: who every year came unto me out of Nursia: but three days ago, a
certain monk coming from those parts, broughe me very heavy news of his
death. The holy life and virtue of which man was such, that although I can
not but fetch sweet sighs when I remember it: yet now I may without all
fear report and publishe to the world such miracles, as I have learned by the
relation of very virtuous and holy Priests, that were his neighbors: and and
amongst dare friends, familiaritye causes one to presume much in charity,
oftentimes my self did so courteouslye urge him, that he was enforced to tell
me some small miracles which him self had done.

Certain Lombardes being upon a time pressinge of olives to make oil:
Sanctulus as he was both merry in countenance and heart, came unto them, and
saluted them pleasantlye: and shewinge them his bottle which he brought,
rather willed, then desired them, to fill it with oil. But they being
infidels, and having labored al day in vain, and not pressed out any oil
at all, took his words in ill part, and gave him very bad speech: but the
man of God, notwithstanding this, spoke unto them yet with a more merry to do
me a good turn, you will fill this bottle for Sanctulus, and so he will
depart from you very well contented. But they seeing no oil to run forth,
and hearing him yet for all that so earnest to have his bottle filled, fell
into a great rage, and railed mightily upon him. Then the man of God seeinge
that no oil came from the press, called for water, which he blessed before
them all, and with his own hands, cast it upon the pr^sse: A miracle wrought
by holy water.
and forthwith by virtue of that benediction, such plentye of oil ran
forth, that the Lombardes who before had long labored in vain, did not only
fill their own vessels, but also his bottle: giving him thanckes, for that
coming to beg oil: by his blessinge, he bestowed that upon them, which him
self had demanded.

At an other time, when a great dearth was in the country, the man of God
being desirous to repair the church of S. Laurence, burnt before by Churches
dedicated to saints.
the Lombardes, he hired for that end many cunning workmen and diverse other
laborers, who of necessity were daily to be maynetained: but so great was the
scarsitye, that he wanted bread to relieve them: where upon his worckmen cried
out for meat, because they were fainte and could not labor. The man of God
hearing this, gave them comfortable words, promisinge to supplye their want:
yet inwardlye very much was he grieved, being not able to perform what he
had said. Goinge therefore up and down in great anxietie he came to an oven,
wherein the neighbors that dwelt by, had the day before baked bread: and
stooping down he looked in, to see whether they had by chance left any bread
behind them, where he found a loase both greater and whiter then commonly
they used: which he took away, but yet would he not by and by give it to his
vvorckemen, least perhaps it belonged to some other body, and so might as it
were, of compassion to other, have committed a sin him self: and therefore
he did first shevve it to all the women there about, inquiringe whether it
were any of theirs: but all denied it saying, that they had all received
their just number of ^oaues. Then the man of God in great joy, went with
that one ^oafe to many vvorckemen, vvishinge them to give thanckes to almighty
God, tellinge them how his goodenes had provided them of necessary food:
and forthwith he set that loaf before them, whereof when they had
satisfied them selves, he gathered up more pieces of bread which remained,
then the whole loaf it self was before in quantitye. The day follovvinge,
again he set it before them, and again the pieces remayninge were far more
them the former fragmentes: and so for the space of ten days together, all
those arti^icers and vvorckemen lived upon that one loaf, and were very well
satisfied: some thing remayninge every day for the next, as though the
fragmentes had by eatinge increased.

Peter. A strange thing and not unlike to that notable miracle of our Savior:
and therefore worthy to be admired of all.


Gregory. Our Savior at this time Peter voutsafed by his servant to feed
many with one loaf, who in times past by him self, feed five thousand
Joan. (...)
with five loaves: and does daily of a fevve grains of corn produce
innumerable ears of wheat: who also out of the earth brought forth those
very graynes: and more then all this, created all things of nothing. But to
the end you should not marvel any longer, what by Gods assistance the
venerable man Sanctulus wrought outvvardlye: I will now tell you what by
our Lords grace he was invvardlye in his soul. Upon a certain day, the
Lombardes had taken a Deacon, whom they kept in prison, with a purpose to put
him to death. When eueninge was come, the man of God Sanctulus intrea^ed them
to set him at liberty, and to grant him his life: but when he savve that he
could not obtain that ^auor at their hands, but that they vverefully
resolved to have his life: then he beseeched them, that they would at least
committ him to his keeping: wherewith they were content, but with this
condition, that if he escaped away, that then him self should die for him. The
man of God was very well content, and so he received the deacon into his own
charge and custodye.

The midnighte followinge when he saw all the Lombardes fast a sleep, he
called up the Deacon, willing him quickly to rise up and to run away as fast
as he could: and almighty God (quoth he) deliver the out of their hands. To
whom the Deacon (knowing what he had promised) said. Father I can not run
away, for if I do, out of all doubt they will putt you to death: yet for all
this Sanctulus enforced him to be gone with all speed, saying, up and away:
and God of his goodenes defend and protect you: for I am in his hands, and
they can do no more unto me then his divine Ma^estye shall give them leave.
Upon these words, away went the Deacon: and he that had undertaken his
safe-keepinge, as one that had been deceived remained behind.

In the morning the Lombardes demanded of Sanctulus for their prisoner: who
told them, that he was run away. Then (quoth they) you best know what is
convenient for you to have: yea marye that do I, answered the servant of God
with great constancye: well (quoth they) thou art a good man, and therefore we
will not by diverse torments take away thy life, but make c^oise of what death
thou vvilt: to whom the man of God ansvvered in this manner. Here I am at Gods
disposition and pleasure, kill me in such sort, as he shall vouchsafe to give
you leave. Then all the Lombardes that were present agreed to have him
beheaded: to the end an easy and quick death might sone dispatche him. When it
was given out abroad that Sanctulus was to dye, whom for his virtue and
holiness, they greatly honored: all the Lombardes that were in those parts
repaired thither, being glad (such cruel minds they have) to behold him putt
to death: and when all the a ^mye was gathered together, they brought him forth
to execution, and the strongest man amongst them was chosen out, to cut of
his head at one blow.

The venerable man besett with armed soldiars, betook him self to his usual
weapons: for he desired them to give him a little leave to pray: which when he
had obtained, he cast him selse prostrat upon the earth, and fell to his
devotions: in which after he had continewed for a good space, the executioner
spurned him up with his foot, bidding him rise, kneel down, and to prepare
him self for death. The man of God rose up, bowed down his knee, and held
forth his head, and beholding the drawn sword ready to dispatch him, these
only words they said that he spoke aloude. O Saint Iohne hold that sword.
Then Prayer to Saint Iohne.
the foresaid executioner, having the naked weapon in his hand, did with all
his force lift up his arm to strike of his head: but by no means could he
bring it down again, for it became suddenly so stiff that it remained still
above, the man being not able once to bend it downewarde. Then all the
Lombardes who came to feed their eyes with the lamentable sight of his
death, began with admiration to praise Gods name, and with fear to reverence
the man of God: for they now saw apparantlye of what great holiness he was,
that did so miraculouslye stay the arm of his executioner above in the air.

Then they desired him to rise up, which he did: but when they required him to
restore his executioners arm to his former state, he utterly refused, saying.
By no means will I once pray for him, unless before hand he swear unto me,
that he will never with that arm offer to kill any christian more. The poor
Lombarde who as we may truly say, had stretched out his arm against God,
enforced with this necessitye, took an oath never more to putt any Christian
to death. Then the man of God commanded him to putt down his arm, which
forthwith he did: he commanded him also to putt up his sword, which in like
manner he performed. All the Lombardes by this perceiving him to be a man of
rare virtue, began in all have to present him with the gifts of such oxen and
other cattle, as before they had taken from others: but the man of God, utterly
refused all such kind of presents, desiringe them rather if they meant to
bestow any thing upon him worth the giuinge, that they would deliver unto him
all such prisoners as they had in their keeping: that he might have some
cause in his prayers, to commend them to almighty God. To which request of his
they condescended, and so all the poor captives were discharged: and thus by
Gods sweet providence, one offering him self to die for an other, many were
delivered from death.


Peter. A strange thing it was, and although I have heard the same story by
the relation of others: yet I can not deny, but so often as I hear it
repeated, it seems still unto me, as though it were fresh news.


Gregory. There is no cause why you should admire Sanctulus for this thing: but
ponder with your self if you can, what manner of spirit that was, which
possessed his simple soul, and did advance it to so high a perfection of
virtue: For where was his mind, when he offered him self with such constancye
to die for his neighbor: and to save the temporal life of his brother,
contemned his own, and put his head under the executioners sword? what force
of true love did then harbor in that heart, when he nothing feared death, to
preserve the life of an other? Ignorant I am not, that this venerable man
Sanctulus could scant read well, and that he knew not the precepts of the
law: yet because charity is the fulfilling of the law, by loving God and his
neighbor, he kept the whole law: and that which outwardlye lacked in
knowledge, did in wardlie by charity live in his soul. And he perhaps who
never read that, which S. Iohne the Apostle said of our Savior, to wit, that
as he Joan. 13. v. 16.
yielded his life for us, so we likewise should yield our lives for our
brethren: yet that great and high precept of the Apostle, he knew more by
action, then by speculation. Let us here if you please compare his learned
ignorance, with our unlearned knowledge: Where our kind of (...)inge is
nothing worth, his is of (...)t price and estimation: we destit^ (...)virtue
do speak thereof, and as (...)vere in the mids of plentiful (...)s smell
of the fruit, but do not (...)e thereof. He knew full well (...)we to gather
and taste of the fruit (...)elfe, although he lacked the smell (...)words and
vain speech.


Peter. What I pray, do you think is the (...)ause, that good men are still
taken (...)way: and such as for the benefit and (...)dification of many,
might live still in this world: either are not to be found at all, or at
least very fevve can be heard of?


Gregory. The malice and wickedness of them that remain behind in the
world, deserves that those should quickly be taken away, who by their
life might much help us: and for as much as the world draws toward an
end, Gods chosen servants are taken out of it, that they fall not into more
wicked times: and therefore from hence it comes, that the prophet says. The
just man does perish, and there is Esaias. 5.
none that does ponder it in his heart: and men of mercy are gathered together,
because there is none that has understanding. And from hence also it
proceeds, that the scripture says. Open ye, that they may go forth Ierem.
50.
which do tread it under foot. Hence likewise it is, that Solomon says.
There is a Eccles. 3.
time of casting stones abroad, and a time of gathering them together. And
therefore the nerer that the world draws to an end, so much the more
necessary it is, that the living stones, should be gathered together, for the
heavenly building: that our celestial Jerusalem may arrive to the full measure
of his whole perfection. And yet do I not think, that all Gods elect
servants are so taken out of the world, that none but the wicked remain
behind: for sinners would never be converted to the sorrow of true penance,
if they had not the examples of some good people to provoke them forward.


Peter. Without cause do I complain of the death o^goode men, when as daily I
see them also that be wicked, in great numbers to depart this life.


OF THE VISION OF REdemptus Bishop of the city of Ferenti.

CHAPTER XXXVIII.
Gregory. VVOnder nothing at this Peter, for you knevve very well Redemptus,
Bishop of the city of Ferenti, a man of venerable life, who died almost seven
years since: with whom I had familiar acquaintance, by reason that he dwelled
not far from the Abbey in which I lived. This man when I asked him (for the
matter was very well known far and nere) told me that which by divine
revelation he had learned concerning the end of the world, in the time of
Io^^e the younger, who was my prededecessor. For he said that upon a certain
day, as he was according to his manner visiting of his Diocese, he came to
the Church of the blessed martyr Euthicius: and when it was nigh the would
needs be lodged nighe to the sepulcher of the martyr, where after his trauail
he ^eposed him self. About midnighte, being as he said him self neither
perfectly waking, nor yet sleeping, but rather heavy of sleep, he felt his
waking soul oppressed with great sorrow: and being in that case, he saw the
same blessed martyr Euthicius standing before him, who spoke thus: Art thou
waking Redemptus? to whom he answered, that he was. Then the martyr said. The
end of all flesh is come: the end of all flesh is come: which wor^es after he
had repeated thus three times, he vanisshed out of his sight.

Then the man of God rose up, and fell to his p^aiers with many tears: And
straight after, those fearful sightes in heaven followed: to wit fiery lances,
and armies appearing from the north. Straight after likewise the barbarous and
cruel nation of the Lombardes drawn as a sword out of a sheath, left their
own country and invaded ours by reason whereof the people which before for
the huge multitude were like to thick corn fields: remain now withered and
overthrown: for cities be wasted, towns and villages spoiled, churches
burnte, monasteries of men and w^men destroyed, farms left desolate, and the
country remains solitarye and void of men to till the ground, and
destitute of all inhabitants: beasts possessinge those places, where before
great plenty of men did dwell. And how it goes in other parts of the world
I know not, but here in this place where we live, the world does not foretell
any end, but rather shows that which is present and already come. Wherefore so
much the more zealouslye ought we to seek after eternal things, by how much
we find all temporal, so quicklye to be fled and gone. Suerlye this world
were to be contemned, although it did flatter us, and with pleasant
prosperitye contented our mind: but now seeing it is fraught with so many
miseries and diverse afflictions, and that our sorrows and crosses do daily
increase and be doubled, what does it else but cry unto us that we should not
love it.

Ma^y more things yet remain of the worthy acts of Gods servants, but
because I have resolved upon an other course, I will pass over with silence.


Peter. For as much as I perceive, that many Christians do doubt of the
immortality of the soul, after the dissolution of the body: I beseech you for
the spiritual good of many, to set down some reasons for proffe thereof:
or the examples of some souls which have testified the same, if you remember
any: to the end that those which be troubled with any such tentations, may
learn that the soul does not die together with the body.


Gregory. This is a work of great labor, especially for one that is busied
with other affairs, and has other things to attend unto: yet if any profit
by my means may redound to others, willingly do I prefer that before mine
own will and pleasure: and therefore Gods grace assisting me, in this fourth
book followinge, I will clearly show that the soul does live after the death
of the body.


The end of the third book.
THE CHAPTERS OF THE FOVRTH BOOK.
1. THat carnal men do the less believe eternal and spiritual things,
because those of which they hear, they know not by experience. 2. That an
infidel lives not without faith. 3. That there were three vital spirittes
created. 4. Of that question of Solomon, wherein it is said: That the death of
a man and beasts is all one. 5. Of that question concerning the soul, which
goes inuisiblye out of the body: to wit, whether there be any such thing,
when as it can not be seen. 6. That as the life of the soul whiles it
remains in the body, is known by the motions of the members: so the life of
the soul, as^er it is out of the body in Saints, is gathered by the virtue
of miracles. 7. Of the departures of souls. 8. Of the departure of the soul
of a monk called Specio^us. 9. Of the soul of an Anchoret. 10. Of the
departure of the soul of an Abbot called Hope. 11. Of the departure of the
soul of a Priest caled Vr^inus. 12. Of the soul of Probus, Bishop of the
city of Reati. 13. Of the departure of a Nun called Galla. 14. Of the
departure of Seruulus, sick of the Palsye. 15. Of the departure of a Nun
called Romula. 16. Of the departure of the virgin Tarsilla. 17. Of the
departure of a young maid called Musa. 18. How certain young children, come not
to heaven, through the fault of their parents: because they bring them up
wickedly, as is showed and afterward declared, by the example of a blasphe^^ous
young boy. 19. Of the departure of one Steven, the servant of God. 20. That
sometime the merit of the soul is not seen at the departure: but is after
death more truly declared. 21. Of the two monks of Abbot Valentius. 22. Of
the departure of Abbot Soranus. 23. Of the departure of the Deacon of the
Church of Marsi. 24. Of the death of the man of God, that was sent to Bethel.
25. Whether the souls of just men, be received into heaven, before the
resurrection of the body. 26. By what means some that are a dying do
prophecy. Of the death of a certain Aduocat: Of the revelation of the two
monks Gerontius and Mellirus: Of the death of a boy called Armentarius, and of
the diuersitye of tongues. 27. Of the death of the Earl Theophanius. 28. That
as the souls of just men be in heaven: so we ought to believe, that after the
death of the bodies, the souls of wicked men are in hell. 29. What reason we
have to believe that corporal fire can hold spirittes, they being without
bodies. 30. Of the death of the Arrian king Theodoricus. 31. Of the death of
Reparatus. 32. Of the death of a courtier, whose grave burnt with fire. 33.
Whether the good know the good in heaven: and the bad those that be bad in
hell. 34. Of a certain religious man, who at his death saw the Prophets. 35.
How sometime, souls ready to depart this world, that know not one an other*
do know for all that what torments for their sins, or like rewards for
their good deeds, they shall receive. And of the death of Iohne, Vrsus,
Eumorphius, and Steue^ 36. Of those souls, which through error seem to be
carried out of their bodies. Of the vocation and reuocation of Peter the
monk: and of the death and resusci^ation of Steven. Of the vision of a
certain soldiar: and of Deusdedit, whose house was seen to be built upon the
sabbath day: and of the punnishement of the men of Sodom. 37. That the souls
of certain men whiles they be yet in their bodies, do see some spiritual
punnishment: and of the boy Theodorus. 38. Of the death of Chrisorius: and of a
certain monk of Iconia. 39. Whether there be any fire of purga^orye after
death. 40. Of the soul of Paschasius the Deacon. 41. Why in latter times, so
many things come to light concerning men's souls, which before, were not
known. 42. In what place we ought to believe that hell is 43. Whether the fire
of hell be one or many. 44. Whether they always burn that lie in hell. 45.
How the soul is said to be immortal, if it be punnished with the sentence of
death. 46. Of a certain holy man, who was affraide at the time of his death.
47. That some are by revelation strengthened not to be affraide when they dye:
and of the monks called Anthony, Merulus, and Iohne. 48. Whether we ought to
observe dreams: and how many sorts of dreams there be. 49. Os a certain
man, who in his dream had long life promised: and yet died shortly after. 50.
Whether the souls receive any commoditye by the burial of their bodies in
the church. 51. Of a certain Nun that was buried in the church of S.
Laurence, which appeared half burnt. 52. Os the burial of the noble man
Valerianus. 53. Of the body of Valentinus, which was thrown out of the church
after it was buried. 54. Of the body of a dier buried in the church, which
afterward could not be found. 55. What thing that is, which after death,
has force to helppe men's souls: and of a Priest of Centumcellis, who was by
the soul of a certain man desired, that he might after his death, be helped
by the holy sacrifice. And of the soul of a monk called Iustus. 56. Of the
lise and death of Bisshoppe Cassius. 57. Of one that was taken by his enemies,
whose irons at the time of the sacrifice were loosed: and of the mariner called
Caraca, saved by the sacred host, from being drowned in the sea. 58. Of the
virtue and mystery of the healthful sacrifice. 59. How we ought to procure
contrition of heart, at the time of the holy mysteries: and of the custodye of
our soul after we have been sorrowful sor our sins. 60. How we ought to
forgive the sins of others, that we may obtain forgiveness of our own.
THE FOVRTH BOOK OF S. GREGORY'S DIALOGVES.
HOW CARNAL MEN GIVE the less credit to those things which be eternal and
spiritual: because they know not by experience, what they hear others to
speak of.

CHAPTER I.
AFTER that the first pare^t of mankind, was for his sin bannished from the
joys of Paradise, he fell into the miserye of this ignorance and bannishment,
which to this yerie day we do all endure: for his sin was the cause, that
he could not any longer see those joys of heaven, which before by
contemplation he possessed: for during the time of his residence in Paradise,
he usually heard God talking with him, and by purity of heart, and heavenly
vision, was present with the quires of the blessed Angels. But after his fall
he lost that light of soul, which before abundantly he enjoyed. From whom we
being by carnal propagation derived, that live now in this darcke ignorance
of bannishme^t do hear indede of an heavenly country, and how it is
inhabited by the Angels of God, and that the souls of just and perfect men do
there keep them company. But yet such as be carnal, because they can not by
experience know those invisible creatures, doubt whether there be any such,
seeing with their corporal eyes they can not behold them: from which doubt,
our first Parent was altogether free: for although he was exiled from the
joys of Paradise, yet did he still keep in memory what he had lost, because
he had before beheld the same: but these men can not by any means call to
mind such things as they hear others speak of, because they never had of
them any former experience as our first father Adam had.

For it is in this case as if a woman big with child, should be putt in
prison, and be there delivered of a son, which never went forth, but were
there continually brought, up: for if his mother should tell him of the sun,
moan, stars, mountains: and speak of the fields, the flying of birds, and
running of horses: her child that had continually been brought up in the
prison, and acquainted with nothing else but black darckenes: might well hear
what she said, but with a doubt whether it were true or no, because experience
taught him not any such thing. Euene so men that are borne in this darcke
world, the place of their bannishme^t, do hear that there be wonderful,
strange, and invisible things: but because they are not acquainted with any
else but terrestrial creatures, which only be visible, they doubt whether there
be any such invisible things as are reported of, or no: for which cause the
creator him self of all things both visible and invisible, and the only
begotten son of the eternal father, came into this world, for the
redemption of mankind: and sent the holy Ghost unto our hearts, that quickened
by him and his grace, we should believe those things, which as yet by sense
or experience we can not possibly understand: and therefore so many of us as
have received this spirit, the heavenly pledge of our inheritance, make no
doubt of Gods invisible and immortal creatures: and who so ever as yet is not
settled in this belief, out of all question, he ought of reason to give credit
to the words of them, that be more learned and holy, and believe them that
through the grace of Gods holy spirit, have experience of those things that
be invisible: for he were a very foolish child, that thought his mother
lied, when she spoke of light in other places, because him self where he was,
beheld nothing else but the darckenes of the prison.

Peter. That you say does wonderfully content me: yet he who believes not that
there be any invisible things, out of question in mine opinion is an infidel:
and he that is an infidel, in that thing whereof he doubts seeks not for
faith, but for reason.


THAT AN INFIDEL LIVES not without faith.

CHAPTER II.
Gregory. I Speak boldlye yet truly, that an infidel lives not without
faith: for if I demand of him, who is his father or mother, straight-waies he
will tell me, such a man and such a woman: and if I press him further, whether
he does remember the time when he was first conceived, or the hour when he was
borne into this world, he will answer me, that he never knew or saw any such
thing: and yet for all this does he believe that which he never beheld, seeing
he believes without all doubt, that such a man was his father, and such a woman
his mother.


Peter. I must needs confess, that I never knew before this time, that an
infidel had any faith.


Gregory. Infidels have faith, but not in God, sor then they were not infidels:
but worthly are they by the former reason to be blamed, and thereby also to be
provoked to embrace true faith: for if concerning their visible body, they
believe that which they never saw, why do they not also believe some things,
which with their corporal eyes they can not behold.


THAT GOD CREATED THREE kinds of spirits with life.

CHAPTER III.
FOr that our soul does live after the death of the body, reason does teach
us, assisted and helped with faith: for almightye God created three kinds of
spirits having life. One altogether spiritual without body: an other with a
body, but yet which dies not with the body: the third that which is both
joined with the body and also together with the body does dye. The spirits
that have no bodies be the Angels: they that have bodies but die not with them,
be the souls of men: those that have bodies and by together with them, be the
souls of cattail and brute beasts. Man therefore as he is created in the
middle state, inferior to Angels and superior to beasts, so does he
participate of both: having immortality of soul with the Angels, and
mortality of body, with beasts, until the day of dome: for then the glory
of the resurrection, shall take away and consume the mortalitye of the body:
for being then reunited to the soul, it shall be preserved for ever: as the
soul joined to the body, is preserved for God. Neither shall the bodies of the
damned, lying in torments ever perfectly perish: for though they always
decay, yet for ever shall they continewe: and as they sinned both with soul
and body, so living always in body and soul, they shall always die without
end.

Peter. All your discourse is consonant to that reason, which Christian
religion teaches: but I beseech you, if there be so great difference betwixt
the souls of men and beasts as you affirm, why does Solomon speak in this
manner? I have said in mine heart of the sons Ecclesias. cap. 3.
of men, that God would prove them, and show them to be like unto beasts:
therefore here is one death of men and beasts, and their state is both alike:
and prosecutinge afterward more exactlye that opinion of his, thus he writes.
As a man dies, so do beasts dye: Al things breath alike, and man has
nothing more then beasts. After which words, he adds also this general
conclusion. Al things are subject to vanity, and all things go to one place:
of the earth they were made, and into the earth they return again.


OF SALOMONS QVESTION, to wit. The death of men and beasts is all one.

CHAPTER IIII.
Gregory. SAlomons book in which these sayings are found, is called
Ecclesiastes: as much to say properly as The preacher. And in a sermon, the
manner is to have an opinion set down, by means whereof the tumultuous
sedition of common people may be appeased: and whereas diverse have diverse
opinions, yet are they all by the Preachers arguments and reasons, brought to
unity and agreement: and therefore this book is called, The preacher: because
in it Solomon does as it were take upon him, the person and words of the
unruly vulgar sort, and by way of inquisition speaks those things, which
happily ignorant men thoroughe tentation do verily think: and therefore so many
questions, as he does by way of inquirye propounde: so many diverse persons
does he in a manner take upon him selfe^ but the true Preacher does as it were
with his hand, compounde all the^re doubts and disagrementes, and bring them
all to concord and unity of opinion, when as in the end of his book he
says. Let us all Eccles. cap. 12
together hear an end of speaking: Fear God, keep his commandementes, for
this is every man. For if in that book he had not by his discourse taken upon
him the person of diverse* why did he admonish all to make an end of speaking,
together with him, and to hear.

He therefore that in the conclusion of the book says. Let us altogether
hear: does give evident testimony of him self, that he took many persons
upon him, and that he spoke not all as of him self: and therefore some things
there be in that book, which are moved by way of disputation, and other some
which by reason give satisfaction: some things which he utters in the person
of one that is tempted, and who as yet follows the pleasures of the world:
and some other things, in which he disputes them according to the rule of
reason, and to draw the mind from vain pleasure and delighte: for as there
he says. This therefore seems unto me good, that a Eccles. 5.
man should eat and drink: and takeioye of his labor: so afterward he
adds. It is better to go unto the house of mourning, then to the house of
feasting. For if it be good to eat and drink, it seems better to go unto
the house of feasting, then to the house of mourning: and therefore by this it
is evident, that he uttered that former saying in the person of frail men, and
pronounced this latter, according to the rule of reason: and therefore does he
straighte-waies set down the grounds of his reason, and shows what
commodity is gotten by going to the house of mourning, saying thus: for in that
we are put in mind Eccles. 11.
of the end of all men: and the living man thincketh what he shall be. Again
there we find it written. O young man rejoice in thy youth: and yet a little
after is added: for youth and pleasure be vain things.

Seeing therefore he does afterward reprove that for vain, which before he
seemed to allow: plainly does he declare, that he spoke those words as it
were of carnal concupiscens, and the other of a right and true judgment.
Therefore as he does in the first place, express the delighte of carnal
things, and pronounces it to be good to cast away all care, and to eat and
drink: so afterward with reason and judgment does he reprou^ that, when he
says, that it is better to go unto the house of mourninge, then to the house
of feasting: and though he says that a young man ought to rejoice in his
youth: yet does he utter that, as proceeding from the resolution of a carnal
mind: seeing afterward by definitive sentence, he reproves both youth and
pleasure, as vain things. Even so and in like manner, does our Preacher set
down the opinion of man's suspicion, as it were in the person of those that be
weak, and subject to tentation, when he says. The death of man and beasts is
one, and their condition both a like: As man dies, so they also die: Al
things do breath alike, and a man has not any more then beasts: who
notwithstanding afterward, puts down his own opinion, proceeding from
judgment and reason in these words. What has a wise man more then Eccles. 6.
a fool, and what a poor man, but that he may go thither where life is? He
therefore that said: A man has no more then beasts: said also with mature
deliberation, that a wise man has not only more then a beast, but also more
then a foolish man, to wit that he goes to that place, where life is: in
which words he does also teach us, that man's life is not in this world,
seeing he affirms it to be else where: wherefore man has this more then
beasts, because they after death do not live: but he does then begin truly
to live, when by mortal death he makes an end of this transitorye life: and
therefore long after he says. What soever they hand can do, instantly
work: because with them in h^l whether thou go, there shall be neither
wor^ke, nor reason, nor knowledge, nor wisdom: how then is the death of man and
beasts all one, and how is their condition and state alike? or how has not
a man more then beasts, when as they after death live not, and the souls of
men after the death of there bodies, be for there wicked deeds carried to hell,
and do not dye, when they depart this life? But in both these sayings, which
seem contrary each to other, it is made manifest, that the Preacher speaks
the truth: uttering the one of carnal tentation, and yet afterward upon
deliberation and according to truth resolutely sets down and defines the
contrary.


Peter. Glad I am, that ignorant I was of that question, which I demanded:
seeing I have by means thereof, come to so exact an understanding of that,
which before I knew not. But I beseech you to take it patiently, if I also
like to this our Preacher, take upon me the person of weak and frail men:
that I may the better, as it were by their demanding of questions, be
profitable to them in their weakness and infirmities.


Gregory. Why should I not bear with you, condescending to the infirmities of
your neighbors? when as Paul says: 1. Corint. ^.
To al men I became al things, that I might By this we see, that men may in a
good so^ce be called Saviors, without any injury to our Savior Christ.
save al: and surely you are the more to be reverenced, for condescending to
their weakness upon charity, and therein do you imitate the steps of an
excellent preacher.


OF A QVESTION CONCERNING the soul, which goes inuisibly out of the body: to
wit, whether there be any such thing, seeing it can not be seen.

CHAPTER V.
Peter. IT chanced so, that I was present, when one departed this life. Who
suddainlye as he was a speakinge, gave up the ghost: and whom before I heard
talking with me, in an instant I saw dead: but whether his soul went out of
the body or no, that I did not see: and it seems very hard to believe that
thing, which no man can behold.


Gregory. What marvel is it Peter that you saw not the soul departing out
of the body, seeing you behold it not, when it remains in the body: what?
do you believe me to have no soul, because whiles you now talk with me, you
can not see it? The nature of the soul is invisible, and therefore inuisibly
does it depart out of the body, as it does inuisibly remain in the body.


Peter. That the soul has life, so long as it remains in the body, easily
do I perceive by the motion thereof: for if the body were destitute of the
soul, the members could not possibly move at all: but that the soul lives
when it is out of the body, by what motions or actions I should gather,
desirous I am to be informed by you: to the end that by such things as I do
see, I may know that thing which I can not see.


Gregory. Though not with any great ^ubtility of discourse, yet confidentlye
do I affirm it to be most true, that as the power of the soul, does quicken
and move the body: so the power of God, does fill all things which he has
created: and to some things does he give life, by breathing it into them: to
other things, he vouchsafes life in an other manner: and upon some other
things he bestows only a being, without any life at all. Seeing therefore you
doubt not, but that God is the creator and preserver of all things, that he
does fill and embrace all things, that he does excel all things, and also
mainetayneth them, that he is incircumscriptible, and invisible: so neither
ought you to doubt, but that he is served with invisible creatures, seeing they
that serve, ought to be somewhat like unto him, upon whom they attend, and so
consequently that we ought not to doubt, but for as much as he is invisible in
him self, that they also be of the same nature: and what creatures can these
be else but his holy Angels, and the souls of just men? wherefore as you know
when you see the body move, that the soul remains in the body, and you
gather this from the body which is lowest: so ought you to think of the
life of the soul that departs from the body, deducing a reason from God who
is the highest: to wit that the soul lives inuisibly, seeing it is to remain
in the service of the invisible creator.


Peter. All this is very well said: yet our mind can hardelye be brought to
believe that, which with our corporal eyes we can not behold.


Gregory. Seeing S. Paul says, that faith is the Hebr. 11.
substance of things to be hoped for, the argument of things not appearing:
truly are we said to believe that which can not be seen, and by no means to
believe that which with out eyes we do behold: yet in few words to bring you
home again to your self, I say, that no visible things be seen but by the
means of invisible: for although your bodily ey beholds all sensible
creatures, yet could it not behold any such thing, did it not receive force
from that which is invisible: for take away the soul, which none does see,
and in vain be the eyes opened, to look upon any thing. Take away the soul
from the body, and the eyes out of all question may remain still open as
before. If then our eyes did ^ee of them selves, how comes it to pass, that
now the soul is gone, they see nothing at all. Learn then by this, that
visible things them selves are not seen, but by means of them that be
invisible. Let us also imagine, that we saw before us, the building of houses,
huge timber and stones to be lifted up, great pillars to hang upon engines:
what I pray you effects all this? the visible body that with hands draws
and moves those huge and massy things, or the invisible soul that gives
life to the body? for take away that which is not seen in the body, and
straightwaies all those things which before did move, will temayne without any
motion at all. By which we may easily gather, that nothing can be disposed of
in this visible world, but by an other creature, which is invisible: for as
almightye God either by inspiration, or by replenishing those creatures which
have reason, does both quicken and move those things which be invisible, so in
like manner those things which be invisible, do give motion and sense to
carnal bodies which are visible.


Peter. Willingly overcome with these reasons alleged, I confess that I am
enforced almost to think, that these visible things are nothing: whereas
before, taking upon me the person of weak and unlearned men, I doubted whether
there were any invisible creatures or no: wherefore your whole discourse does
very well please me: yet as I am assured of the life of the soul by the motion
of the body, so desirous I am to know by some sure and certain
demonstrations, that the soul does also live, after it is departed from the
body.


THAT AS THE LIFE OF THE soul remaining in the body, is gathered by the
motion of the members: so the life of the soul, after death in holy men, is to
be found out by the virtue of miracles.

CHAPTER VI.
Gregory. HErein most ready I am to satisfye your request: and for proffe of
this point, no difficultye do I find: for think you that the holy Apostles
and martirs of Christ, would have contemned this present life, and offered
their bodies to death, had they not known that their souls did most
assuredly live for ever? You confess that you know the life of the soul
remayninge in the body by the motion thereof: behold then how these that lost
their lives for Christ, and believed that souls lived after death be renoumed
for their daily miracles: For sick persons come unto Pilgrinage to Saints
bodies.
their dead bodies, and be curied: perjured persons repair thither, and be
possessed with deuiles: possessed with deuiles visit them, and are delivered.
Lepers come, and be cleansed: dead folk are brought, and they be raised up
again. Consider then in what sort their souls do live in those places, where
they live, whose dead bodies live also in this world by so many miracles: if
then you gather the life of Miracles wroughe by relickes.
the soul remayninge in the body, by the motion of the members: why do you not
likewise by the dead bones which work miracles, infer that the soul does
live after the death of the body.


Peter. No solution as I think can overthrow the force of this reason
alleged: by which we are constrained through visible things, to believe
those, which we see not and be invisible.


OF THE DEPARTVRE OF menes souls.

CHAPTER VII.
Gregory. A Little before you complained, for that you could not see the soul
of one when it departed out of his body: but that was your fault, who desired
with corporal eyes to behold an invisible thing, for many of us that by
sincere faith and plentiful prayer, have had the eye of our soul purified,
have often seen souls going out of their bodies: and therefore now I think
it necessary to set down, both how, and in what sort, menes souls
departing out of their bodies have been seen: and also what wonderful
things have been revealed unto them, at the time of their departure: that by
this means, examples may satisfye our wavering and doubtful minds, which
reason can not so full ye persuade. Wherefore to begin. I remember that in the
second book of this work, I told you how venerable Bennet (as by relation
of his own monks I learned) being far distant from the city of Capua,
beheld the soul of Germanus (Bishop of the same place) at midnighte to be
carried to heaven in a fiery globe: who seeing the soul as it was ascending
up; beheld also in the largenes of his own soul, within the compass of
one sun beam, the whole world as it were gathered together.


OF THE DEPARTVRE OF the soul of Speciosus a monk.

CHAPTER VIII.
BY the relation also of the same monks his disciples, I understood how two
noble men that were brethren, and very well learned in humanity: the one called
Speciosus, the other Gregory, entered into religion, there to live virtuously
under the direction of his rule: whom the venerable father placed in a
Monastery of his, hard by the city of Teracina. These men whiles they remained
in the world, were very rich, but for the redemption of their own souls,
they Voluntarye pouertye.
had giuene all to the poor, and ledd their life in the same Monasterye. One
of these twain, to wit Speciosus being sent upon business of the Monasterye to
the Capua: his natural brother Gregory in the mean time sitting at table at
dinner amongst the other monks, rapt in spirit, beheld his brothers soul
though so far distant, departing out of his body: which forthwith he told
unto the other monks, and straighte after in all have took his iornye to
Capua, where he found his brother newlye buried: and there understood how he
died at that very hour, in which he saw his soul going out of his body.

OF THE SOVLE OF A certain Anchoret.

CHAPTER IX.
A Certain religious man, and one of great credit, (at such time as I lived in
the Monastery) told me that certain sailing from Sicilye to Rome, as they
were in the the midst of the sea, beheld the soul of a certain servant of
God carried to heaven, who had been an Anchoret in the Island of Samnium. Landing
afterward in the same place, Anchoretes.
and making enquiry of that thing, they understood that holy man to have
departed this life upon that very day, in which they saw his soul ascending to
heaven.

OF THE DEPARTVRE OF Abbot Hopes soul.

CHAPTER X.
VVHiles I lived as yet in my Monasterye, I understood by the relation of a
very reverent man, a certain thing which I will now tell you. A venerable
father there was, called Hope, who had built an Abbey in a place called Cample,
distant almost six miles from the old o^tye of Nursia. This man, almightye and
merciful God by temporal affliction, preserved from everlasting miserye: and
gave him great grace and quiet of mind: for how dearly he loved him, yea at
that very time when he sent him affliction, was afterward made apparent to the
world, when he vouchsafed perfectly to restore him to his former health. This
man therefore was for the space of forty years, punnished with such a
continual blindenes of his eyes, that he could not so much as behold any
light at all. But because none in aduersitye can without the help of Gods
grace stand: and unless the same merciful father, who sends punnishement,
gives also patience: straighte-waies his chastising of our sins, does by
impatience more increase them: and so it pitifully falls out, that our sin
is by that very thing made greater, by which an end of all sin might very
well have been expected. God therefore seeing our infirmitye, together with
affliction, by his sweet providence keeps and preserves us: and is in his
correction which he sends his chosen children in this world, so just with
mercy, that they may become such, to whom afterward he may justly show
mercy: and therefore though he did lay his cross of blindenes upon this
venerable man, yet did he not leave him destitute of inward light: for as his
body was weried with pain, so by the providence of Gods holy spirit, his
soul was refreshed with heavenly comfort.

At length when he had continewed forty years in this kind of blindenes, our
good Lord restored him, to his former sight, giuinge him also to understand,
that he was shortly to leave this world: and therefore admonished him to
preach the word of life unto all such Abbeies, as were about him: and that
for as much as him self had received the light of his body, he would go and
open unto them the spiritual light of the soul: who forthwith obeying Gods
commandment, visited the foresaid Albeies, and preached unto them such
precepts of good life, as him self before had in conversation practiced.
Returning after fiftene days to his own Abbeye, he called his monks
together, and in their presence received the Sacrament of the body and blood
of our Lord, and straighte-waies began together with them the mystical hymns
of the Psalms: afterward falling with attention to his prayers, whiles they
continued on their singing he gave up the ghost: at which very time all the
monks saw a dove coming out of his mouth, which in their sight flying
forth through the topp of the oratory being then opened, ascended up into
heaven. And surely it is to be thought, that his soul by divine providence,
did in that manner appear in the likeness of a dove, that almighty God might
thereby show, with what a true and simple heart that holy man had always
served him.

OF THE DEPARTVRE OF a Priests soul, called Vrsinus.

CHAPTER XI.
NEither must I forget that, which the reverent Abbot Steven, (who not long
since died in this city, and whom you kne we very well) told me to have
happened in the same Province of Nursia: For he said that a Priest dwelled in
that country, who in the fear of God, governed the Church committed to his
charge: and although after he had taken orders he did still love his old wife
as his enemy: and never would he permit her to come near him upon any
occasion: Priests after holy orders, bound to abstain from the carnal
company of their former wives.
abstayning wholly from all intercourse of familiarity. For this is a thing
proper to holy men, often times to deprive them selves of those things which
be lawful, to the end they may remain the more free from such as be unlawful:
and therefore this man not to fall into any sin, utterly refused al necessary
and requisite service at her hands.

When this reverent man, had long lived in this world, the fourtith year
after he was made Priest, by a great and vehement agewe was brought to the
last cast: his old wife beholding him so far spent, and to ly as though he
had been dead, putt her head near unto him, to see whether he did breath or
no: which he perceiving, having yet a little life left, enforced him self to
speak as well as he could, and in greatferuor of spirit, brake out into these
words. Get the away woman: a little fire is yet left, away with the straw:
after she was gone, his strength somewhat increasing, he began with greatioy
to cry out: welcome my Lords, welcome my Lords: why have you vouchsafed to
visit me your unworthy servant? I come, I come: I thancke you, I thancke you:
and when he did often repeat these and the like words, his friends that were
present, asked him to whom hespake, to whom with a kind of admiration he
answered: what? do you not here behold the holy Apostles? Do you not see the
chief of them S. Peter and S. Paul? and so turning him self again toward
them, he said. Behold I come, behold I come: and in speaking those words he
gave up his happy ghost. And that he did indede verily behold the holy
Apostles, he testified by that his departure with them. And thus it does often
fall out by the sweet providence of God, that good men at their death do
behold his Saints going before them, and leading as it were the way, to the
end they should not be affraide at the panges thereof: and that whiles their
souls do see the Saints in heaven, they may be discharged from the prison
of this body, without all fear and grief.

OF THE SOVLE OF PROBVS Bishop of the city of Reati.

CHAPTER XII.
COncerning which thing I must also tell you that, which the servant of God
Probus, (who now in this city lives in an Abbey) gave me to understand of an
uncle of his, called also Probus, who was Bishop of the city of Reati. For he
said, that being grievously sick, and in great extremity of death, his father
whose name was Maximus, caused many Physicians to be sent for, to see, whether
by their skill he could any ways be helped: who all upon the feeling of his
pulse, gave sentence of speedy death. When dinner time was come, and the day
some what far spent, the venerable Bishop more careful of their health, then
of his own, desired them that they would go up with his old father into the
higher part of his palace: and after their great pains, to refresh them
selves with a poor dinner. Whereupon all went up, and none remained with him,
but a little young boy, who as Probus says, is yet living. The little boy
standing by his beds side, suddenly saw certain men coming into the man
of God, apparrelled in white stoales, whose faces were far more bewtifull and
brighte, then the whitenes of their garments: whereat being amazed and
affraide, he began to cry out, and ask who they were: at which noise the
Bishop also loking up, beheld them coming in and knew them, and thereupon
comforted the little boy, bidding him not to cry, or be affraide, saying,
that they were the holy martirs S. Iuuenall and S. Eleutherius that came to
visit him: but he not acquainted with any such strange visions, ran out at the
doors as fast as he could, carrying news hereof both to his father and the
physicians: who going down in all have, found the Bishop departed: for those
Saints whose sight the child could not endure, had carried his soul away
in their company.

OF THE DEATH OF A Nun called Galla.

CHAPTER XIII.
NEither will I conceal that, which I received by the relation of those that
are grave, and of good credit. In the time of the Goths, an honorable young
maid called Galla, daughter to Simmachus the Consul, was bestowed in marriag:
whose husband before the year came about departed this life: and though both
plentye of wealth, and her young years were great allurementes to a second
marriag, yet she made choice rather to be married spiritually to God, in which
after mourninge everlasting joy does follow: then to become again subject to
carnal matrirnonye: which always begineth with joy, and in conclusion ends
with sorrow. But because she had a passing high color, the Physicians told
her, that unless Nuns may not marrye.
she did marrye again, that she would through abundance of heat contrary to
nature, have a bearde like unto men: which afterward fell so out indede: but
the holy woman little regarded outward deformitye, which in wardly in her
soul was inamored with the bewtye of the heavenly spouse: and feared not, if
that in her became foul, which she knew that her caelestial spouse did
nothing love. Wherefore straight upon the death of her husband, casting of her
secular Nuns wear no secular habit^
habit and attire, she rendered her self for the service of God to that
Nunnery, which is by the church of the blessed Apostle S. Peter: where she
lived for the space of many years in prayer and simplicitye of heart, and
bestowed alms plentifullye upon needy and poor people.

At length, when almightye God determined to bestow upon her an everlasting
reward, he sent her a canker in one of her breasts. Two candles she had
usually in the night time burninge before her bed: for loving light, she did
not only hate spiritual darckenes but also corporal. One night lying sore
afflicted with this her in firmitye, she saw S. Peter standing before her bed,
betwixt the two candlestickes, and being nothing affraide but glad: love giving
her courage, thus she ^pake unto him. How is it my Lord: what? are my sins
forgiven me? to whom (as he has a most gracious countenance) he bowed down a
little his head, and said. Thy sins are forgiven the, come and sollowe me:
but because there was an other Nun in the Monasterye which Galla loved more
then the rest, she straight-waies beseeched him, that sister Benedicta might
go with her: to whom he answered, that she could not then come, but an other
should: and as for her (quoth he) whom you now request, thirtye days hence
shall she follow you: and when he had thus said, he vanished out of her
sight. After whose departure, she straighte-wayes called for the mother of the
Convent, and told her what she had seen and heard: and the third day
following, both she and the other before mentioned, departed this life: and she
also whose company Galla desired, the thirtith day after d^d follow them. The
memory of which thing continues still fresh in that Monasterye, so that the
Nuns which now live there, (receiving it by tradition from their
predecessors) can tell every little point thereof, as though they had been
present at that time when the miracle happened.

OF THE DEPARTVRE OF A poor man, sick of the palsy, called Seruulus.

CHAPTER XIIII.
HEre also we have to know, that often times at the death of Gods servants,
heavenly music is heard, to the end that whiles they give willing ear to
that melodye, the soul may have no leisure to feel, when it departs from
the body. For I remember that in my Homelies Homelia 15.
upon the Gospel, I told how in that porche which is in the way to S.
Clements Church, there lay a certain man called Seruulus, whom I doubt not
but you also do remember: who as he was poor in wealth, so rich in merits.
This man had long Mer^^.
time been a^^cted with sickness: for from the first time that I knew him, to
the very last hour o^ his (...) never can I remember but that he was sick of
the palsy, and that so pitifully, that he could not stand, nor sit up i^ his
bed: neither was he ever able to putt his hand unto his mouth, or to turn
from one side to the other. His mother and brethren did serve and attend him,
and what he got in alms, that by their hands he bestowed upon other poor
people. Read he could not, yet did he buy the holy scriptures, which very
careful ye he caused such religious men as he entertained, to read unto him:
by means whereof according to his capacity, though as I said he knew not a
letter of the book yet did he fullye learn the holy scripture. Very careful
he was in his sickness always to give God thanckes, and day and night to
praise his holy name.

When the time was come, in which God determined to reward this his great
patience: the pain of his body struck inwardlye to his heart, which he
feeling, and knowing that his last hour was not far of, called for all such
strangers as lodged in his house, desiring them to sing hymns with him, for
his last far well and departure out of this life: and as he was him self
singing with them, all on a sudden he cried out a loud, and bad them be
silent saying: do ye not hear the great and wonderful music which is in
heaven? and so whiles he lay giving of care within him self to that divine
harmonye, his holy soul departed this mortal life: at which time all that
were there present, felt a most pleasant and fragrant smell whereby they
perceived how true it was that Seruulus said. A monk of mine, who yet lives
was then present, and with many tears uses to tell us, that the sweetness of
that smell never went away, but that they felt it continually until the time
of his burial.

OF THE DEPARTVRE OF a Nun called Romula.

CHAPTER XV.
IN the same Homilyes I remember likewise how I told a certain thing, which
Speciosus my fellow Priest does also verify to be most true. At such time as I
entered into religion, there dwelt in this city near to the church of our
blessed Lady, a certain old woman called. Redempta, living in the habit of a
Nun, Habit of Nun.
a disciple of that Hirundina, which was famous for virtue, and lead an
eremiticall life (as they say) in the mouutaines, Eremites, and oremitical
life.
by the city of Preneste. This foresaid Redempta had two scollers which ware
the same habit that she did: the one called Romula; and the name of the other
which yet lives I can nortel, though by sight I know her very well.
These three together in one little house lived a poor life, yet rich for
pietye and virtue: and of these tvvaine Romula far excelled the other in meritt
of life: for she was a woman of maruailous patience, passing obedient, a
great obseruer of silence, and one that with great zeal bestovved her time
in continual prayer.

But because it often falls out, that they whom the world think to be
perfect, have yet in the eyes of almighty God some imperfection (as many times
unskillful men do commend seals of arms, as excellently well engraven,
which yet the cunninge vvorckeman does better consider, and labors to make
more perfect) this foresaid Romula fell into such a pitiful palsye, that she
was feign to keep her bed: where she lay, deprived almost of all the use of
her members: which great cross notwithstanding, drew her not to any
impatience, but rather the sickness of her body, was the health of her soul,
and the cause of her greater increase in virtue: for the less she could do in
other things, the more she did in prayer and devotion. Upon a certain night
she called for Redempta (who as I said brought them both up as her daughters)
saying. Come mother, come mother: who straighte-waies with her other disciple
rose up, and (as my self and many more have heard it from their own mouths)
when they were about midnighte by her beds side, suddainlye there came a
light from heaven, which filled all that cell: and such a brightenes there
appeared, that it put them both into a vvonderfull fear, and as them selves
did afterward report, all their body became cold, in such sort, that
there they stood amazed: for they heard a noise as it were of many that came
in, and the cell door shaken and thrust open, as though there had been a
great press of people: and as they said, they heard a great company come
in, yet they saw no body, and that by reason of great fear, and much light:
for both fear did make them to hold their eyes downe-warde, and the
brightenes of such plentye of light did so dazell them, that they could not
behold any thing.

Straighte after that light, followed a wonderful pleasant smell, which did
greatly comfort their fearful hearts. Romula perceiving that they could
not endure that abundance of light, with sweet words comforted Redempta,
that stood trembling by her beds side saying: Be not affearde mother; for I
shall not die at this time: and when she had often repeated those words, by
little and little the light vanished away, but yet the sweet smell remained
still, and so continued both the next and the third day after. Upon the fourth
night, again she called for that her mother, and when she was come, she
desired to receive the Sacrament, and so she did: and behold before Redempta
or her other disciple departed from her beds side, suddainlye they heard two
quires singing before the door without: and as they said, they perceived by
their voices that the one was of men, that began the psalms, and the other of
women that answered: and whiles these heavenly funerals were in celebratinge
before the cell door, that holy soul departed this life, and was carried in
that manner up into heaven: and the higher those two quires did ascend, the
less did they hear that celestial music, until at length they heard no
more: and beside that sweet and odoriferous smell which before they felt
vanished quite away.

OF THE DEPARTVRE OF the holy Virgin Tarsilla.

CHAPTER XVI.
Sometime also for the comfort of the soul that departs, there appears
unto it, the author him self of life, and rewarder of all virtue: for proffe
whereof I will here report that, which I remember also to have spoken of in
mine Homelies, concerning mine aunt Tarsilla: who in the company of two others
of her sisters, had for continuance in prayer, grauitye of life, singularity in
abstinence, arrived to the topp of perfection. To this woman, Felix my great
grandfather sometime Bishop of this sea of Rome, appeared in vision, and
showed her the habitation of everlasting light, speaking thus: Come with me,
and I will entertain you in this dwelling place of light. Shortly after,
taken with an agew she was brought to the last cast: and as when noble men and
women ly a dyinge, many do visit them for the comfort of their friends: so
diverse both men and women, at the time of her departure were come, which stood
round about her bed: at what time she suddainlye casting her eyes upward,
beheld our Savior coming: whereupon looking earnestly upon him, she cried
out to them that were present. Away, away: my Savior Jesus is come, and so
fixinge her eyes upon him, whom she beheld, her holy soul departed this life:
and such a wonderful fragrant smell ensued, that the sweetness thereof gave
evident testimony, that the author of all sweetness was there present.
Afterward, when her dead body according to the manner, was made ready to be
washed, they found that with long custom of prayer, the skin of her arms
and knees, was like a camels become hard: and so her dead body gave
sufficient testimonye, what her living spirit had continually practiced.

OF THE DEPARTVRE OF a young maid called Musa.

CHAPTER XVII.
NEither must that be forgotten, which the servant of God before mentioned,
called Probus, used to tell of a little sister which he had called Musa: for
he said that one night our blessed Lady appeared unto her in vision, showing
her sundry young maids of her own years doathed all in white, whose
company she much desiring, but yet not presuminge to go amongst them, the
Blessed Virgin asked her, whether she had any ^ninde to remain with them, and
to live in her service: to whom she ansvvered that willingly she would. Then
our blessed Lady gave her in charge, not to behave her self lightely, nor ^o
live any more like a girl, to abstain also from laughinge and pastime,
telling her that after thirty days she should amongst those virgins which she
then saw, be admitted to her service.

After this vision the young maid forsook all her former behauior: and with
great grauitye, reformed the leuitye of her childish years: which thing her
parents porceiuing, and demanding from whence that change proceeded, she told
them what the blessed mother of God had given her in commandment, and upon
what day the was to go unto her service. Five and twenty days after she fell
sick of an agewe: and upon the thirtith day, when the hour of her departure
was come, she beheld our blessed Lady, accompanied with those Virgins which
before in vision she savve to come unto her, and being called to come away,
she ansvvered with her eyes. modestlye cast do vvnevvarde, and very
distinctlye spoke in this manner: Behold blessed Lady I come, behold blessed
Lady I come: in speaking of which words she gave up the ghost, and her soul
departed her virgins body, to dvvell for ever with the holy virgins in heaven.

Peter. Seeing mankind is subject to many and innumerable vices, I think that
the greatest part of heaven is replenished with little children and infantes.


HOW CERTAIN YOUNG CHILdren are hindered from heaven by their parents wicked
education: as is showed by the example of a blasphemous young boy.

CHAPTER XVIII.
Although we ought not to doubt but believe that all infantes which be
baptized, and dye in their infancye go to heaven: yet no point of our
belief it is, that all little ones which can speak, do come unto that holy
place: because some little children, are kept from heaven by their parents,
which bring them up wickedly, and in lewd life. For a certain man in this
city well known to all, some three years since had a child as I thinck five
years old, which upon too much carnal affection he brought up very carelessly:
in such sort that the little one (a lamentable case to speak of) so sone as
any thing went contrary to his ^^inde, straighte-waies used to blasphe^^e the
name of God.

This child in that great mortality which happened three years since fell
sick, and came to the point of death: and his father holding him at that time
in his arms, the child (as they say, which were then present) beheld with
trembling eyes, certain wicked spirits coming toward him: at which sight
he began to cry out in this manner. Keep them away, father, keep them away:
and crying so out, he turned a way his face, and would have hidd him self in
his fathers bosom: who demaundinge why he was so affraide, and what he savve.
O father (quoth he) there be black a mores come to carry me away: after which
words straighte-waies he blasphemed God, and so gave up the ghost. For to the
end, God might make it known to the world, for what sin he was delivered
to such terrible executioners, he permitted him at his very death to iterat
that sin, for which his father whiles he lived would not correct him: so that
he which through Gods patience had long lived a blasphemer, did at length by
his just judgment, blaspheminge end his life, that the father might both
know his own sin, and also how by neglectinge the soul of his little
son, he nourished and brought up not a little sinner for hell fire. But now
to surcease from further speech of this sadd and melancholy matter: let us
prosecute as we have begun our former joyful narration.

OF THE DEPARTVRE OF the man of God called Steuene.

CHAPTER XIX.
BY the relation of the same Probus, and other religious men, I came to the
knowledge of such things, as in my Homelies I told to mine aucitors,
concerning the venerable father Steven. For he was a man as Probus and many
more affirm, who had no wealth in this world, nor cared for any, loving only
poverty for Gods sake: in adversity always did he keep patience: secular men's
company did he avoid: and his desire was, always to pray and serve God: of
whom I will here report one excellent virtuous act, that by one, many other
which he likewise did, each man may ponder with him self. This man therefore
having upon a time carried his corn which he reaped with his own hands, into
the barn, being the only substance upon which he and his disciples were to
live all the year: a certain wicked wretch pricked forward by the devil,
set it all on fire: which an other perceiving, ran in all have and told it to
the servant of God: and after he had done his message, he added these words
saying. Alas and woe father Steven, what in ill chance has befallen you. To
whom straight-waies with a pleasant countenance and quiet mind he answered,
nay what an ill chance and misery is befallen him that has done this: for to
me what has happened? By which words of his it appears, to what great
perfection he was arrived, that took so quietlye the loss of all his worldly
wealth, and was more sorye for the others sin, then grieved for his own
loss: and more thought what his neighbor had inwardly lost in his soul,
then what him self had outwardly lost in his substance. When this man lay a
dying, many came to visit him, and to commend their souls to his, that was
now leaving this world: and standing about his bed, some of them beheld
Angels coming in, but yet were not able to tell it unto others then present:
others there were, that saw nothing, but yet such a great fear fell upon them
all, that none could endure to remain in that place, when his soul departed
the body: and therefore all of them terrified and wholly possessed with fear
fled away: by which they perceived of what power he was, that received his
soul going out of this world: seeing at that time no mortal creature could
endure to be there present.

HOW SOMETIME THE MERIT of the soul is uot so truly declared at the time of
the departure, as afterward.

CHAPTER XX.
But here we have to understand, Merit.
that sometime the merit of the soul, is not so truly known at the time of
the departure, as it is afterward: and therefore diverse holy martirs have
suffered many great torments at the hands of insidels: who afterward at
their dead bones, were famous for signs Miracles wrought by the relickes of
martirs.
and miracles as before has been noted.

OF THE TWO MONKS of Abbot Valentinus.

CHAPTER XXI.
For the virtuous man Valentinus, who afterward as you know was in this city
Abbot of my Mona terye, having had before in the prou^nce of Valeria the
government of an other Abbey: into which as he told me the cruel Lombardes
entered in, and hunge up two of his monks upon a tree, who in that manner ended
their life. When evening was come, both their souls began in that place to
singe so plainly and distinctlye, that they also who had killed them, hearing
that kind of music, became wonderfullye affraide. All the prisoners likewise
that were there present heard it, and afterward witnessed the same: which
strange melodye, Gods providence would have known, to the end that mortal
men living yet upon earth might thereby learn, how that if theye serve him
truly in this world, that they shall after death verily live with him in the
world to come.

OF THE DEPARTVRE OF Abbot Suranus.

CHAPTER XXII.
AT such time as I yet lived in the Monasterye, I understood by the relation of
certain religious men, that in the time of the Lombardes, in this very
Province called Sura and not far of, there was an holy Abbot called Suranus,
who bestowed upon certain prisoners which had escaped there hands, all such
things as he had in his Monasterye: and when he had given away in asmes all
his own apparel, and whatsoever he could find either in the monks
celles, or in the yardes, and nothing was left: suddainlye the Lombardes came
thither, took him prisoner, and demanded where his gold was: and when he
told them, that he had nothing, they carried him to an hill hard by, where
there was a mighty great vvode in which a certain prisoner that ran away
from them had hidd him self in an hollovve tree. There one of the Lombardes
dravvinge out his svvorde slevve the foresaid venerable Abbot, whose body as
it fell to the ground, suddenly all the hill together with the wood did shake,
as though the earth by that tremblinge had said, that it could not bear the
waighte of his holiness and virtue.

OF THE DEPARTVRE OF a Deacon, belonging to the church of the Marsori.

CHAPTER XXIII.
AN other Deacon also there was in the Province of the Marsori, a man of holy
life, whom the Lombardes had taken, and one with his sword had cut of his
head. But as his body fell to the ground, he that slew him was possessed by
a devil, and so he fell down at the holy man's feet, showing thereby that he
was delivered to the enemy of God, because he had so cruellye slain the
friend of God.

Peter. What is the reason I beseech you, that almightye God suffers them to
be put to death: whom afterward he does make known to the world, that they
were holy men, and his dear servants.


OF THE DEATH OF THE man of God, that was sent to Bethel.

CHAPTER XXIIII.
Gregory. Saying we find it writter, that what death so ever the just man
dies, that his justice shall not be taken from him: what hurt comes to Gods
elect seruates, (vvalking no question the way to everlasting life) if for a
little while, they have some pitiful end: and perhaps it proceeds from some
small sin of theires, which by such kind of death Gods pleasure is that it
should be purged. And here of it comes, that reprobates receive superioritye
and power over others, who at their death, be so much the more punnished, for
that they used their cruel authority against Gods servants: as the
foresaid wicked and wretched man, whom God suffered not to triumph over that
venerable Deacon, though he permitted him to kill his body: which thing to
be true we learn also out of holy scriptures. For that man of God which was
sent against Samaria, because contrary to 3. Reg. 19.
Gods commandment he did eat in in his iorny, was slain by a lion: and yet
in the same place we read, that the lion stood by the man's ass, and did not
touch his dead body. By which we perceive, that his sin of disobedience,
was by that his death pardoned: because the same lion that feared not to kill
him, presumed not yet to touch his dead carcass: for license he had for the
one, but no leave was granted for the other, because he that was culpable in
his life, having his sin of disobedience now punnished, was just by his
death: and therefore the lion that before slew the body of a sinner, preserved
afterward the corpse of a just man.


Peter. Your discourse pleases me very well: yet willing I am to know,
whether before the resurrection, the souls of just men do enter into the
kingdom of heaven:


WHETHER THE SOVLES OF just men be received into heaven, before the general
resurrection of our bodies.

CHAPTER XXV.
Gregory. THis thing speaking generallye Al just men go not straighte to heaven
of all just men, can neither be affirmed nor denied: for the souls of some
just men, remayninge as yet in certain mansions, be differ^ed from heaven: by
which stay of theirs, what else do we learn, but that they lacked somewhat of
perfect justice. And yet is it more clear then day that the souls of them
that be perfect, do straighte after death possess the joys of heaven: the
truth where of Christ him self assures us when he says: Wheresoever the
body shall be, thither will the Luc. 17.
eagles be gathered together: for where our Savior is present in body,
thither without all question do the souls o:^ just men assemble them selves:
and S. Paul says: I desire to be dissolved and to ^ Philip. 1.
with Christ. He therefore tha^ doubts not Christ to be in heaven, how can he
doubt that S. Paul's soul is in the same place: which Apostle speaks also of
the dissolution of his body, and his dwelling in heaven in these words. We
know that if our terestrial house of 2 Corint. 5.
this habitation be dissolved, that we have a buildinge of God; and house not
made with hands, but everlasting in heaven.


Peter. If just men's souls be already in heaven; what then shall they receive
for a reward of their virtuous and just life at the day of judgment?


Gregory. Whereas now their souls be only in heaven, at the day of
judgment, this further increase of joy shall they have, that their bodies,
also, shall be partakers of eternal bliss, and they shall in their flesh
receive joy: in which for Christ's sake, they suffered grief and to^mentes. In
respect of this there douole glory, the scripture says. In their land, they
shall possess double Esaias. 61.
things: and it is written of the souls of the just, that before the day of
resurrection. To every one of them white stoales Apocalip. 6.
were given: and it was said to them: that they should rest yet a little time,
until the number of their fellow-seruantes and brethren were complete. They
therefore that now receive but one stoale, in the day of judgment shall every
one have two: because now they rejoice only for the felicitye of their
souls, but then shall they enjoy the endless glory of body and soul
together.


Peter. I grant it to be as you say but what I beseech you, is the reason
that ostentymes those which ly a dyinge, do prophecye and tell of many things
to come.


BY VV HAT MEANS IT FALLS out, that those which ly a dying, do prophecye of
things to come: and of the death of a certain aduocat: os that also which was
revealed to the monks Gerontius and Mellitus: of the death of a boy called
Armentarius, and of the diuersitye of tongues.

CHAPTER XXVI.
Gregory. Sometime the soul it self by reason of the spiritual nature which
it has, does foresee some thing which will so fall out: and sometime souls
before their departure, come to the knowledge of future things by revelation:
sometime also when they are straight-waies to leave the body, by heavenly
inspiration they penetrate with their spiritual eyes, the secrets of heaven.
For that the soul by reason of the spiritual nature which it has, does know
things to come, certain it is, by that which happened to a certain advocate
in this city, who died two days ago of a pain in his side. For a little
before his death, he called for his boy, to give him his apparel, that he
might rise up and walk: who supposinge him not to know what he said refused
to do what he willed him. Where upon herose up, put on his clothes, and said
that he would go to the church of S. Sixtus, which is in the way called
Appia: and when not long after, his sickness increasing lie departed this life,
determined it was, that his bod^e should be buried in the church of S.
Ianuarius the martyr, which stands upon the way called Prenestina. But
because they which had the care of his burial thought i^ too far of,
suddainlye they resolved upon a new course: and so going forth with his corpse
by the way called Appia, not knowinge what he had said, they buried him in
that church, which before he mentioned: and seeing it is well known, that he
was a man given to the world, and one that sought after earthly gain, how
could he know that which fell out, but that the force and spiritual nature of
his soul, did foresee what should become of his body?

That those also which lie a dyinge, do oftentimes by divine revelation
foretell what shall happen afterward, we may learn by such things as have
fallen out amongst us in diverse Abbeyes. For ten years since, there was a
monk in my Monasterye, called Gerontius, who lying sore sick, saw by vision
in the night time, certain white men bewtifully apparrelled to descend from
above into the Monasterye, and standing by his beds side, one of them said.
The cause of our coming hither is, to choose out certain of Gregory's monks
to send them abroad unto the wars: and forthwith he commanded an other to
write in a bill the names of Marcellus, Valentinian, Agnellus, and diverse
others, whose names I have now forgotten: that being done he said further.
Putt down also the name of him that now beholds us. By which vision he
being assured of that which would come to pass, the next morning he told the
monks, who they were that should shortly die out of the Monasterye, adding also
that him self was to follow them. The next day the foresaid monks fell more
dangerously sick, and so died all in that very order, which they were named
in the bill. Last of all him self also departed this life, who hade foretold
the departure of thee other monks before him.

Likewise in that mortalitye which three years since lamentablye afflicted this
town, there was in the Monasterye of the city of Portua, a young monk called
Mellitus, a man of wonderful simplicitye and humilitye, whose last day being
come, he fell desperatlye sick of the common disease: which when venerable
Felix Bishop of the same place understood, (by whose relation my self have
learned this storye) very careful he was to visit him, and with sweet words
to comfort him against death: adding not-withstandinge, that by Gods grace he
might live long in this world. To whom the sick man answered, that his time
was at hand, saying that there came unto him a young man with letters, willing
him to open and read them: which when he had done, he said that he found
both his own name, and all the rest of them which the Easter before had been
baptized by that Bishop, written in letters of gold: and first of all he said
that he found his own name, and afterward the rest of them that were
christened at that time: by which he made no doubt but that both him self and
the rest, should shortly depart this life, and so it fell out, for he died
that very day: and after him followed all those which had before benebaptised,
so that within the space of a few days, no one of them was left alive. Of
whom no question can be made, but that the reason why the foresaid servant of
God saw them written in gold was, because their names were written in heaven
in the ever lasting sight of God.

And as these men by divine revelation, knew and foretold such things as
were to come: so sometimes souls before their departure, not in a dream but
waking, may have some taste of heavenly mysteries. For you were well acquainted
with Ammonius a monk of my Monasterye, who whiles he lived in a secular vveede
and was Secular weede^.
married to the daughter of Valerianus a lawyer in this city, continuallye
and with all diligence he follovved his business: by reason whereof, he knevve
whatsoever was done in his father in laws house: This man told me, how in
that great mortalitye which happened in this city, in the time of that noble
man Narsus, there was a boy in the house of the foresaid Valerianus, called
Armentarius, who was very simple and passing humble: when therefore that
mortal disease entered that lawyers house, the foresaid boy fell sick
thereof, and was brought to the point of death: who suddenly falling into a
trance, and afterward coming to him self again, caused his master to be
sent for, to whom he told that he had been in heaven, and did know who they
were that should die out of his house. Such and such (quoth he) shall dye, but
as for your self fear nothing, for at this time die you shall not. And that
you may be assured that I have verily been in heaven, behold I have there
received the gift to speak with all tongues: you know well enough that
ignorant I am of the greek tongue, and yet will I speak greek, that you may
see whether it be true that I say or no. Then his master spoke greek, and he
so answered him in that tongue, that all which were present did much marvel.
In the same house there was a Vulga^, servant to the foresaid Narsus, who in
all have being brought to the sick person spoke unto him in the Vulgarian
tongue: and the boy that was borne and brought up in Italye, answered him so
in that barbarous language, as though he had been borne and bredd in that
country. All that heard him thus talking wondered much, and by experience of
two tongues which they knew very well that before he knew not, they made no
doubt of the rest, though they could make no trial thereof. After this he
lived two days, and upon the third by what secret judgment of God none can
tell, he tare and rent with his teth his own hands and arms, and so
departed this life. When he was dead, all those whom before he mentioned did
quicklye follow after: and besides them, none in that house died at that time.


Peter. A very terrible thing it is, that he which merited so great a grace,
should be punnished with so pitiful a death.


Gregory. Who is able to enter into the secret judgments of God? Wherefore
those things which in divine examination we can not comprehend, we ought
rather to fear, then curiouslye to discuss.


OF THE DEATH OF THE Earl Theophanius.

CHAPTER XXVII.
ANd to prosecute what we have already begun, concerning the prophetical
knowledge of those that dye, I will now tell you that which when I was in the
city of Centumcellis I understood by the relation of many, touching
Theophanius Earl of that place. For he was a man of great mercy and
compassion, and one that did many good worckes, but especially he was given
to good housekeeping and hospitalitye. True it is that following the affairs
of his Earldom, he spent much time about earthly and worldly business, but that
rather of necessitye and duty, then according to his own mind and desire, as
his virtuous end afterward declared. For when the time of his death was come,
there arose a great tempest, which was likelye to hinder the funeralles: where
at his wife pitifullye weeping asked him in this manner: what shall I do? or
how shall we carye you to be buried seeing the tempest is so terrible, that none
can stir out of doors? To whom he answered thus: weep not good wife, for so
sone as I am dead you shall have fair wether: and when he had so said, he
gave up the ghost: and straighte-waies the aier became clear, and the tempest
ceased: after this miracle one or two more follovved. For whereas his hands
and feet, were with the gout before svvolne and festered; and by reason of
much corrupt matter, did savor and smell: yet when he was dead, and his body
after the manner came to be vvashed, they found his hands and feet so sound
and whole, as though they had never been trobled with any such sores at all.
Four days after his burial, his wife was desirous to have the marble stone
that lay upon him changed: which being done, such a fragrant and pleasant
smell came from his body, as though in stead of worms, spices had sprunge
out of that corrupt carcass: of which strange thing when I did in my Homelies
make public mention, and certain incredulous persons doubted thereof: upon a
day as I was sitting in the company of diverse noble men, those very workmen
which had changed the tomb stone, came unto me about business of their own:
whom in the presence of the clergy, nobilitve, and common people I examined,
touching that miracle: and they all affirmed it to be most true, saying that
they were in a strange manner replenished with that sweet smell: and they added
also certain other things concerning his sepulcher, that made the miracle
greater, which not to be over long I mean to pass over with silence.

Peter. I perceive now that my former question is sufficientlye satisfied: yet
an other remains which troubles my mind, and that is, saying you affirmed
before, that holy men's souls which depart this life be now in heaven: it
follows consequentlye, that the souls of the wicked be also in hell: and yet
ignorant I am whether it be so or no, for man's ymagination can not conceive,
how the souls of sinners can be tormented before the day of judgment.


THAT AS WE BELEVE THE SOVles of just and perfect men to be in heaven so we
ought also to believe, that the souls of the wicked, after their departure
from the body be in hell.

CHAPTER XXVIII.
Gregory. IF by the testimonye of holy scripture, you believe that the souls
of holy and perfect men be in heaven: by the same reason ought you also to
believe, that the souls of the wicked be in hell: for as just men do rejoice
and be glad at the retribution of eternal justice, so necessary it is that the
wicked at the same justice should be grieved, and tormented^ for as heavenly
felicitye does glad the elect, so we ought to believe that from the day of
their departure, fire does afflict and burn the reprobat.


Peter. With what reason can we believe, that corporal fire can hold and
torment an incorporall thing.


THE REASON WHY WE ought to believe, that corporal fire can hold and torment
the spirits that be without bodies.

CHAPTER XXIX.
Gregory. IF a spirit without a body, can be holden and kept in the body of a
living man: why like wise after death may not an incorporal spirit, be
holden and kept in corporal fire?


Peter. The reason why an incorporal spirit in every living man is kept in
the body, is, because it does quicken and give life to the body.


Gregory. If an incorporall spirit Peter may be kept in that, to which it
gives life: why also for punnishement may it not be kept there, where it
continually dies? And we say that a spirit is holden by fire, to the end that
in the torment thereof, it may both by seeing and feeling be punnished: for
the soul by seeing of the fire is afflicted, and burned it is, in that it
sees it self to be burned: and so it falls out, that a corporal thing may
burn that which has no body, whiles that an invisible burninge and sorrow
is drawn from visible fire, and the incorporall soul by means of corporal
fire may be tormented with a spiritual and incorporall flame: although out of
the Gospel we also learn that the soul is not only tormented by seeing the
fire, but also by the feeling thereof: for the rich glutton as our Savior
says was buried in hell. And he gives us to understand, that his soul was
kept in fire, in that he tells us how he did beseech Abraham, speaking to him
in this manner. Send Lazarus Luc. 16.
that he may dipp the topp of his finger into the water, and may refrethe my
tongue: because I am tormented in this flame. Seeing then, truth it self
assures us, that the sinful rich man was condemned into fire, what wise man
can deny that the souls of the reprobat be detained in fire.


Peter. Both reason and testimonye of scripture draws my mind to believe what
your say: but yet when I think not of them, it returns again to his former
opinion: for I neither see nor can perceive, how a corporal thing can hold
and torment that, which is incorporall and without body.


Gregory. Tell me I pray you, whether do you think that those Angels which
fell from heaven, have bodies or no?


Peter. What man that has his wits, will say that they have any bodies.


Gregory. And whether do you think that the fire of hell is corporal or
spiritual.


Peter. I make no doubt but that it is corporal, saying most certain it is,
that bodies be burned therewith.


Gregory. And as certain it is, that at the day of judgment, our Savior
shall say to the reprobate: Go into everlasting Math. 25.
fire, which is prepared for the devil and his angels. If then the devil and
his angels, though without bodies shall be tormented with corporal fire, what
maruail is it, that the souls after their departure, and before they be
united again to their bodies, may in like manner suffer corporal torments?


Peter. The reason you give is very plain, and therefore now there is not any
further doubt touching this question, that does troublemy mind.


OF THE DEATH OF KING Theodoricus who was an Arrian heretic.

CHAPTER XXX.
Gregory. Seeing with such difficulty you are brought to believe: I think it
worth my labor, to let you understand such things concerning this very point,
as I have received from them that be of good credit. Julian who died almost
seven years since, and had a worshipful office in this church of Rome, in
which now by Gods prouicence I serve, used often to visit me (living as yet in
my Monastery) and to talk with me of spiritual things for the good of both
out souls. This man upon a day told me this storye. In the time of king
Theodoricus (quoth he) my wives father being the^ in Sicilye was to return
into Italy. The shipp in which he came, arrived at the Island of Liparis: where
he understood Solitary men and Anchoretes.
that there dwelt a certain solitary man of great virtue, whom he thought
good, whiles the mariners were occupied about mendinge of their shipp and
tacklinge to visit, to talk with him, and to commend him self to his
prayers: and so he did in the company of others. When they were come to the man
of God, amongst other talk which they had, he asked them this question. Do
you (quoth he) hear that king Theodoricus is dead? to whom they quickly
answered: God forbidd, we left him alive at our departure from Rome: and
before this present we never heard of any such thing. Then the servant of
God told them, that certainly he was dead: for yesterdaye (quoth he) at nine
of the clock he was without shoes and girdle, and his hands fast bound,
brought betwixt Iohne the Pope, and Symmachus the Senator: and thrown into A
rupture of the earth, that casts forth fire.
Vulcanes gulf, which is not far from this place. When they heard this
nevves, carefullye they wrote down the time, and at their return into
Italy, they understood that king Theodoricus died upon that very day, in
which his unhappy passage out of this world and punnishement, was revealed
to the servant of God. And for as much as he had by miserable inprisonment been
the death of Pope Iohne, and also killed Symnachus: iustlye did he appear to
be thrown of them into fire, whom before in this life he had unjustly
condemned.


OF THE DEATH OF Reparatus.

CHAPTER XXXI.
AT the same time, when I first desired to lead a solitary life: a certain
old man called Deusdedit, passing well beloved of the whole city, and one also
that was my friend and familiar acquaintance, told me that in the time of the
Goths, a certain worshipful man called Repararus came to dye: who lying a
long while with his countenance changed, and his body stiff: many thought in
very deed that he had been deade^: and when diverse of his friends and
familye wept for his departure, all on a sudden he came to him felfe, to the
great admiration of his mourning house-holde. Being returned thus to life, he
bad them in all have to send a boy to the church of S. Laurence in Damafo (so
called of him that built it) and quicklye to bring word what was become of
Tiburtius the Prlest. This Tiburtius as the speech went, was much given to a
dissolute and wanton life: and Florentius who at that time was a Priest in the
same church, remembers full well his conversation and manner of life. When the
messenger was gone, Reparatus that was returned to life, told them that in the
place where he was, he saw a great woode-pile made ready, and Tiburtius
brought forth and laid upon it, and there to have been burnt with fire. Then
an other fire (quoth he) was prepared, which was so high, that it reached from
earth to heaven, but although they demanded for whom it was, yet did he not
tell them: for when he had spoken these words straight-waies he died: and the
boy which was sent to see what was became of Tiburtius, returned with
news, that he found him a little before his coming departed this life. By
which we may learn, that seeing this Reparatus was carried to the places of
torments to see them, returned after ward to life to tell what he had there
beheld, and straighte after left this world: that he savve not all these
things for him self, but for us that yet live, and have time granted to
amend our wicked lives. And the reason why Reparatus savve that great
vvoode-pile burning, was not that we should think that the fire of hell is
nourished with any wood: but because he was to make relation of these things
to them, that remained still in this world, he savve that fire prepared for
the wicked, to be made of the same matter of which our fire is, to the end,
that by those things which we know, and be acquainted with: we should
learn to be affraide of those, which yet we have not seen nor have any
experience.

OF THE DEATH, OF A COVRtier: whose grave burned with fire.

CHAPTER XXXII.
MAximianus Bishop of Siracusis, a man of holy life, who for a long time in
this city had the government of my Monasterye, often told me a terrible
storye, which fell out in the Province of Valeria. A certain courtier upon
Easter even was Godfather to a young maid, who after the fast was ended
returned home to his house: where drinckinge more wine then enough, he desired
that his God daughter might tarry with him: whom that night which is horrible
to speak of, he did utterly undo. In the morning up he rose, and with
guilty conscience, thought good to go unto the bathe, as though the water of
that place could have washed away the filthiness of his sin, yet he went and
washed him self. Then he began to doubt whether it were best to go unto the
church or no: fearing on the one side what men would say, if he went not upon
that so great a festiual day: and on the other if he did go, he trembled to
think of Gods judgment. In conclusion shame of the world overcame him, and
therefore to the church he went: where yet he remained with great fear and
horror, loking every instant that he should have been delivered to the deuile,
and tormented before all the people. At that solemn mass Solemn. mass.
though he did wonderfully shake for fear, yet he escaped free from all
punishment: and so he departed very joyfully from church: and the next day
after, came thither without any fear at all: and so merrily and securely he
continewed for six days together, thincking with him self, that either God
savve not that his abominable sin, or else that mercifully he had pardoned
the same. Upon the seventh day, by sudden death he was taken out of this
world. And being buried, for a long time after in the sight of the whole to
wne a flame of fire came out of his grave, which burnt his bones so long,
until it consumed the very grave it self, in such sor^e that the earth which
was raised up with a little bancke, appeared lower then the rest of the
ground. By which fact almightye God declared, what his soul suffered in the
other world, whose dead body flaminge fire consumed in this. To us also he
has left a fearful example, that we may there-by learn, what the living
and sensible soul suffers for sin committed, when as the sensible bones by
such a punnishement of fire were burnt to nothing.

Peter. Desirous I am to know whether in heaven the good know the good,
and the wicked in hell know one an other.


THAT IN HEAVEN THE GOOD know the good: and in hell the wicked have knowledge
of the wicked.

CHAPTER XXXIII.
Gregory. THe truth of this question we find most clerelye resolved in those
words of our Savior before alleged: in which when it is said that, There
was a certain rich man, and he Luc. 16.
was clad with purple and silk, and he fared every day magnificallye: and
there was a certain beggar called Lazarus, that lay at his gate full of sores,
desiring to be filled of the crommes that fell from the rich man's table, and
none did give him, but the dogs also came and licked his sores: straighte --
ways it is there also said, that. Lazarus died, and was carried of the
Angels into Abrahames bosom: and the rich man also died, and was buried in
hell: who lifting up his eyes being in torments, saw Abraham a far of, and
Lazarus in his bosom, and he cried saying: father Abraham have mercy on me,
and send Lazarus that he may dippe the tippe of his finger into water, for to
cool my tongue, because I am tormented in this flame. To whom Abraham an
^vvered. Son, remember that thowe diddes^ receive good things in thy life
time, and Lazarus likewise evil. By vvwhich words, the rich man having no
hoope of salvation for him self, begins to make suit for his friends
saying: Father I beseech the that thou would send him unto my fathers house,
for I have five brethren, for to testify unto them, least they also come into
this place of torments. In which words we see plainlye, that the good do
know the good, and the badd have knowledge of the badd. For if Abraham had
not known Lazarus, never would he have spoken to the rich man being in
torments, and made mention of his affliction and misery past, saying: that he
had received evil things in his life. And if the badd, did not know the badde:
never would the rich man in torments have remembered his brethren that were
absent: for shall we think that he knew not them, that were present with
him, who was so careful to pray for them that were absent?

By which we learn also the answer to an other question, which you demanded
not: and that is, that the good do know the badde, and the badde the good.
For Abraham knew the rich man, to whom he said. Thou have received good
things in thy life: and Lazarus Gods elect servant, was also known to the
rich reprobat, whom by name he desired, that he might be sent unto him
saying: Send Lazarus, that he may dippe the tippe of his finger into water, and
coolemy tongue: by which mutual knowledge on both sides, the reward like
wise to both parts increases, for the good do more rejoice, when they
behold them also in felicitye, whom before they loved: and the wicked seeing
them, whom in this world not respecting God they did love, to be now punnished
in their company, tormented they are, not only with their own pains but
also with the pains of their friends. Beside all this, a more wonderful grace
is bestowed upon the saints in heaven: for they know not only them, with whom
they were acquainted in this world, but also those, whom before they never
saw, and converse with them in such familiar sort as though in ^ymes past
they had seen and known one an other: and therefore when they shall see the
ancient fathers in that place of perpetual bliss, they shall then know them
by sight, whom always they knew in their lives and conversation. For seeing
they do in that place with unspeakable brightenes (common to all) behold
God, what is there that they know not, that know him who knows all things?


OF A CERTAIN RELIGIOUS man that at his death, saw the Prophets.

CHAPTER XXXIIII.
FOr a certain religious man of my Monasterye, that lived a virtuous life,
dying some four years since, saw at the very time of his departure (as other
religious men do report, that were present) the Prophet Jonas, Ezechiell, and
Daniell, and by there names called them his Lords, saying, that they were come
unto him: and as he was bowing his head downewarde to them for reverence, he
gave up the ghost: whereby we perceive what perfect knowledge, shall be in that
immortal life, when as this man being yet in corrupt^ble flesh, knew the
Prophets whom he never saw.

HOW SOMETIME SOVLES READY to depart this world, that know not one an other,
know yet what torments for their sins, or like rewards for their good
deeds, they shall receive. And of the death of Iohne, Vrsus, Eumorphius, and
Steven.

CHAPTER XXXV.
ANd sometime it falls out, that the soul before it departs, knows them
with whom by reason of equalitye of sins or rewards, it shall in the next
world remain in one place. For old Eleutherius a man of holy life, of whom in
the former book I spoke much says, that he had a natural brother of his,
called Iohne, who lived together with him in his Monasterye, who fourtene days
before hand told the monks when he was to dye: and three days before he
departed this life, he fell into an agewe, and when his time was come, he
received the mysterye of our Lords body and blood: and calling for the monks
about him, he willed them to singe in his presence, prescribing them a certain
antheme concerning him self, saying. Open unto me the gates of justice Psalm.
17. v. 19.
and being gone into them, I will confess unto our Lord: this is the gate of
our Lord, just men shall enter in by it: and whiles the monks about him were
singinge this antheme, suddainlye with a loud and long voice he cried out,
saying: Come away Vrsus: straighte after which words his soul departed this
mortal life. The monks maruailed, because theye knew not the meaning of
that, which at his death he so cried for: and therefore after his departure, all
the Monastery was in sorrow and affliction. Four days after, necessary
business they had, to send some of their brethren to an other Monastery far
distant: to which place when they came, they found all the monks in great
heaviness, and demanding the reason, they told them, that they did lament the
desolation of their house: for four days since (quoth they) one of our
monks died whose life kept us all in this place: and when they inquired his
name, they understood that it was Vrsus: asking also at what hour he left
this wo^lde, they found that it was as that very instant, when he was called by
Iohne who died with them. Out of which we may learn that the merits of either
were alike: and that in the next world they lived familiarly together in one
mansion, who at one time like fellows departed this life.

Here also will I tell you what I heard from the mouths of my neighbors, at
such time as I was yet a lay man, and dwelled in my fathers house, which
descended to me by inheritance. A certain widow there was not far from me
called Galla, which had a young man to her son, whose name was Eumorphius:
not far from whom dwelt one Steven called also Optio. This Eumorphius lying
sick at the point of death, called for his man, commanding him in all have to
go unto Steven Optio, and to desire him without all delay to come unto him,
because there was a ship ready, to carry them both into Sicily. But because his
man refused to go, supposing that through extremity of sickness he knew not
what he spoke, his master very earnestlye urged him forward saying: Go thy
may and tell him what I say, for I am not mad, as thou thinckest. Here-vpon
away he went toward Steven, but as he was in the midst of his iornye, he
met one that asked him whether he was goinge, and when he told him, that he
was by his master sent to Steven Optio: You lose your labor (quoth the other)
for I come now from thence: and he died this very hour. Back again upon
this news he returned to his master Eumorphius: but before he could get home,
he found him dead. And so by conferring their meeting together, and the
length of the way, apparaunt it was that both of them, at one and the self
same instant departed this mortal life.

Peter. Very terrible it is that you say: but what I pray you is the reason,
that he saw a shipp at his departure: or why did he sayo, that he was to go
into Sicily?


Gregory. The soul needs not any thing to carry it: yet no wonder it is, if
that appeared to the soul being yet in the body, which by means of the body
it had often times before seen: to the end that we should thereby vnderstanne
whether his soul might spiritually be carried. And in that he said he was to
go into Sicily, what else can be meant therebye but that there be in the Islands
of that country more then in any place else, certain gaping gulphes of
torments, castinge out fire continually. And as they say that know them,
dailye do they wax greater, and enlarge them selves: so that the world
drawinge to an end, and so consequently more coming thither to be burnt in
those flaminge dungeons, so much the more do those places of torments open and
become wider. Which strange thing almighty God, for the terror and amendment
of the living would have extant in this world, that infidels which believe not
the unspeakable pains of hell, may with their eyes see the places of
torments, which they list not to credit when it is told them. And that both
the elect and reprobat, whose life and conversation has been alike, shall after
death be carried to like places, the saying of our Savior does teach us,
though we had no examples to prove the same: for of the elect him self says
in the Gospel. In the house of my father, Joan. 14. Inequality of rewards in
heaven.
there be many mansions. For if there were not inequalitye of rewards in the
everlasting felicitye of heaven, then were there not many mansions, but rather
one: wherefore there be many mansions, in which diverse orders and degrees of
Gods saints be distinguished, who in common do all rejoice of the society and
fellowship of their merits, and yet all they that labored, receive one penny,
though they remain in distinct mansions: because the felicitye and joy which
there they possess is one, and the reward which by diverse and unequal good
Worckes they receive, is not one but diverse: which to be true our Savior
assures us, when talkinge of his coming to judgment he says. Then I will
say to the Math. 13.
reapers: Gather up the cockle and bind it into bundels to burn. For the
Angels which be the reapers, do then bind up in bundles the cockle to burn,
when like with like are putt together in torments: as the proud to burn in
hell with the proud, carnal with the carnal, covetous with the covetous,
deceiptfull with the deceiptfull, inuious with the inuious, and infidels with
insidels: when therefore those that were like in sinful life, be condemned to
like torments, then be they as it were cockle bound together in bundels to be
burnte.


Peter. You have given a sufficient reason for satisfaction to my demand: yet
I beseech you to inform me further, what the cause is, that some be called out
of this world as it were through error: who afterward return again to
life, saying that they heard, how they were not the men which were sent
for out of this life.


OF THOSE SOVLES WHICH seem as it were through error to be taken out of
their bodies: and of the death and reuiuinge of a monk called Peter: of the
death likewise and raising up again of one Steven: and of the strange vision
of a certain soldiar.

CHAPTER XXXVI.
Gregory. When this happens Peter, it is not, if it be well considered, any
error, but an admonition. For God of his great and bountiful mercy so
disposes, that some after their death do straighte-vvaies return again to
life, that having seen the torments of hell, which before when they heard
they would not believe, they may now at least treble at, after they have
with their eyes beheld them. For a certain Sclauonian, who was a monk,
and hued with me here in this city in my Monasterye, used to tell me, that at
such time as he dwelled in the wilderness, that he knevve one Peter a monk
borne in Spain, who lived with him in the vast desert, called Euasa: which
Peter. Eremites.
(as he said) told him how before he came to dwell in that place, by a
certain sickness he died, and was straightwaies restored to life again,
affirming that he had seen the torments and innumerable places of hell, and
diverse who were mighty men in this world, hanging in those flames: and that
as him self was carried to be thrown also into the same fire, suddenly an
Angel in a be wtifull attire appeared, who would not suffer him to be cast into
those torments: but spoke unto him in this manner. Go thy way back again,
and hereafter carefully look unto thy self, how thou leadest thy life: after
which words his body by little and little became warm, and him self waking
out of the sleep of everlasting death, reported all such things as happened
about him: after which time he bound him self to such fasting and watchinge,
that though he had said nothing, yet his very life and conversation did
speak what torments he had seen and was affraide of: and so Gods merciful
providence wroughte in his temporal death that he died not euerlastinglye.

But because man's heart is passing obdurat and hard, hereof it comes that
though others have the like vision, and see the same pains, yet do they not
always reap the like profit. For the honorable man Steven, whom you knevve
very well, told me of him self, that at such time as he was upon business
resident in the city of Gonstantinople, that he fell sick and died: and when
they sought for a surgeon to bovvell him, and to embalme his body and could
not get any, he lay unburied all the night follovving: in which space his
soul was carried to the dungeon of hell, where he savve many things, which
before when he heard he little believed. But when he was brought before the
judge that satt there, he would not admit him to his presence saying: I
commanded not this man to be brought, but Steven the smith: upon which words
he was straighte-way restored to life, and Steven the smith that dwelled hard
by, at that very hour departed this life: whose death did show that the
words which he heard were most true. But though the foresaid Steven escaped
death in this manner at that time, yet three years since in that mortalitye
which lamentably waste this city, (and in which as you know, men with
their corporal eyes did behold arrows that came from heaven, which did
strike diverse) the same man ended his days: at which time a certain soldiar
being also brought to the point of death; his soul was in such sort carried
cut of his body that he lay void of all sense and feelinge, but coming
quickly again to him self he told then that were present, what present,
what strange th^nges he had seen. For he said (as many report that know it
very well) that he saw a bridge, under which a black and smoakye river did
run, that had a filthy and intolerable smell: but upon the further side
thereof there were pleasant grene meadows full of sweet flowers, in which also
there were diverse companies of men apparrelled in white: and such a delicate
savor there was, that the fragrant odor thereof did give wonderful content
to all them that dwelt and walked in that place. Diverse particular mansions
also there were, all shining with brightness and light, and especially one
magnificall and sumptuous house which was a buildinge, the brick whereof seemed
to be of gold, but whose it was that he knew not.

There were also upon the bancke of the foresaid river certain houses, but
some of them the stinking vapor which rose from the river did touch, and some
other it touched not at all. Now those that desired to pass over the
foresaid bridge, were subject to this manner of trial: if any that was wicked
attempted to go over, down he fell into that darcke and stinking river: but
those that were just and not hindered by sin, securely and easily passed over
to those pleasant and delicate places. There he said also that he saw Peter,
who was steward of the Popes familye, and died some four years since, thrust
into a most filthy place, where he was bound and kept down, with a great
waighte of iron: and inquiring why he was so used, he received that answer,
which all we, that knew his life can affirm to be most true: for it was told
him, that he suffered that pain, because when him self was upon any occasion
to punnishe other, that he did it more upon cruelty, then to show his
obedience: of which his merciless disposition, none that knew him can be
ignorant. There also he said that he saw a Priest whom he knew: who coming
to the foresaid bridge, passed over with as great security, as he lived in
this world sincerelye.

Likewise upon the same bridge he say, that he did see this Steven, whom
before we spoke of, who being about to go over, his foot slipped, and half
his body hanging beside the bridge, he was of certain terrible men, that rose
out of the river, drawn by the legs downewarde: and by certain other white
and bewtifull persons, he was by the arms pulled upward: and whiles they
strove thus, the wicked spirits to draw him downewarde, and the good to
lift him upward: he that beheld all this strange sight returned to life,
not knowing in conclusion what became of him. By which miraculous vision, we
learn this thing concerning the life of Steven, to wit, that in him the
sins of the flesh did strive with his worckes of alms. For in that he was
by the legs drawn downewarde, and by the arms plucked upward, apparent it
is, that both he loved to give alms, and yet did not perfectly resist the
sins of the flesh, which did pull him downewarde: but in that secret
examination of the supreme judge, which of them had the victory, that neither
we know, nor he that the saw it. Yet most certain it is, that the same
Steven after that he had seen the places of hell as before was said, and
returned again to his body, did never perfectly amend his former wicked life,
seeing many years after, he departed this world, leaving us in doubt whether
he were saved or damned. Wherebye we many learn, that when any have the
torments of hell shown them, that to some it is for their commoditye, and to
others for their testimonye: that the former may see those miseries to avoid
them, and these other to be so much the more punnished, in that they would not
take heed of those torments, which they both knevve and with their eyes
beheld.


Peter. What I beseech you was meant by the building of that house in those
places of delight, with brickes of gold. For it seems very ridiculous, that
in the next life we should have need of any such kind of metal.


WHAT IS MEANT BY THE building of the house in those pleasant places. And of
one Deusdedit, whose house was seen to be built upon the Saturday.

Gregory. What man of sense can think so? but by that which was shovven
there, (who so ever he was, for whom that house was built) we learn
plainly what virtuous works he did in this world: for he that by plenty
of alms does merit the reward of eternal light, certain it is, that he
does build his house with gold. For the same soldiar who had this vision
said also, which I forgott before to tell you, that old men, and young,
girls, and boys, did carry those brickes of gold, for the buildinge of that
house: by which we learn, that those to whom we shevve compassion in this
world, do labor for us in the next. There dwelled also hard by us a
religious man called Deusdedit, who was a shoemaker, concerning whom, an
other savve by revelation that he had in the next world an house a building:
but the vvorckemen thereof labored only upon the saturday. Who afterward
inquiring more diligently how he lived, found that whatsoever he got by his
labor all the vveke, and was not spent upon necessary provision of meat and
apparel, all that upon the saterdaye he bestovved upon the poor in alms at
S. Peter's church: and therefore see what reason there was, that his building
went forvvard upon the Saturday.


Peter. You have given me very good satisfaction, touching this one point:
yet desirous I am further to know, what the reason was, that some of those
habitations were touched by the stinckinge vapor, and some were not: and what
is meant by the bridge and river which he savve.


Gregory. By the representation of these things Peter, are expressed the
causes which they do signify: For the bridge by which he beheld Gods
servants to pass unto those pleasant places, does teach us, that the path is
very Math. cap. 7.
straighte which leads to everlasting life: and the stinking river which
he savve runninge beneath, signifies that the filthy corruption of ^ice in
this world, does dailye run to the dovvnefall of carnal pleasure. And that
some of the habitations were touched with the stinking vpour, and some were
not, what s meant else, but that there be diverse which do many good vvorckes,
yet in their soul they are touched with the delighte of carnal sins: and
therefore very great reason there is, that in the next world such should taste
of a stinckinge vapor, whom filthye carnality did delighte in this: and
ther^ore blessed Job, perceiving the pleasure of the flesh to be stinckinge,
pronounces ths sentence of the vvanton and carnal man. His Job. 24.
swetenes be worms. But those that do preserve their heart free from all
pleasure of carnal thoughts, have not their houses touched with any such
stinking vapor: and here we have also to note, that he savve one and the
same thing both to be a vapor and also to have an ill savor, because carnal
delighte does so obscure the soul which it has infected, that it can not see
the brightenes of true light: for the more pleasure it has in the inferior
part, the more darkness it has in the superior, which does hinder it from the
contemplation of heavenly mysteryes.


Peter. Is there any text of holy scripture, to prove that carnal sins be
punnished with stinking and bad savors.


OF THE PVNNISHEMENT of the men of Sodom.

Gregory. THere is: for in Genesis we read Genes. 19.
that our Lord rained fire and brimstone upon the city of Sodom: that both
fire might burn them, and the stenche of brimstone smother and kill them: for
seeing they burnt with the unlawful love of corruptible flesh, by Gods just
judgment, they perished both by fire and an unsavory smell: to the end they
might know that they had by the pleasure of their sti^cking life, incurred
the sorrovves of eternal death.


Peter. Concerning those things which before I doubted of, I find my self
now so fullye satisfied, that I have not any further question to move.


HOW THE SOVLES OF SOME men, being yet in their bodies do see some spiritual
punnishement: And of that which happened to the boy Theodorus.

CHAPTER XXXVII.
Gregory. WE have also to know that sometime the souls whiles they are in
their bodies, do behold some spiritual punnishement: which yet happens to
some for their own good, and to others for the edification of them, that
hear thereof. For there was one Theodorus (which storye I remember that in
mine homiles to the people I have also spoken of) who was a very unruly
ladde, and more upon necessi^ye then of his own good will, in the company of
his brother entered into my monasterye: and so sittle pleasure he took in
spiritual talk, that it was death to him to hear any thing tending to the
good of his own soul, for he was so far from doing any good work, that he
could not endure to hear thereof: and he would openly protest sometimes by
swearing, sometimes in anger, and sometimes in scoffing sort, that he never
meant to take upon him the habit of a religious life. This untoward ^he ha^it of
re^igious ^en.
boy, in the late mortalitye which consumed the greatest part of this city,
was grievously strooken: whereof he lay sore sick, and being at last come to
the point of death, all the monks repaired to his chamber, to pray for the
happy departure of his soul, which seemed not to be far of: for the one half
of his body was already dead, and only in his breast a little life remained,
and therefore the nerer they saw him to his end, the more feruentlye did they
commend him to Gods mercy. Whiles they were thus busied, suddainlye he cried
out to them, and with great clamor went about to interrupt their devotions
saying. Depart and away, for behold I am delivered over to a dragon to be
devoured, and your presence does let him, that he can not dispatch me. My head
he has already swallowed up in his mouth, and therefore go your ways, that
my torments be not the longer, and that he may effect that which he is about
to do: for if I be given him to devour, why do you keep me here in longer
pain. At these fearful words the monks said unto him, why do you speak
thus good brother? bless your self with the sign The sig of the h^ly cross
used against the deu^
of the holy cross: to whom he answered, willinglye I would, but I can not, I
am so laden with this dragons scales. Upon these words the monks fell
prostrat upon the earth, and in great zeal with tears they prayed to God for
his deliuerye out of the enemies hands, who mercifully heard them, for upon a
sudden the sick person began to cry out, and say: God be thancked, behold
the dragon that had me to devour, is fled away, and overcome with your
prayers, here he could not tarry. Now I beseech you, make intercession for my
sins, for I am ready to turn unto God, and wholly to renounce all kind of
secular life: and thus he that was half dead as before was said, reserved
now to a longer life, turned to God with his whole heart, and so after he had
put on a new mind, and was a long time punnished with affliction: then his
soul departed from the miserie^ of this mortal life.


OF THE DEATH OF CHRIsorius: and of a certain monk of Iconia.

CHAPTER XXXVIII.
But Crisorius on the contrary (as his kinseman Probus of whom I made mention
before told me) was a substantial man in this world, but as full of sin as
of wealth: for he was passing proud, given to the pleasures of the flesh,
covetous, and wholly set upon scraping of riches together. But when God
determined to make an end of so many sins, he sent him a greatsickenes: and
when his last time drew nere, in that very hour in which his soul was to
leave the body, lying with his eyes open, he saw certain cruel men and
black spirits stand before him, pressing upon him to carrye him away to the
pit of hell: at which fearful sight he began to tremble, to wax pale, to
sweat, and with pitiful outcries to crave for truce: and often with faltring
tongue to call for his son Maximus (whom when I was a monk, I knew also to
profess the same kind of life) saying, Come away Maximus, with all speed:
Never in my life did I any harm to thee, receive me now in thy faith. His
son greatly moved at these outcries, came unto him in all have: and his whole
familye lamentinge and crying out, repaired also to his chamber: none of all
which beheld those wicked spirits, which did so urge and vex him: but by his
trouble of mind, by his palenes, and tremblinge, they made no doubt of their
presence: for he was so affrighted with their terrible looks, that he turned
him self every way in his bed. Lying upon his left side he could not endure
their sight: and turning to the wall, there also he found them: at last
being very much beset, and dispairing of all means to escape their hands, he
cried out with a loud voice saying: O truce till to morrow, o truce till to
morrow: and crying out in this sort he gave up the ghost. This being the manner
of his death, certain it is that he saw this fearful sight not for him
self, but for us: that his vision might do us good, whom Gods patience does
yet with fatherly long sufferance expect to amendment. For what prosit
reaped he by seeing those foul spirits before his death, and by craving for
that truce which he could not obtain?

There is also now dwelling amongst us a Priest of Isauria called Athanasius,
who tells a very fearful storye which in his time happened as he says at
Iconium. For there was in that place as he reports a Monasterye called.
Thongolaton, in which there lived a monk that was had in great accounte: for
he was of good conversation, and in his life very orderlye: but as the end
declared, he was far otherwise then he outwardlye appeared: for though he did
seem to fast with the rest of the monks, yet did he secretlye take his meat:
which vice of his none of the other monks ever understood. But at length it
came forth by this means: for falling grievously sick, so that no hope of
life remained, he caused all the monks of the Convent to be called together,
who all willingly came, verily thincking that at the departure of so notable a
man, they should have heard some sweet and good exhortation: but it fell
out far otherwise, for with great trouble of mind, and tremblinge of body he
was enforced to tell them, that he died in a damnable state saying: when you
thought that I fasted with you, then had I my meat in secret corners: and
behold now I am delivered to a dragon to be devoured, who with his tail has
in wrapped fast my hands and feet: and his head, he has thrust into my
mouth, and so he lies sucking and drawing out of my breath: and speaking these
words he departed this life, and had not any time given to deliver him self
by penance from that dragon with he saw. By which we learn, that he had this
vision only for the commoditye of them that heard it, seeing him self could
not escape from the enemy which he beheld, and into whose hands he was given
to be devoured.

Peter. Desirous I am to be informed, whether we ought to believe, that after
death there is any fire of Purgatory.


WHETHER THERE BE ANY FIRE of purgatory in the next world.

CHAPTER XXXIX.
Gregory. Our Lord says in the Gospel: Walk whiles you have the light:
Joan. 12.
and by his Prophet he says: In time accepted have I heard the, and in the
day of salvation have I helped the: Esai. 49.
which the Apostle S. Paul expounding says: Behold now 2. Corint. 6.
is the time acceptable: behold now the the day os salvation. Solomon
likewise says, whatsoever thy hand is able to do, Ecclesiastes. 9. v. 10.
work it instantlye: for neither work, nor reason, nor knowledge, nor
wisdom, shall be in hell, whether thou do hasten: David also says. Because
his mercy is for ever. By Psalm. 117.
which sayings it is plain, that in such state as a man departs out of this
life, in the same he is presented in judgment before God. But yet we Purga ry
fire the ^^^ life for small si nes. Math.
must believe that before the day of judgment there is a Purgatory fire, for
certain small sins: because our Savior says, that he which speaks
blasphemye against the holy Ghost, that it shall not be sorgiuen him, neither in
this world, nor in the world to come. Out of which sentence we learn, that
some sins are forgiven in this world, and some other may be pardoned in the
next: sor that which is denied concerning one sin, is consequentlye
understood to be granted touching some other. But yet ths as I said we have
not to believe but only concerning little and very small sins, as for
example, daily idle talk, immoderate laughter, negligence in the care of our
family, (which kind of offenses, scarce can they avoid, that know in what
sort sin is to be shunned) ignora^terror in matters of no great waighte: all
which sins be punnished after death, if men procured not pardon and remission
for them in their life time: for when S. Paul says, that Christ is the
fou^datio^: 1. Corin 3.
and by and by adds. And if any man build upon this soundation, gold, silver,
precious stones, wood, hay, stubble: the work of every one of what kind it
is, the fire shall try, if any man's work abide which he built thereupon, he
shall receive reward: if any man's work burn, he shall suffer detriment, but
him self shall be saved, yet so as by fire. For although these words may be
understood of the fire of tribulation, which men suffer in this world: yet if
any will interpret them of the fire of purgatory, which shall be in the next
life: then must he carefully consider, that the Apostle said not, that he may
be saved by fire, that builds upon this foundation ^ron, brass, or lead,
that is the greater sort of sins, and therefore more hard, and consequently
not remissible in that place: but wood, hay, stubble, that is little and very
light sins, Litile and light sins.
which the fire does easilye consume. Yet we have here further to consider,
that none can be there purged, no not for the least sins that be, unless in
his life time he deserved by virtuous worckes to find such fa^or in that place.


OF THE SOVLE OF PASchasius the Deacon.

CHAPTER XL.
FOr when I was yet in my younger years, and lived a secular life, I heard
from the mouth of mine elders, who knew it to be true: how that Paschasius a
Deacon of this Roman church (whose sound and eloquent books of the holy
Ghost be extant amongst us) was a man of a wonderful holy life, a maruailous
giver of alms, a lover of the poor, and one that contemned him self. This
man, in that conte^tion which through the exceeding hot emulation of the
clergy, fellout betwixt Symmachus and Laurence, made choice of Laurence to be
Bishop of Rome: and though he was afterward by common consent overcome, yet
did he continewe in his former opinion until his dying day: louinge and
preferring him, whom the The Bi^shop o^Rome, ^uernor the church
Church by the judgment of Bishops refused for her governor. This Deacon
ending his life in the time of Symmachus, Bishop of the Apostolic sea: a man
possessed with a devil, came ^elickes ^isposses ^euiles. 4 dalma. ^icke or
^unicle, is that ve^timent, ^vhich the Dea^on uses ^^t the time of Mass.
and touched his dalmatike, as it lay upon the biere, and was forthwith
delivered from that vexation. Long time after Germanus Bishop of Capua,
(before mentioned,) by the counsel of Physicians, for the recouerye of his
health went to the bathes: into which after he was entered, he found there
standinge in those ^ote waters, the foresaid Paschasius ready to do him
service. At which sight being much affraide, he demanded what so worthy a man
as he was did in that place: to whom Paschasius returned this answer. For no
other cause (quoth he) am I appointed to this place of punnishement, but for
that I took part with Laurence against Symmachus: and therefore I beseech you
to pray unto our Lord for me, and by this token shall you know that your
Prayer for souls de^parted.
prayers be heard, if at your coming again, you find me not here. Upon
this, the holy man Germanus betook him self to his devotions, and after a
few days he went again to the same bathes, but found not Paschasius there:
for seeing his fault proceeded not of malice, but of ignorance, he might after
death be purged from that sin. And yet we must with all think that the
plentiful alms which he bestowed in this life, obtained favor at Gods
hands, that he might then deserve pardon, when he could work nothing at all
for him self.

Peter. What I pray you is the reason, that in these latter days, so many
things come to light, which in times past were not known: in such sort that
by open revelations and manifest signs, the end of the world seems not to
be far of.


WHY IN LATTER TIMES, so many things be known, concerning men's souls.
Which in former ages, were not heard of.

CHAPTER XLI.
Gregory. So it is, for the nerer that this prese^^ world draws to wards an
end, so much the more the world to come is at hand, and shows it self by
more plain and evident tokens. For seeing in this world, we know not one an
others cogitations, and in the next, men's hearts be known to all, what fitter
name can we give to this world then to term it night, and what better to the
next, then to call it day? But as when the night is almost spent, and the
day begins to break, darkness and light be in a certain manner joined
together, until the light of the day followinge does perfectly bannishe away
the dark remnantes of the former night: even so, the end of this world, is
as it were mingled together with the beginning of the next, and with the
darckenes of this, some light of such spiritual things as be in that does
appear: and so we see many things which belong to that world, yet for all
this, perfect knowledge we have not any, but as it were in the tvvilighte
of our soul behold them before the risinge of that son of knowledge, which
then abundantly will cast his beams over all.


Peter. I like very well of your speech, yet in so worthy a man as Paschasius
was, this doubt does trouble me, how he was after his death carried to any
place of punnishement, seeing the touching of his garment upon the biere did
dispossess a wicked spirit.


Gregory. Herein appears the great and manifold providence of almightye God,
by whose just judgment it fell out, that Paschasius for sometime entertained
inwardly sin in his soul, and yet in the sight of the world wroughte
miracles by his body after his death, who in his life time did as they know
many good worckes: to the end that those which had seen his virtuous life,
should not be deceived concerning the opinion of his great alms: and yet him
self should not without punnishement have remission of his sin, which whiles
he lived he thought to be no sin, and therefore did not by tears wash it
away.


Peter. I understand very well what you say, but by this reason I am driven
unto such straightes, that I must stand in fear both of those sins which I
know, and also of those which I know not. But because a little before you
discoursed of the places of torments: in what part of the world I beseech you
are we to believe that hell is, whether above the earth or beneath the same?


IN WHAT PLACE OF THE world we ought to believe that hell is.

CHAPTER XLII.
Gregory. Touching this point I dare not rashelye desine any thing: for some
have been of opinion, that hell was in some place upon the earth: and The
latin lord for ^el signi^eth a ^ace be^eath.
others think that it is under the earth: but then this doubt arises for if
it be therefore called hell or an infernal place, because it is belovve, then
as the earth is distant from heaven, so likewise should hell be distant from the
earth: for which cause perhaps the Prophet says. Thou have delivered Psalm. 8
my soul from the lower hell: so that the higher hell may seem to be upon the
earth, and the lower under the earth: and with this opinion, that sentence of
Iohne agrees, who when he had said, that he saw a book sealed with Apocal.
seven seals: and that non was found, worthy neither in heaven, nor in earth,
nor under the earth, to open the book and loose the seals thereof: he added
forthwith. and I wept much: which book notwithstanding afterward he says was
opened by a lion of the tribe of Judah. By which book, what else can be meant,
but the holy scripture, which our Savior alone did open: for being made man,
by his death resurrection, and ascension, he did reveal and make manifest all
those mysteries which in that book were closed and shutt up. And none in
heaven, because not any Angel: none upon earth, because not man living in
body: not any under the earth was, found worthy: because neither the souls
departed from their bodies could open unto us, beside our Lord him self the
secrets of that sacred book. Seeing then none under the earth is said to be
found worthy to open that book, I see not what does let, but that we should
believe that hell is in the lower parts, under the earth.


Peter. I beseech you: Is there one fire in hell, or according to the
diuersitye of sinners, be there so many sorts of fires prepared in that place?


WHETHER THERE IS ONE fire in hell, or many.

CHAPTER XLIII.
Gregory. THe fire of hell is but one: yet does it not in one manner torment
all sinners. For every one there according to the quantit^e of his sin has
the measure of his pain. For as in this world, many live under one and the
same sun, and yet do not alike feel the heat thereof: for some be burnt
more, and some less: so in that one sire, diverse manners of burninge be
found, for that which in this world, diversity of bodies does, that in the
next does diuersitye of sins: so that although the fire be there all alike,
yet does it not in one manner and alike burn and torment them that be damned.


Peter. Shall those I pray you which be condemned to that place, burn always,
and never have any end of their torments?


WHETHER THOSE THAT be in hell, shall burn there sor ever.

CHAPTER XLIIII.
Gregory. Certain it is, and without all doubt most true, that as the good
shall have no end of their joys, so the wicked never any release of their
torments: for our Savior him self says. The wicked shall go into
everlasting Math. 2
punnishment, and the just into everlasting life: seeing then true it is, that
which he has promised to his friends: out of al question false it can not be,
that which he has threatened to his enemies.

Whar if it be said that he did threaten eternal pain to wicked livers, that
he might thereby restrain them from committing of sins?


Gregory. If that which he did threaten be false, because his intent was by
that means, to keep men from wicked life: then likewise must we say that
those things are false which he did promise: and that this mind was therebye
to provoke us to virtue. But what man though madd dare presume so to say: For
if he threatened that which he meant not to put in execution: whiles we are
desirous to make him merciful, enforced we are likewise (which is horrible to
speak) to affirm him to be deceiptfull.


Peter. Willinge I am to know how that sin can iustlye be punnished without
end, which had an end when it was committed.


Gregory. This which you say might have some reason, if the just judge did
only consider the sins committed, and not the minds with which they were
committed: for the reason why wicked men made an end of synninge was, because
they also made an end of their life: for willingly they would, had it been it
their power, have lived without end, that they might in like manner have
sinned without end. For they do plainly declare, that they desired always
to live in sun, who never so long as they were in this world, gave over
their wicked life: and therefore it belongs to the great justice of the
supreme judge, that they should never want torments and punnishement in the
next world, who in this, would never give over their wicked and sinful life.


Peter. But no judge that loves justice takes pleasure in crueltye: and the
end why the iustmaster commands his wicked servant to be punnished is,
that he may give over his lewd life. If then the wicked that are tormented in
hell fire never come to amend them selves, to what end shall they alvvaies
burn in those flames?


Gregory. Almightye God because he is merciful and full of pity, takes no
pleasure in the torments of wretched men: but because he is also just,
therefore does he never give over to punnishe the wicked. All which being
condemned to perpetual pains, punnished they are for their own wickedness:
and yet shall they always there burn in fire for some end, and that is, that
all those which be just and Gods servants, may in God behold the joys which
they possess, and in them see the torments which they have escaped: to the
end that they may thereby always acknowledge them selves grateful to God for
his grace, in that they perceive through his divine assistaunce, what sins
they have overcome, which they behold in others to be punnished euerlastinglye.


Peter. And how I pray you can they be holy and saints, if they pray not for
their enemies, whom they see to ly in such torments? when it is said to
them: Pray for your enemies. Math. 5 v. 44.



Gregory. They pray for their enemies, at such time as their hearts may be
turned to fruitful penance, and so besaued: for to what purpose else do we
pray for our enemies, but as the Apostle says that God may give them
repentance 2. Timoth 2. v. 25.
to know the truth, and recover them selves from the devil, of whom they are
held captive at his will?


Peter. I like very well of your saying: for how shall they pray for them,
who by no means can be converted from their wickeones, and brought to do the
worckes of justice.


Gregory. You see then that the reason is all one, why in the next life, none
shall pray for men, condemned for ever to hell fire: that there is now of not
praying for the devil and his angels, sentenced to everlasting torments: and
this also is the very reason why holy men do not now pray for them that dye in
their infidelitye and known wicked life: for seeing certain it is, that
they be condemned to endless pains, to what purpose should they pray for
them, when they know that no petition will be admitted of God their just
judge. And therefore if now holy men living upon earth take no compassion of
those that be dead and damned for their sins, when as yet they know that
them selves do some thing through the frailty of the flesh, which is also
to be judged: how much more straightly and seuerelye do they behold the
torments of the damned, when they be them selves delivered from all vice of
corruption, and be more nerelye united to true justice it self: for the force
of justice does so possess their souls, in that they be so intrinsecall
with the most just judge, that they list not by any means to do that which
theye know is not conformable to his divine pleasure.


Peter. The reason you bring is so clear, that I can not gain say it: but
now an other question comes to my mind, and that is, how the soul can
truly be called immortal, seeing certain it is, that it does dye in that
perpetual fire.


HOW THE SOVLE IS SAID to be immortal and never to dye: if it be punnished
with the sentence of death.

CHAPTER XLV.
Gregory. BEcause there be two manner of lives, consequently also there be two
manner of deaths. For one kind of life there is, by which we live in God,
another which we received by our creation orgeneration: and therefore one thing
it is to live blessedlye, and an other thing to live naturallye. The soul
therefore is both mortal and immortal: mortal, because it loses the
felicitye of an happy life: and immortal, in that it always keeps his
natural life, which can never be lost, no not when it is sentenced to
perpetual death: for in that state though it has not a blessed life, yet it
does retain still the former being and natural life: by reason whereof it is
enforced to suffer death without death, defect without defect, and end without
end: seeing the death which it indudureth is immortal, the desect which it
suffers never fails, and the end which it has, is infinite, and without
end.


Peter. What man is he though never so holy, that coming to leave this
mortal life, has not just cause to fea^e the unspeakable sen^^n^e of
damnation: for although he knows what he has done, yet ignorant he is not,
how straightlye his worckes shall be examined and judged.


OF A CERTAIN HOLY MAN that was assraide when he came to dye.

CHAPTER XLXVI.
Gregory. IT is even so Peter as you say. And yet sometime, the only fear of
death, does purge the souls of just men from their smaller sins, as you and
I have often heard of a certain holy man that was very much affraide when he
came to dye: and yet after he was dead, appeared to his disciples in a white
stoale, reporting to them in what excellent manner he was received, when he
departed out of this world.


HOW SOME BY DIVINE revelation are discharged from fear at their death. And
of the manner how the monks Anthony, Merulus, and John departed this life.

CHAPTER XLVII.
Sometime also almightye God does by divine revelation strengthen the minds of
them that be fearful to the end that they should not be affraide of death.
For a certain monk there was called Anthonye, that lived together with me in
my Monasterye, who by daily tears labored to come to the joys of heaven: and
when as he did very carefullye and with great zeal of soul meditate upon the
sacred scriptures, he sought not so much for cunninge and knowledge, as for
tears and contrition of heart, that by means thereof his soul might be
stirred up and inflamed: and that by contemninge all earthly things, he might
with the wings of contemplation fly unto the kingdom of heaven. This man
upon a night by revelation, was admonished in this manner. Make your self
ready because our Lord has given commandment, for your departure, and when
he answered, that he had not wherewith to defraye the charges of that iorny:
straighte-waies he heard these comfortable words. If you take care for your
sins, they be forgiven you: which thing though he had heard once, and yet
for all that was in great fear, an other night he had again the same vision:
and so after five days he fell sick of an agewe, and as the other monks were
in praying and weeping about him, he departed this life.

An other monk there was in the same Monasterye called Merulus, who was
wonderfullye given to ^eares, and bestowing of alms: and no time almost passed
him, except it were when he was at meat or a sleep, in which he did not sing
psalms. This man by vision in the night, saw a crown made of white flowers,
to descend upon his head: and straighte after falling sick, he died with
great quiet and joy of mind. Fouretene years after, when Peter who now has
the government of my Monasterye, went about to make a grave for him self hard
by Merulus sepulcher, such a fragrant and pleasant smell as he says came out
of it, as though it had been a storehouse of all manner of sweet flowers. By
which it appeared plainlye, that it was very true, which before he had seen by
vision in the night.

Likewise in the same Monasterye there was an other called John, who was a
young man of great towardnes, and one that ledd his life with great
circumspection, humility, swetenes, and grauitye. This man falling sore sick,
saw in his great extremity by vision in the night, an old man to come unto
him, who touched him with a wande saying. Rise vpe, for you shall not dye of
this sickness: but make your self ready, for you have not any long time to
stay in this world: and forthwith though the physicians dispaired of his
health, yet he recovered, and became perfectlye well. The vision which he saw
he told to others, and for two years followinge as I said he served God in
such sort, that his great devotion surpassed his young years. Three years
since an other monk died who was buried in the churche-yarde of the same
Monasterye, and when we had ended all his ^uneralles, and were departed, this
Iolme as him self with pale face, and great trembling told us, remained there
still, where he heard that monk which was buried to call him out of the
grave: and that it was so indeed, the end following did show: for ten days
after he fell sick of an agewe, and so departed this life.

Peter. Willingly would I learn whether we ought to observe such visio^s, as
be revealed to us by night in our sleep.


WHETHER DREAMS ARE TO be believed: and how many kind of dreams there be.

CHAPTER XLVIII.
Gregory. Concerning this point, Peter you must understand, that there are
six kind of dreams. For sometime, they proceed of too much fulness or emptines
of the stomach: sometime by illusion: sometime both by thought and illusion:
sometime by revelation: and sometime both by thought and revelation. The two
first, all by experience know to be true: and the four latter we find
mentioned in holy scripture. For if dreams did not sometime proceed by
illusion from our secret enemy, never would the wise man have said. Dreams
have made many Eccles. 34.
to err, and hooping in them have they been deceived: and again. You shall not
be sothsaiers, nor observe dreams: by which words we see, how they are to be
detested, that are compared with soothsayinges. Again if dreams did not
sometime proceed both of thought together with illusion, the wise man vvoulde
not have said: Dreams follow ccl^s. 5.
many cares. And if sometime also they did not come by mystical revelation,
Joseph had never known by dream ^enes. 37.
that he should have been exalted above his brethren: neither the Angel would
Aath. 2.
ever in a dream have admonished the spouse of our Lady to fly away with
the child into Egypt. Again, if sometime they did not also proceed both from
thoughts and divine revelation, never would the prophet Daniell disputing of
Nabuchod mosors dream, have begun from the root of his former thoughts
saying. Thou Daniel. 2.
o king did begin to think in thy ^edd, what should happen in times to
come: and he that reuealeth mysteries, did show the what things should come:
and a little after. Thou did see, and behold as it were a great statua:
that great statua, and high of stature did stand against the etc. Wherefore
seeing Daniell does with reverence insin^ate that the dream should come to
pass, and also declares from what cogitation it did spring, plainlye do we
learn that dreams sometimes do come both of thought and revelation together.
But seeing dreams do grow from such diue^s roots, with so much the more
difficultye ought we to believe them: because it does not easily appear unto
us, from what cause they do proceed. Holy men indeed by a certain in ward
spiritual taste, do discern betwixt illusions and true reuelatio^s, by the
very voices or representations of the visions them selves: so that they know
what they receive from the good spirit, and what they suffer by illusion from
the wicked: and therefore if our mind be not herein, very attentive and
vigilant, it falls into many vanities, through the deceit of the wicked
spirit: who sometime uses to foretell many true things, that in the end, he
may by some falshoode ensnare our soul.


OF ONE WHO IN HIS DREAM, had long lise promised him, and yet died shortly
after.

CHAPTER XLIX.
AS not long since it is most certain, that it befell to one that lived
amongst us, who being much given to observe dreams, had one night in a
dream long life promised him: and when as he had made provision of great
store of money for the maintenance of his many days, he was so suddainlye
taken out of this life, that he left it all behind him, without ever having
any use thereof, and carried not with him any good worckes to the next world.

Peter. I remember very well who it was: but let us I pray you prosecute such
questions as we began to entreat of: Does any profit think you redounde to
men's souls if their bodies be buried in the church?


WHETHER THE SOVLES receive any commoditye if their bodies he buried in the
church.

CHAPTER L.
Gregory. SVch as dye not in mortal sin ne si nmorand ne not.
receive this benefit by having their bodies buried in the church: for when
their friends come thither, and behold their sepulchers, then do they
remember them, and pray unto God for their soules^ but those that depart
Prayer for the dead.
this life in the state of deadly sin, receive not any absolution from their
sins, but rather be more punnished in hell, for having their bodies buried
in the church: which thing shall be more plain if I do briefly tell you what
concerning this point has chanced in our time.


OF A CERTAIN NVNNE that was buried in the church, which appeared with her
body halse burnt.

CHAPTER LI.
FElix Bishop of Portua, a man of holy life, who was borne and brought up in
the Province of Sabina says, that there lived in that place a certain Nun,
which though she were chaste of her body, yet had she an ungracious and
foolish tongue: which departing this life, was buried in the church: the
keeper whereof the night following, saw her by revelation brought before the
holy altar, where she was cut in two pieces, and the one half was burnt in
the fire, and the other was not touched at all. Rising up in the morning, he
told unto others what a strange vision he had seen, and showed them the very
place in which she was burnt, the marble whereof appeared with the very
marckes and signs of a fire upon it* as though that woman had been there
burnt in very deed with corporal fire. By which we may plainly see, that such
as have not their sins pardoned, can reap small benefit by having their
bodies after death buried in holy places.

OF THE BVRIALL OF Valerianus.

CHAPTER LII.
John also an honorable man, one of the governors of this city, and one that
is of great gravity and credit as all know, told me how one Valerianus, that
was a gentleman of the city of Bressa departed this life, whose body for money
the Bishop was content should be buried in the church. This Valerianus euene
to his very old age, led a light and wanton life: refusing utterly to give
over sin and wickedness. That very night in which he was buried, the blessed
martyr Faustinus, in whose church his body lay, appeared to the keeper
thereof saying. Go and bid the Bishop cast out that stinckinge carcass
which he has here buried, and he if he will not do it, tell him that thirty
days hence he shall dye him self. This vision the poor man was affraide to
report unto the Bishop, and though he were admonished the second time to do
it, yet he refused: and so upon the thirtith day, the Bishop goinge safe and
sound to bed, (never fearing any such thing) suddenly departed this life.

OF THE BODY OF VALENTINVS, that was after his burial cast out of the church.

CHAPTER LIII.
THere be also at this time here in the city, our venerable brother Vena^tius
Bishop of Luna, and Liberius a noble man and one of very great credit: both
which do say that them selves know it, and that their servants were present
in the city of Genua, when this strange thing happened. One Valentinius who
had an office in the church of Millan died there, a man in his life time given
to wantonness and all kind of lightenes, whose body was buried in the church
of the blessed martyr Sirus. The midnighte followinge a great noise was heard
in that place, as though some body by force had been drawn out from thence:
whereupon the keepers ran thither, to see what the matter was, and when they
were come, they savve two very terrible deuiles that had tied a rope about
his legs, and were dravving him out of the church, him self in the mean
time crying and roaring out: at which sight they were so frighted, that they
returned home again to their beds: but when the morning was come, they
opened the grave in which Valentinus was buried, but his body they could not
find and therefore they sought without the church to see where it was, and
so found it thrown into an other place, with the feet still bound as it was
drawn out of the church. Out of which Peter you may learn that such as dye
in mortal sin and cause their bodies, to be buried in holy ground, are
punnished also for that their presumption: the holy places not helping them,
but rather the sin of their temeritye accusing them.

OF THE BODY OF A DIER buried in the church, which afterward could not be
found.

CHAPTER LIIII.
FOr an other thing also which happened in this city, the company of diers
dwelling here do testifye to be most true, and it is concerning one that was
the chief of their profession, who departed this life: and was by his wife
buried in the church of S. Ianuarius the martyr, near to the gate of S.
Laurence: whose spirit the night followinge in the hearing of the sextin
cried out of his grave saying: I burn, I burn: and when he continued a long
time crying so: the sextin told it to the diers wife, who thereupon sent
certain of his own profession to the church, to see in what case his body
was in the grave, who so cried out in that pitiful manner, and The manner of
Italy is to bury men in their garments.
when they had opened it, there they found his garments safe and sound, which
be still kept in the same church, for a perpetual memory of that which
happened: but his body by no means could they find, as though it had never
been buried there: by which we may, gather to what torments his soul was
condemned, whose body was in that sort turned out of the church: what profitt
then do holy places bring to them that be buried there, when as those that be
wicked and unworthy, be by Gods appointement thrown out from those sacred
places?

Peter. What thing is there then, that can profit and relieve the souls of
them that be departed?


WHAT IS AVAILABLE FOR the soul after death: and of a Priest of Centumcellis,
who was desired by a certain man's spirit, to be helped after his death, by the
holy sacrifice: and of the soul of a monk called Iustus.

CHAPTER LV.
Gregory. IF the sins after death be pardonable Some sins pardonable after
death.
then the sacred oblation of the holy host uses to help men's souls: for
which cause the souls sometime of them that be dead, do desire the same: for
Bishop Felix whom we spoke of before, says that a virtuous priest who died
some two years since, and dwelt in the diocese of the city of Centumcellis,
and was Pastor of the church of S. John, in the place called Tauriana told
him, that him self did use (when he had need) to wash his body in a certain
place, in which there were passing hot waters: and that going thither upon a
time, he found a certain man whom he knew not, ready to do him service, as
to pull of his shoees, take his clothes, and to attend upon him in all dutiful
manner. And when he had diverse times done thus, the Priest minding upon a day
to go to the bathes, began to think with him self, that he would not be
ungrateful to him that did him such service, but carry him somewhat for a
reward, and so he took with him two synging breades: and coming thither he
found the man there ready, and used his help as he was wont to do: and when
he had washed him self, putt on his clothes, and was ready to depart, he
offered him for an holy reward that which he had brought, desiringe him to
take that courteously, which for charity he did give him. Then with a sadd
countenance, and in sorrowful manner he spoke thus unto him: why do you give me
these father? This is holy bread, and I can not eat of it, for I whom you see
here was sometime Lord of these bathes, and am now after my death appointed
for my sins to this place: but if you desire to pleasure me, offer this
bread unto almighty God, and be an intercessor for my sins: and by this
shall you know that your prayers be heard, if at your next coming you find
me not here: and as he was speaking these words, he vanished out of his
sight: so that he which before seemed to be a man, shevved by that manner of
departure that he was a spirit. The good Sacrifices for the dead.
Priest all the week follovvinge gave him self to tears for him, and dailye
offered up the holy sacrifice: and afterward returning to the bath, found
him not there: whereby it appears what great profit the souls receive
Souls departed helped by the holy sacrifice.
by the sacrifice of the holy oblation, seeing the spirits of them that be
dead, desire it of the living, and give certain tokens to let us understand,
how that by means thereof they have received absolution.

Here also I can not but tell you that which happened three years since in
mine own Monasterye. A certain monk there was called Iustus, one very
cunninge in physic, and vvhiles I remained in the Abbey, served me very
diligently, attending upon me in my often infirmities and sickness. This man
him self at length fell sore sick, so that in very deed he was brought to
the last cast. A brother he had called Copiosus that had care of him, who yet
lives. Iustus perceiving him self past all hoope of life, told this brother
of his, where he had secretly laid up three crowns of gold: but yet they were
not so closelye conuaied, that they could be concealed from the monks: for
they carefully seeking and tossing up all his medicines and boxes, found in
one of them these three crowns hidden. Which thing so sone as I understood,
very much grieved I was, and could not quietly digest so great a sin at his
hands, that lived with us in communitye, because the rule of my Monastery was,
that all the Monastical pouertye.
monks thereof should so live in common, that none in particular might
possess any thing proper to him self. Being therefore much troubled and
grieved at that which had happened, I began to think with my self, what was
best to be done, both for the soul of him that was now dying, and also for the
edification and example of those that were yet living. At length I s^nt for
Pretiosus Prior of the Monasterye, and gave him this charge: Se (quoth I) that
none of our monks do so much as visit Iustus in this his extremity, neither
let any give him any comfort at all: and when his last hour draws nighe, and
he does desire the presence of his spiritual brethren, let his carnal brother
tell him, that they do all detest him, for the three crowns which he had
hidden: that at least before his death, sorrow may wound his heart and purge it
from the sin committed: and when he is dead, let not his body be buried
amongst the rest of the monks, but make a grave for him in some one dunghill
or other, and there cast it in, together with the three crowns which he left
behind him, crying out all with iointe voice: thy money be with the unto
perdition, and so put earth upon him. In either of which things my mind and
desire was, both to help him that was leaving the world, and also to edifye
the monks yet remayninge behind, that both grief of death might make him
pardonable for his sin, and such a severe sentence against avarice, might
terrifye and preserve them from the like offense: both which by Gods goodenes
fell out accordinglye: For when the foresaid monk came to dye, and carefullye
desired to be commended to the devotions of his brethren, and yet none of them
did either visit him, or so much as speak to him: his brother Copiosus told
him, for what cause they had all given him over: at which words he
straightwaios sigh the^ for his sin, and in that sorrow gave up the ghost.
And after his death he was buried in that manner, as I had given in
commandment: by which fact all the monks were so terrified, that they began
each one to seek out the least and basest things in their celles, and which
by the rule they might lawfully keep: and very much they feared, least some
thing they had, for which they might be blamed.

Thirty days after his departure, I began to take compassion upon him, and
with great grief to think of his punnishement, and what means there was to
help him: whereupon I called again for Pre^iofus Prior of my Monasterye, and
with an heavy heart spoke thus unto him. It is now a good while since that
our brother which is departed, remains in the torments Purgatory.
of fire, and therefore we must show him some charity, and labor what we may
to procure his deliuerye: wherefore go your way and see that for A Trenta of
masses.
thirty days following sacrifice be offered for him, so that no one day pass
in which for his absolution and discharge, the healthful sacrifice be not
offered: whoforth with departed, and put my commandment in execution. ^n the
mean time, my mind being busied about other affairs, so that I took no
heed to the days how they passed: upon a certain night the same monk that
was dead, appeared to his brother Copiosus: who seeing him enquired of his
sta^e in this manner: what is the matter brother? and how is it with you? to
whom he ansvvered thus: Hitherto have I been in badd case, but now I am
well, for this day have I received the communion: with which news Copiosus
straightwaies coming to the Monasterye told the monks: and they diligently
counting the days, found it to be that, in which the thirtith sacrifice was
offered for his soul: and so though neither Copiosus knew what the monks had
done for him, nor they what he had seen concerning the state of his brother,
yet at one and the same time both he knew what they had done, and they what he
had seen, and so the Souls delivered out of Purgatory hy the holy sacrifice.
sacrifice and vision agreing together, apparent it was, that the dead monk
was by the holy sacrifice delivered from his pains.


Peter. The things you report be passing strange, and yet full of joy and
comfort.


OF THE LIFE AND DEparture of Bishop Cassius.

CHAPTER LVI.
Gregory. ANd that we should not call in question, or doubt of that which the
dead report, we have for confirmation of the same thing, the factes of the
living. For Cassius Bishop of Narnye a man of holy life, who did usually
every day offer sacrifice unto God: (and vvhiles he was at the mysteries of
those sacrifices, did also immolat him self in tears) received from our Lord
this message by one of his Priests. Do that thou do: work that thou
worckest: let not thy foot cease, let not thy hand cease, upon the natiuitye
of the Apostles, thou shall come unto me, and I will give the thy reward. And
so seaue^ years after, upon that very day of the Apostles, after Cassius
offered sacrifice and said mass.
he had ended the solemnity of Mass and received the mysteries of the sacred
communion, he departed this life.


OF ONE THAT WAS TAKEN BY his enemies, and put in prison, whose irons fell of
at the time of the sacrifice: and of one Baraca a mariner that was by the holy
sacrifice, delivered from drowninge.

CHAITER LVII.
THat also which I have heard, is known to many, to wit, how one was by his
enemies taken and putt in prison with irons upon him: for Oblation of sacrifice.
whom his wife caused upon certain days sacrifice to be offered: who long
time after returning home to his wife, By this appears how auailable the holy
sacrifice is.
told her upon what days his boltes used to fall of: by whose relation she
found, that it was upon those very days, in which sacrifice had bin offered
for him. By an other thing like wise which happened seaue^ years since, the
very same truth is confirmed. For when Agathus Bishop of Palermo (as many
faithful and religious men both have and still do tell me) was in the time of
my predecessor of blessed memory, commanded to come to Rome, The Bishop of
Rome commanded Bisshoppes of other countries.
and in his iornye fell into such a tempest at sea, that he despaired of ever
coming to land. The mariner of the ship called Baraca (who now is one of
the clergy and serves in the same church) governed an other small vessel,
tied to the poupe of the former shipp: the roope whereof breaking in pieces,
away it went with man and all, and amongst the huge mountains of waters,
quickly vanished out of sight. The shipp in which the Bishop was, after many
great danugers, at length arrived all weather beaten at the Island of Ostica:
and when three days were past, and the Bishop could hear no news of the
foresaid mariner that was so violently carried away with the storm, nor see
him in any part of the sea, very sorry he was, and verily believed that he had
been drowned: and so upon great charity bestowed one thing upon him being yet
alive, which was not due unto him, until he was dead: for he willed Sacrifice
offered for the souls departed.
that the sacrifice of the healthful oblation, should be offered unto almighty
God, for the absolution of his soul: which being done accordinglye, and the
shipp new rigged, away he departed for Italy, where arriving at Portua, he
found the mariner alive, whom he verilye supposed to have been drowned: upon
which good chance altogether unlooked for, very glad he was, and demanded of
him, how it was possible that he could escape so many days, in so great a
danger and so terrible a tempest: who told him, how in that storm he was
tossed with that little ship which he governed, and how he did swim with it
being full of water: and so often as it was turned vpside down, how he gat
upon the keele, and held fast there: adding also that by striving and laboring
thus continuallye day and night, at length with watchinge and hunger his
strength began to fail him: and then he told how by the singular providence
and mercy of God he was preserved from drowninge: for as even to this very
day he still affirms, so then did he verifye the same to the Bishop,
telling him in this manner. As I was (quoth he) striving and laboring in the
sea, and my strength began to fail me, suddainlye I became so heavy of mind,
that me thought I was neither waking nor yet a sleep: and being in that case
in the midst of the sea, I saw one come, who brought me bread to refreshe
my tired body: which so sone as I had eaten, I recovered my strength again:
and not long after, a shipp passing by took me in, and so was I delivered from
that danger of death and set safe a land. The Bishop hearing this, inquired
upon what day this strange thing happened, and he found by his relation, that
it was that very day, in which the Note how auailable the holy sacrifice is.
Priest in the Island of Ostica, did sacrifice for him unto God, the host of
the holy oblation.

Peter. That which you report, my self also heard at my being in Sicily.


Gregory. I for my part do verily believe, that the reason why by Gods
providence, this thing sal^eth out thus apparantlye to them that be living,
and think nothing thereof is, that al may know Some sins pardonable after
death. The holy sacrifice profits some after their death.
how if their sins be not irremissible, that they may after death obtain
pardon and absolution for them, by the oblation of the holy sacrifice. But yet
we have here to note, that the holy sacrifice does profit those kind of
persons after their death, who in their life time obtained, that such good
works as wereby their friends done for the^ might be auailable to their
souls, after they were out of this world.


OF THE VERTVE AND MYSTERYE of the holy sacrifice.

CHAPTER LVIII.
ANd here also we have diligently to consider, that it is far more secure and
safe, that every man should do that for him self whiles he is yet alive,
which he desires that others should do for him after his death. For far more
blessed it is, to depart free out of this world, then being in prison to seek
for release: and therefore reason teaches us, that we should with our whole
soul contemn this present world, at least because we see that it is now
gone and past: and to offer unto God the daily sacrifice of tears, and Note
what was the daily sacrifice in the primative church.
the dailye sacrifice of his body and blood. For this sacrifice does e^pe
cially save our souls from everlasting damnation, which in mystery does renew
unto us, the death of the son of God: who although being risen from death,
does not now die any more, nor death shall not any further prevail against
him: yet living in him self immortallie, and without all corruption, he is
again sacrificed for us in this mysterye of the holy oblation: for there his
body is received, there his flesh The real ^presence.
is distributed for the salvation of the people: there his blood is not now
shed betwixt the hands of infide^s, but poured into the mouths of the
faithful. Wherefore let us hereby meditate what manner of sacrifice this is,
ordained for us, which for our absolution does always represent the passion of
the only son of God: for what right believing Christian can doubt, that in
Ponder attentively these words.
the very hour of the sacrifice, at the words of the Priest, the heauenes be
opened, and the quires of Angels are present in that mystery of Jesus Christ:
that high things are accompanied with low, and earthly joined to heavenly,
and that one thing is made of visible and invisible.

HOW WE OYGHTE TO PROCVRE sorrow of heart, at the time of the holy mysteries:
and of the custodye of our soul after contrition.

CHAPTER LIX.
But necessary it is, that when we do these things, we should also by
contrition of heart, sacrifice our selves unto almightye God: for when we
celebrate the mystery of our Lords passion, we ought to imitate what we then
do: for then shall it truly be a s^crifice for us unto God, if we offer our
selves also to him in sacrifice. Careful also must we be, that after we have
bestowed some time in prayer, that as much as we can by Gods grace, we keep
our mind fixed in him, so that no vain thoughts make us to fall unto
dissolution, nor any foolish mirth enter in to our heart: least the soul by
reason of such transitory thoughts, lose all that which it gained by former
contrition. For so Anne deserved to obtain that which she craved at Gods
hand, because after her tears she preserved her self in the former force of
her soul: for of her thus it is written. And her looks were not any more
changed to 1. Reg. 1.
diverse things. She therefore that forgot not what she desired, was not
deprived of that gift which she requested.

THAT WE OVGHTE TO PARDON other men their sins: that we may obtain
remission of our own.

CHAPTER LX.
WE have also further to know, that he does ^ightly and in good sort demand
pardon for his own sin, who does forgive that, which has been done against
him self. For our gift is not received, if before, we free not our soul from
all discord and lack of charity: for our Savior says. If thou Math. 5.
offer thy gift at the altar, and there thou remember that thy brother has
ought against the, leave there thy offering besore the altar, and go first to
be reconciled to thy brother, and then coming thou shall offer thy gift.
Wherein we have to consider, that whereas all sin by a gift is loosed, how
grievous the sin of discord is, for which no gift is received: and therefore
we ought in soul and desire, to go unto our neighbor though he far of, and
many miles distant from us, and there to humble our selves before him, and to
pacifye him by humility and hearty good will, to the end that our creator
beholdinge the desire of our mind, may forgive us our own sin, who
receives a gift for sin. And our Savior him self teaches us, how that
servant which did owe ten thousand talentes, by penance obtained of his Lord,
the forgiveness of that debt: Math. 18.
but yet because he would not forgive his fellow servant, an hundred pence,
which were due to him, that was again exacted at his hands, which before was
pardoned. Out of which sayings we learn, that (...) do not from our heart
forgive (...) which ^s committed against us, ^ow that is again required at our
hands, whereof before we were glad, that by penance we had obtained pardon and
remission. Wherefore whiles time is given us, whiles our judge does bear with
us, whiles he that examineth our sins does expect our conversion and
amendment: let us mollyfy with tears the hardenes of our heart, and with
sincere charity, love our neighbors: and then dare I speak it boldly that we
shall not have any need of the holy sacrifice after our death: if before death,
we offer up our selves for a sacrifice unto almightye God.

FAVLTE^ ESCAPED IN SOME FEW copies.
Page 38. lin. 17. read message. Page 96. lin. 10. read child. Page 268. lin.
13. read opinion. Page 289. marg. blott out the word how. Page 297. lin. 10.
read boldlye. Page 290. lin. 23. read stick. Page 269. lin. 16. read into. Page
386. lin. 2. read spoke. Page 437. lin. 19. read corruptible. Page 461. lin.
27. blot out the word saying. Page 473. lin 13. read sorthwith. Page 474. lin.
19. read quantity. Page 489. lin. 22. read life.
A SHORT RELATION OF DIVERSE MIRACLES, WROVGHTE AT THE MEMORIES OR SHRINES OF
CERTAIN MARTIRS, ESPECIALLY S. Steuene, the Protomartyr of Christ's Church.

Written by the ancient, learned, and holy doctor S. Augustine: and tranflated
into our English tongue by P. VV.

Hebr. cap. 13. v. 7.Remember your Prelates, which have spoken the words of
God to you: the end of whose conversation beholding, imitate their faith.

Gregor. lib. 8. epistol. cap. 37. He that desires thoroughly to be filled with
delitious food: let him read the works of Blessed Augustine.

Printed at Paris. 1608.

TO THE GOOD CHRISTIAN READER.
According to promise (gentle Reader) I have here for the antiquity and
verity of our religion, added to S. Gregory, the testimony of glorious S.
Austen: upon whom the heavenly dew of Gods grace was so plentifully powered,
that he was for sharpness of wit, depth of learning, and holiness of life,
both to them of his time, and all posterity, the light of the world, and salt
of the earth. Many, singular, and rare testimonies for his virtue, learning,
and zeal of true religion, might be produced: but I will content my self only
with two. The first shall be of S. Celestinus Bishop of Rome who writes thus
in his commendation: Augustinum Epist. 1. ad quosda^ Galliaru^ Episcopos. cap.
2.
sanctae recordationis viru^, etc. We have always for his life and merits had
in our communion, Augustine a man of holy memory: neither was he ever so much
as once touched, with any sinister suspicion: Whom long since we remember to
have been of so great learning, that he was by my predecessors, reckoned
amongst the best Doctors: Wherefore all did generally think well of him, as
he that was every where both loved and honored. The second shall be of master
Cooper one living in our days, and not partial as the world knows on our
side, whose words be these. Austen the most famous In his chronicle anno Do^.
397.
and learned Doctor of Christ's Church was Bishop of Hippone a City in
Affricke. This man was of such excellent wit, that in his Childhoode Se also
his Dictionaay in the words Augustinus.
he learned all the liberal sciences, without any instructor: and in all
parts of Philosophy, was wonderfully learned. At the begininge he favored the
opinion of them, which be called Maniches: but by the continual prayer of his
good mother Monica, and the persuasion of holy S. Ambrose, he was converted to
the true faith. They both being replenished with the holy Ghost, sang the
psalm Te Deum, answering mutually one the other. After in prayer, writing,
and preachinge, he so much profited the Church, that his name is worthyly had
in reverence of all men: and generally all Protestants so esteem him, as of no
one Doctor more. To this holy and learned Father, we appeal for trial of our
cause. They deny prayer and invocation of Saints, as injurious to Christ, and
sauoringe of idolatrye: we defend it as Catholic, and Apostolical. They
condemn pilgrimage and visitinge of Martyrs tombs for superstitious, and
abominable: We teach it to be good and lawful. They detest shrininge of
Saints bones, the reverent touching and carrying their relics in procession:
We embrace it as highly redoundinge to the honor of God, from whose divine
fountain all their grace did flow, and by such signs do praise God in his
Saints, and know their death to be precious in his sight. Now whether in these
points S. Austen does favor us, or help them, that I leave to the judgment of
all Protestants, though never so partial in their own cause, aster they have
readd over this small treatise; for our cause is so clear, and the ancient
father so close on our side, that most assured I am, were his name suppressed,
and a title prefixed accordingly (which spiritual stratagem with such as
allow the authority of this, Father, any that please may sone put in
practice) they would rather scoff and deride them for fantastical news sent
out of the new world by the Jesuits, and trim tales meet for dotinge old women
to solace them selves, then once imagine that such doctrine was current in the
slourishinge time of the primative Church; or so much as dream, that such
gross stuff in their concept, could come from the penn of that learned Clerck
and worthy Father S. Austen: What salve then for this sore can be devised?
will they happily say, that the book from whence this doctrine is fetched, is
some bastard, lipp, and falsely fathered, upon that holy Doctor? This shiste
can not serve, there being not so much as any color to countenance such a
cavil: for all learned men confess it not only to be his, but also one os the
most notable monuments that ever he published: being made in his ^iper age,
against insultinge Pagans and infidels, in defense of Christian religion, and
about which he labored many years, besore he brought it to perfection: all
which circumstances maturely considered, make his authority in the foresaid
articles far more great and wayghtye. Will they tell us that he wrote a book
of Retractations, and so not unlikely that these opinions of his be there
recalled? willingly should I grant it, if any such thing were there extant:
but saying no cunninge in searchinge can find that out, which is not there to
be found, they must needs grant, that this answer brings rather corsiue,
then comfort to their cause: sor if in his latter times he perused over all his
works, and yet never revoked any one article of the Catholic faith, then can
not his book of Retractations any ways prejudice, but rather give them more
creditt, and make his authority more to press them. And what man of common
sense, that reads his own words, will ever think that he could retract
what he there writes, concerning prayer to Saints, visitation of relics and
the like? saying they were not any private opinions of his own, but the common
belief and practice of Gods Church, as is evident out of the treatise
followinge. Smaller matters God knows they be, which he speaks os in his
Retractations, and two only things he retracteth in his book of the City of
God from whence these stories are taken. The first is, that he thought it a
miracle, that fire from heaven did run between Abraham's sacrifice; It should
not (quoth he) have been put down for a miracle, Lib. 10.
because this was shown him in vision. The second is, where he says that
Samuel was not the son of Aaron. I should rather (quoth he) have said, that
he was not the son of a Priest, because Samuels father is found amongst the
sons of Aaron, but a Priest he was not, etc. Such private opinions as these,
of small importance, as each one sees, he retracteth in that book; other main
and many articles of diuinitye, in controversy betwixt them and us, he does
not retract; which argues plainly, that they are sound, and Catholic, and
were the belief of that time. And this the Protestants, that be learned be not
ignorant of, sor which cause when we object that S. Austen prayed sor his
mothers soul: Lib. 9. co^fes cap. 11. 12. 13. Epist. 99. ad Euodiu^ and 20. de
ciuit. cap. 15. Tract. 118 in Joan. Haeres. 82.
that he believed Christ to have descended into that part of hell, called
Limbus patrum, or Abraham's bosom, and delivered Adam from thence, and the rest
os the holy fathers: that he thought it necessary to use the sign of the
Cross: that it was heresy to teach that virginity and marriage were os like
merit, and such like points in controversy: they never tell us, that he
retracted these opinions, knowing full well that no such thing is there to be
found: and therefore though this devise runs up and down in corners, and
helps sometimes amongst ignorant people, and gives a pretty grace when his
book is not present, yet most sure I am that not any of our learned
adversaries would be willinge to join with us upon that issue, being not
ignorant, that this answer rather desires darkness then loves light: which
is the reason as I suppose, that it comes seldom in print: sor except it
were once, if once, never did I se any such thing, though in common conserence
it be the common refuge and sanctury. The Protestants of Magde burge destitute
of a better answer, help out the matter with flat lying, making S. Augustine
to reprehende that, which he does Centur. cap. 6. co 699.
highely commend. Augustine (say they) in his 22. book of the city of God,
the 8. chapter, concerning the relics of Steuene writes, that a superstitious
and great co^curse of multitudes was made unto them euene into Affricke, the
people being become mad with certain illusions, which were reputed for
miracles. But this ouer-reaching liberty argues their cause to be desperate,
and that no sound answer can be found to avoid so irrefragable a testimony:
they greatly injury that worthy father, he neither calls those miracles
illusions, nor censureth the people for superstitious or mad: those terms be
slippes of their own planting: nay what does he else in that whole chapter* but
prove that the catholic faith wants not miracles? can any then believe,
that he would call them illusions, by which he affirms our faith be proved?
Peruse (good reader) the treatise followinge, and I leave it to thy judgment
whether they had the fear of God before their eyes, that entertained so
gross and graceless an invention. Glorious S. Austen then whom so much they
admire (notwithstanding these former shifts) is ours: and the catholic
Church, the Apostles and Christ him self, is ours: for what doctrine he
brought from heaven: what the disciples learned of him, and their posterity
received from them: that did this worthy Father, and the Church of Christ in
his time believe; VVherof as no good Christian ever made doubt: so does
himself affirm in these words with which I will here end. That which (the
fathers and catholic Doctors) found in the Church, Lib. 2. con. ^lulia^.
Pe^agianum ^ap. 10.
they did hold: that which they learned, they taught: that which they received
from their Fathers, the same they delivered to their children.

P. W.

A FEW SELECTED MIRACLES CONCERNING THE HONOR OF SAINTS: Gathered out of S.
Augustins 22. book, Of the city of God. Chap. 8.
MANY miracles in these our days be wrought in Christ's name, either by his
sacraments, or by the prayers, or shrines of his Saints but they be not blazed
out with fame (as those be which are in the scripture) and so lack that
public glory in the eyes of the world which glory in the eyes of the world
which those have. For the canon of the sacred scripture (which requisite it
was, should be published in all places) does make them every where to be readd
and remembered of the whole world: but these other miracles are known where
they were done, and yet scaresly the whole city, or all the inhabitans of that
place. For sometime very few do know them (others never hearing any thing)
especially if the city be great: and when they be told to others in other
places, the reporters are not of so great authority, as that they can be
believed, without difficulty or doubtinge, no although they be related to
Chr^stia^s, and that by them which profess the name of Christ.

That miracle which was wrought in Millan at my being there, when a blind man
received his eyesight, might come to the knowledge of many: because both the
city is great, and the Emperor at that time kep^ his court there, and infinite
store of people were present (when the miracle happened, going in troops to
the bodies of the martyrs Prothasius and Geruasius: which having been long time
vt^erly unknown, were in sleep revealed to Ambrose the Bishop, and so
found:) where that blind man leauinge his old darkness, beheld the new and
joyful ^^e na^of an ^er. in ^amo^gst ^ Ro^^s.
light of this world.

Hesperius the * Tribune who dwells here amongst us, has in the torritory of
Fussalen a farm called Zubedy: and understanding that the house to the
trouble of his cattle and servants, was haunted with wicked spirits, he
requested in my absence, that some of my priests would vouchsafe to go
thither, that by their prayers they might be driven away. One of them The
sacrifice of the body of Christ, commonly called the Mass.
went, and offered there the sacrifice of the body of Christ, prayinge
instantly, for the quietness of that house, and forthwith by Gods merciful
providence, it was discharged from that former vexation.

The same man had also given him by a friend of his a piece of holy earth,
brough from Jerusalem, out of our Saviors sepulcher, which he had hanged up in
his own chamber, least some harm migh also have come to himself. But after
his house was delivered from the foresaid trouble, he begane to think with
himself, what was best to be done with that earth, which now for reverence
sake, he would not any longer keep in his chamber. It sell so out, that my
self and Maximinus Bishop of Sinicen were not far of, whom he requested to
come thither, which we willingly did. And after he had told us all that which
had happened, he desired that the holy earth might be put in some place, and so
to have a Chapel built, unto which Christians might re pair, for the
celebratinge of such things as belong to God. Content we were to satisfy his
desire, and so it was done accordingly. There dwelt not far of a certain
young man of the country, sick of the palsye, who hearing hereof, desired
his parents that without all delay they would carry him to that place, which
being done, there he prayed, and forth with departed from thence safe and sound.

In a certain village called Victoria, not thirtye miles distant from Kings
Hippo, there is a shrine of the blessed martirs of Millan, Geruasius and
Protasius, unto which a certain young man was brought, into whom the devil
had entered, as he was a washing of his horse in the heates of summer. Lying
there almost dead, or at least like a dead man, the Lady of the place according
to the custom, came thither with her maids, and certain Nuns, to euensong,
and they began to singe hymns: with which noise he was as it were strooken and
shaken out, and roaring terribly, he laid hold of the altar, and not daring,
or not being able, to stir it, yet let it go he would not, but held it as fast
as though he had been bound or nailed to the same, and pitifully howling out,
he desired them to spare him, confessing where, when, and in what manner, he
possessed the young man. At length he told them that he would go forth, and
named all those parts of his body, which he threatened at his departure to cut
of: and whils he was thus speakinge, out he went. But the man's eye fell out
upon his cheek, and hunge there by a little string, cominge as it were from
the inward root, and the midst of his eye which before was black, became all
white: which thing when the people present did behold, (for many that heard
him cry out so terriblie came thither, all which prostrate prayed for him)
though glad they were to see him sound of mind:, yet sorry for the hurt of his
eye, and thought it the best way to send for a surgeon: but his brother in law
who had brought him thither, liked not, of that, for God is able (quoth he) by
the prayers of his Saints who has cast out the devil, to restore him likewise
his eye again. Wherefore as well as he could, he put the eye into his former
place, and bound it close up, not thinking good to have it opened until
seven days were expired, after which time he found it perfectly weell.

Others also in the same place were cured, of all which to speak in particular
would be tedious and over long. A certain old man there was called Florentius
dwellinge here in Hippo. one that was religious and poor, and got his living
by mendinge of garments, who by ill chance lost his cloak, not having
wherewith to buy an other: where-vppon he went to Church and prayed to the
twenty martyrs (whose shrine at this day is here very famous) that they would
help him to an other cloak: and he spoke so loud that certain merry
companions that over heard him, fell a laughinge; iestinge, and scoffinge at
him, as though he had begged money of the martyrs to buy him a new garment, and
in this manner they followed him out of the Church. But the good man without
saying any thing, went forth: where he espied upon the sea side, a great fish
leaping and skippinge, that was lately cast up, which by their help he got,
and straight after sold it to a certain cook called Carcoso, for an hundred
halfepence, (which cook was an honest man, and a good Christian) telling him
all the matter as it had happened, purposing with the money to buy some wool,
that his wife thereof might provide him more apparel. But when the cook came
to open the fish, he found in the bowels a ringe of gould: whervppon moved by
and by with pity, and terrified with religion, he restored it to Florentius,
saying: behold how liberally the twenty marty ^s have sent the apparel.

At the Tibilitan waters, at such time as Bishopp Proiectus carried thither the
relickes of the most glorious martyr S. Steven great multitudes of people came
to his shrine, amongst whom a blind woman, desired that she might be brought
to the Bishop, that carried those holy relickes: and when she was come, she
gave certain flowers, which she brought: and receiuinge them again, she put
them to her eyes, and straight ways she was restored to her former sight.

An other shrine there is like wise of Coloni^ or colony is a place inhabited
by people, that came from some other place.
the same martyr in Sinecen, a town not far from the Colonye of Hippo, which
Lucillus Bishopp of the same place, carried in a procession; and a fistula
which long time had put him to much pain, (and which a Physician of his
familiar acquaintance was to have lanced) by the bearing of that holy carriage
was suddenly cured, for never after could he find it any more in his body.

Eucharius a Spanish Priest dwelling at Calama, lay sick of an old disease of
the stone, and was cured by the shrine of the foresaid martyr S. Sreuen, which
Bishopp Possidius brought to that place. The very same man afterward by the
extremity of an other sickness, lay so like a dead man, that none making any
doubt thereof, they bound his hands together: but by help of the foresaid
martyr, one bringing the priests coat from his shrine, and casting it upon
his body, he was restored to life again.

There dwelt in the same place, a man of his degree, in very good account,
called Martialis, well strooken in years, but one that could not abide
Christian religion: yet his daughter and son in law were both Christians,
baptized that very year: both Christians, baptized that very year: both which
instantly besought their sick father, that he would likewise become a
Christian: but all in vain, for in no wise could they persuade him, but in
great anger he commanded them out of his sight. His son in law in that
necessity, thought it best to visitte the shrine of S. Steven, and there with
all his devotion to make his prayers, that God would give him a good mind, and
inspire him quickly to become a Christian, and to believe in Christ: and so he
did with great sighing, many tears, much sinceritye, and a burninge affection
of true piety: and upon his de parture, he carried with him from the altar,
some of the flowers which came next to hand, and when it was night, he laid
them under his father in laws head, after which he fell a sleep: and behold
before it was yet morning, the old man cried out, that thy would run to the
Bishop (who by chance was then with me at Hippo) but understanding that he was
not at home, he desired that some of his Priests would vouchsafe to come unto
him: and when they were present, he told them that he did now believe in
Christ, and so he was baptized, to their great admiration and joy. And so long
as he lived after, he had these words continually in his mouth: O Christ
receive my spirit: him self being altogether ignorant, that these were the
very last words which S. Steuene spoke, when he was stoned of the Jews: which
were also the last that ever he uttered, for not long after he departed this
life.

In the same place three others sick of the gout, were cured by the same
martyr. Two of them were Cityzens, and the third a Pilgrim: and the Cityze^s
were straight healed with out any more ado: but the Pilgrim was instructed by
revelation what he should do, when the pain came upon him, which so often as
he did the grief straight vanished away.

There is a piece of ground called Andurus, where there is a Chnrch, and in it
a shrine of the martyr S. Steven. By chance certain oxen running out of the
way, did with the wheel of the cart, crush a little child as he was
playing in the yard, and by and by, after a fevv pangues it gave up the ghost.
The mother took it up in her arms, and carried it to the Church, and there
laid it before the shrine of the martyr: and it did not only return to life,
but was also perfectly cured, that no show of any hurt at all remained.

A certain Nun likewise dwellinge hard by the same Church, in a place called
Caspaliana, was desperately sick, whose gown some of her friends carried to
the same shrine, and before it was brought back again, she was dead:
notvvith standinge at their return, they laid it upon her dead corpse,
whereupon her soul returned into her body, and she to life again.

At Hippo, one Bassus borne in Siria, did pray before the shrine of the same
martyr for his daughter, which was dangerously sick, and carried with him
thither her gown: and so it happened, that whils he was there at his
devotions, she departed this life. His servants in have came from his house, to
let him understand that doleful news: but his friends that met them, did
utterly forbidd them, least he should before the people have lamentably cried
out. Returning home, and finding the house full of weeping and wayling, he laid
upon her dead corpse, the garment which he brought from the shrine of the
martyr: and forthwith she returned to life again.

In the same place the son of one Ireneus a collector, departed this life:
whose body likewise was laid forth, and all things with much weepinge and
sorrow made ready for his buryall. One comfortinge the father, gave him
counsel to annoint his sons body with the oil of the same Ma^tyr, which
being done, the young man revived.

Likewise Eleusinus the Tribune, who dwells here amongst us, had a young
son of his, an infant, which dyed: whom he laid upon the shrine of the
Martyr which is in the subvrbes, and after he had prayed there with tears, he
carried him back alive.

What shall I do? my promise to finish this work does bind me, that I can
not here report all those miracles which I know: and no question but many
Christians will be sorry (when they read these here mentioned) for that I have
passed over so many other with silence, which they know no less then my self:
whom at this time I beseech to pardon me, and to think with them selves, what
a labor it is to perform that, which the necessity of the work taken in hand
compels me not to perform. For if I should write only of the miraculous
cures (to omit all other) which have been wrought by this glorious martyr
Steven in the Colony of Chalama, as also in ours, it would require many
books: and yet all could not be gathered together, but only those, of which
certificates have been given, to the end they might be read to the people: for
we took order to have it so done, for as much as miracles also in our times
like unto those of former days have been wrought, which we think very
convenient that they should come to the knowledge of many. And it is not two
years since, that this shrine began to be at Kings Hippo, and many (which we
know most certainly) gave no certificates in writing of such miracles as
happened: and yet when I wrott this, the number of them which have been given,
came almost to seauenty. But at Chalama where his shrine was before, and
where such bills or certificates be oftener delivered in, they be incomparably
far more.

We know also that at Vzalis, which is a colony not far from Vtica, many
notable things have been done by the same martyr S. Steven, whose shrine was
there set up by Bishop Euodius long before it was here with us: but there
they use not to keep a register of the miracles, or rather in times past they
did not, but now they begin to do it. For at my being there, vvihch was not
long since, both my self and the Bishop of the same place, did persuade the
Lady Petronia a noble woman, who was there miraculously cured of a great and
long disease (about which many Physicians had labored in vain) that she would
give up in writing a public testimonial of the miracle, that it might be
readde to the people, which most obediently she performed: wherein also she putt
down that, which though I make have forward, yet I can not omit. She said
therefore that she was persuaded by a certain Jew, to put a ring on a girdle
made of hear, and to tie that about her, next unto her bare body: and that
under the gemme of the ring she should put a stone, that was found in the
reins of an ox: having tied this about her, as a remedy for her disease,
forth she went to the shrine of the martyr, and departing from Carthage, she
lodged all night at her own manor, in the confines of the river Bagrada: and
rising up in the morning to go forward on her journey, she espied the ring lying
upon the ground before her feet: where at somewhat amazed, she felt upon the
girdle, and finding that, as it was before, with all the knotts fast tied, she
suspected that the ringe had been broken, and so slipped out: but findinge that
also safe and sound, then she presumed that by so notable a miracle, she had
almost a pledge of her future recovery: where upon she loosed that girdle, and
together with the ring threw it into the river. They will not believe this,
which believe And in this number be many Protestants.
not that our Lord Jesus Christ was brought forth without any detrement to his
mothers virginity, and that he entered into his disciples the doors being shutt:
but let them enquire the truth of this relation, and if they find it to be as
I have reported, then let them believe those other things to be most true; the
woman is honorable, of an honorable parentage, and honorably married. She dwelt
in Carthage, which is a great city, and she of great nobility. Such things as
these, suffer not such a miracle as this to be unknown. The martyr himself by
whose intercession she was cured, believed in the son of her, that remained a
virgin: believed in him who entered into his disciples the doors being shutt.
Finally, which is the cause why I have made rehear sale of all these things, he
believed in him who in that flesh ascended up into heaven, in which he rose
from death, and therefore by him so many miracles are wrought, because for his
faith he shedd his blood.

One miracle there is, which was done here among us, I say not greater then
the former recited, but so famous and well known, that I think there is none
dwelling in Hippo, but either did se it, or at least has heard there of,
neither is it possible that any can ever forgett it. Seven brothers and three
sisters there were, all children of one man, borne at Cesarea in the country
of Cappadocia, of a good family: whom the mother straight upon the death of
their father did curse, for a certain injury which they offered her, and which
she took passing heauylye. Whereupon God punished them with such a pitiful
palsye, that they did most horribly shake: upon which lamentable chance, being
ashamed to remain where they were known, they departed for diverse countries,
wa^dring up and down throuhhout the whole Roman Empire: and at length two of
them, the brother and the sister, called Paulus, and Palladia, came into this
our country, being before well known to many other places, for their markable
miserye, and they arrived here about fifteen days before Easter, not ceasinge
daily to go to the Church, in which also they did frequent the shrine of the
glorious martyr S. Steven: where they did earnestly pray that God would pardon
their sins, be reconciled to his wre^ched servants, and at length restore
unto them their former health. And both there and wheresoever they went, the
people marueyled and gazed upon them: and such as before had seen them in other
places, and knew both them, and the cause of their lamentable shakinge, made
the matter known to so many as they could. When Easter day was come, the young
man early in the morninge, went to the Chruch, being already full of people,
and laying hold as he prayed upon the bar^es of that holy place where the
shrine was, suddenly he fell prostrate, and lay as though he had been a sleep,
yet without any trembling or shaking at all, which before he did also when he
slept. The people present some were amazed, some afraid, some grieved, and one
amongst the rest being about to lift him up, others would not suffer him, but
thought it better to expect, to see what would become of him: and behold after
he had remained in that manner some little time, he rose up without any shaking
at all: being now safe and sound, and stood amongst them in perfect health,
behoulding them that marueiled at him. Who was then present that looked upon
him, and saw what was done, that did not magnify and praise Gods name? And
the Church on all sides did rebound with noise, the people cried so out, and
reioysed at that which had happened: Word of this miracle was brought unto me,
where I was sitting ready to come into the Church, one posting after an other,
the latter ever bringing that for news, which others had told before him. As I
was glad, and secretly in mine heart gave God thanks, in comes the man
himself with a great troop following him, whom falling down at my fecte I
embraced and lifted up again. Forth we came to the people, where we found the
Church, sounding with joy, each man on all sides crying out, God be thanked,
and his name be blessed for ever: I saluted the people, and sorth with out they
cried again, repeating but far more fervently, the same very words. At lenght
when silence was made, the sacred scriptures were solemnly read and when my
time of preaching was come, a few words I spoke meet for that time and
answearable to that great mirth and joy.

The man went home with me to dinner, where very diligently he told me the
whole history of the calamity of his mother and brethren. The next morning
after the sermon was ended, I promised the people that the particularities of
the matter should in writing be readde unto them the day following, which was
accordingly performed: and whils it was in reading, I caused both him and his
sister to be set upon an high place not far from the pulpitt: where all the
people, men and women might see them both standinge, the one safe and sound,
the other pitifully shaking in all parts o^ her body: and they which before
had not seen him in his misery, beheld in his sister what God had mercifully
done for him: and in him they did see for what to thank God, and in her for
what to pray unto Christ. When there bill was readde, I willed them both to
depart, and then I began somewhat more exactly to entreat of the matter: but
whils I was thus busied, all on a sudden we heard new showtinge and crying
out at the shrine of the martyr: wherewith my auditors began to look that way,
and to run to see what the matter was. For the poor wooman departing from
the place where before she stood, wen^ straight way to pray Prayer ^^ Saints.
unto the holy martyr, and so sone as she touched the bars, she fell down as
her brother had done before: and after a little sleepee she rose up perfect and
sound. Demanding therefore what had happened, and what was the cause of that
joyful crying out, they brought her from the shrine of the martyr, into the
Church where we were: whereupon there was such a marvelous crying out of men
and women, and such weeping for joy, that one would have thought it would never
have ended. Back again was she brought to the same place, where a little
before she stood trembling and shaking. Rejoicing there was that she was
found, like unto her brother, for whom a little before sorry they were, that like
she was not: and although as yet they had not prayed for her, yet by the
sequel they perceived, that the desires of their hearts were already heard.
Such rejoicing and showtinge out there was, such lauding and praising God, not
in words, but with such a wonderful joyful noise, that mine ears could
scarce endure it: what was in the hearts of that joyful people, but the faith
of Christ, for which blessed Steven shed his blood.

A NOTABLE MIRACLE VVROVGHT BY S. BERNARDE in confirmation of diverse articles
of religion: written by one william an Abbot, in the third book of the said
Saints life: Chap. 8.

TO THE GOOD CHRISTIAN Reader.
THe miracle ensewing (gentle Reader) I have thought very expedient to add in
this place, (though far inserior to the former sor antiquity) because it was
wrought for the proose and confirmation of diverse articles, denied by the
Protestants, and mayntained by the Catholic church, and is of that quality
that no shadow of just exception can be taken against it. For it was written
by a religious and virtuous man, that lived in S. Bernards time, Se the Preface
o^ S. Bernardes life.
and was very well acquainted with his life and conversation: and he relates
it as done in the sight of the world, with the particular circumstances, of
persons words, and such like: that no place is left for incredulous suspicion
or calumniation: for he that will deny so manifest a story, may with like
reason, deny any histories of former times what-soeuer. To ascribe so powerable
a sign to the operation of the common enemy, is too injurious to the renoumed
sanctity of that holy and great servant of God, whose memory is not only
reverenced of us, but also venerable to our adversaries them selves: and
besides, it is an old devise of wicked Porphirius and Eunomius, as S. Hierom
notes, Co^tra Vi^ilant.
descending to them by inheritance from the Pharisees, who by like blasphemy,
labored to obscure and eneruate the miracles of Christ himself, saying. This
fellow casts not out devils, but in Beelzebub the Prince of the devils. To
this may be added, that if any Math. 12. v. ^^4.
miracles be of force to prove the truth of religion (as none without note of
infidelity can deny) no question but they be especially those, which have been
wrought in defense and confirmation of faith, and religion: for in this case
the providence of God, who desires the salvation of all, and whose honor it
principally concerns, never permits his holy name to be in that kind
abused, or superstitious idolatrye, or any damnable doctrine, as it were by his
own seal to be confirmed, and commended to the world: neither ever in former
times can any such president be produced, but many examples (to the glory of
Gods name, and comfort of Catholics) may be alleged to the contrary. The
idolatrous Priests of Baal, jointly and ernestly with lou^ voice, and that a
long time, called upon their God, yea and launced them selves with knives to
the sheddinge of their blood, and all this, that miraculous fire would descend
from heaven for the consuminge of that sacrifice, which they had prepared sor
his honor, and confirmation of that religion, which they taught: but as the
scripture says no voice was heard, neither was there any that gave them 3.
Reg. Epist. ^ Trallian Lib. 3. excidio Hierosol cap. 2. Amb. ad uersus gentes
li^ 2. Ciril. catach. ^ Philastr de here is cap. 3. A^ gus. her^ 1.
answer. Simon Magus whom S. Ignatius calls the devils eldest son,
attempted to raise up one that was dead, as Egesippus reports, but with
unfortunate success. The same arch heretic, as both the foresaid author and
many more report, having by magical enchantments mounted him self up in the
air, to ascend into heaven, was overthrown by the prayers of S. Peter, and so
disgratiously fell down. One Vide a^ synodi se tae act. ^ Gregor. Turo^. l 3.
hist. Franco cap. 30.
Polychronius a Monothelite heretic, with great ostentation, undertook, to
raise up a dead man, thereby to prove his damnable doctrine, but effected no
such thing

The like disgrace befell Cirola a great Patriarch of the Arrians, who upon
envy to certain catholic Bishops samous for miracles, corrupted a certain
castaway of his own sect with gold, to feign himself blind, that by
restoring him his sight, he might procure glory to him self, and credit to his
religion. The wretched man according to the lesson given him, cried out after
Cirola Passinge by in the streets, adiuringe him by that power which he had,
to restore him his sight. The heretical bishop came, and put his hand upon
his eyes, saying. According to our faith, by which we believe God a right, be
thine eyes opened: what sollowed? Straight ways the miserable man became
blind in deed: whereupon he pittysully bewailed his wickedness, detected the
damnable devise, and cried out to the bishop saying. Behold thy gold,
restore me the light of mine eyes, which through thy deceit I have lost. The
like prankes have been practiced, not only by diverse others, but also by the
new masters of our time, which for brevity sake I forbear to prosecute. But
God is not mocked: their designements by divine providence were always
defeated, and shame to them selves, and confusion to their religion, was the
sinall reward of such graceless attempts.

This being so, though denied it cannot be, but that many magical miscreants
by Gods permission, have done very strange things, to the seducing of diverse,
as is evident in Simon Magus, and that not only by the testimony of other
authors, but also of scripture it self: yet Actor. cap. 8. v. 10. 11.
never did divine providence suffer any such to be wrought sor confirmation of
false doctrine, as the sore-alledged examples do abundantly testify, which is
the reason, why miracles especially in this kind, as being free from all
cauilling exception, prove infallibly that religion to be of God, which is by
such powerable signs first planted among Paganicall infidels, or afterward
desended against the innovation of after-rising heretics: and thersore no
Cont. epi. fundam: cap. 4.
marvel though S. Augustine amongst diverse other things which he says kept
him in the church (as the very name Catholic, the succession of the Bishopps
of Rome) numbreth also miracles. And Richardus de S. Victore, moved with such
strange miracles, as supernatural grace had vouchsafed to work for
confirmation of the Catholic faith, with great zeal and confidence speaks
thus to God. O Lord if it be error which we Lib. 1. de Trmit. cap. 2.
believe, thou have deceived us: for these things have been confirmed in us, by
those signs and woonders, which could not be done but by the. Seeing then S.
Bernard wrought so notable and apparent a miracle, to prove the necessity and
grace of baptism, Prayer for the dead, Invocation of Saints, Pilgrimage,
Festival days, Conse^ration of chrisine, etc. VVha^ good Christian can doubt,
that these articles ^e any other then true, sound, and Apostolical. But let us
now hear the author him self, whose words be these that fellow, truly
translate^t into our English tongue.

P. W.

IN THE country of Tolosa, one Henry sometime a monk, but then a vile
Apostata of most wicked life, taught pernicious doctrine: and with plausible
words, had gotten the light hearts of the people in those parts, and as the
Apostle foretold, speaking 1. Timoth. 4. v. 2. ^. Pet. 2. 1. 3.
lies in hypocrisy, with sained words made merchandise of them.

This man was an open enemy of the Church, speaking irreuerentlye bo^^
against ecclesiastical sacraments, and also those that did minister them: and
he had greatly prevailed in that his leude course: for the venerable father
writing of him to the Prince of Tolosa, amongst other words says thus:
Every where now churches were found without people: people without Priests:
Priests without due reverence: to conclud^ Christians, without Christ. The
infantes of Christians were hindered from the life of Christ, whiles the grace
of Baptism was denied: Prayers and oblations sor the dead were derided:
invocation of Saints, excommunication of Bishops, Pilgrimage of faithful
people, building of churches, observation of festival days, hallowing of
Chrisme and oil: to be short, all ecclesiastical institutions were contemned.

In this necessity the holy man travailed into those parts, having been often
before entreated by the church of that country: and then finally both
persuaded, and also co^ducted thither, by the most reverend Prelat Albericus,
Bishop of Ostia, and legate of the Apostolic sea. Upon his arrival there,
he was received with wonderful joy by the people of that country, as though
an Angel had come from heauene.

Long he could not stay amongst them, because it was not possible to hinder
the people from pressing upon him, so mighty a concurse there was of them that
came unto him day and night, crauinge his blessing, and earnestly desiring his
help. Yet did he preach for some days in the city of Tolosa, and other
places, which that wretch had most frequented, and more daungerously infected:
instructing many that were simple in faith, strengthningthe^ that did waver,
calling back those that were gone a straye, restoring the overthrown,
pressing and beating down with his authority, the subuerters and obstinate,
in such sort, that they were so far from resisting him, as they durst not so
much as come in his presence. And albeit, that heretic at that time fled
away, and lay close: yet were his ways so stopped, and all passages so
besett, that afterward he could scarce remain any where in saftye: at length
being taken and bound, he was delivered over to the Bishop. In that iorny
also, God was glorified in his servant, by very many miracles which he
wrought, recalling the souls of some from their wicked errors, and healing
the bodies of others, from diverse diseases.

There is a place in that country called Sarlatum, where after he had made an
end of his sermon, they offered unto the servant of God (as in all places they
used to do) bread to be blessed: which he lifting up his hand and making
the sign of the cross, did bless, saying: By this shall ye know, that the
doctrine which I preach is true, and that false which heretics, do tell you,
if those which be sick amongst you, eating of of this bread, do recover their
former health. But the venerable Bishop of Chartiers, that great Gaufridus
being present, and next unto the man of God, fearing the event, adjoined these
words: If they receive it (quoth he) with a good faith they shall be cured. To
whom the holy father, nothing doubting of Gods power, spoke thus. I said not
so: but that those which eat thereof, shall verilye be cured: to the end they
may thereby know us to be the true and faithful messengers of God. After
which, so great a multitude of sick persons that eat of that bread,
recovered and became well, that the news thereof ran through out all that
country: and the holy man in his return, shunned and was affraide to go unto
fuch places as were there about, by reason of the intolerable concurse of
people.

The first miracle which Christ An other miracle some what like the former,
thought done before it: taken out of the same place. Chap.
showed by his servant in the city of Tolosa, was the curinge of a clergy man
sick of the palsy. The man of God, visiting this sick person about the
closing of the eueninge (in the house of the Canon regulars, of Saint
Saturninus, being him self one of them, and this at the request of the Abbote
and brethren) he found him ready to die and as it were drawing of his last
breath. After he had comforted the afflicted man, and giuene him his blessinge
he departed: and as him self after ward confessed, the faithful servant
spoke unto our Lord in his heart, with great confidence and faith saying: What
do thou expect o Lord God. This generation seeks for miracles: otherwise
our words have the less force with them, unless they be confirmed by the
with signs that follow them That same very howre^, the man sick of the
palsy leaped out of his bed and by running having overtaken him, he embraced
his feet with all devotion. One of the Canons upon a sudden meeting with
this man, was so terrified, that he cried out, verily thinking him to be some
ghost. For how could he believe that he was^ able to have risen from his
bed? and therefore supposing rather that his soul was departed the body, and
so appeared unto him, for very fear he ran away. But at length, the verity
of the thing it self, caused both him and others to believe it. The brethren
understanding these news, made have to be partakers of so pleasant a sight.
The Bishop also him self and the Legate, came running amongst the first:
Away they went to the church, the man that was restored to health going before
them. There they brake forth with loud voices into the praises of God, the man
him self singing together with them. The people round about came thronging
in: Christ is blessed, the faith triumphs, heretics are confounded, piety
reioiseth, impiety fretteth and pineth away. Because a few pages (good
Reader) remained vacant, I have added these miracles following, taken out of
ancient and authentical authors.

OF A JEWS CHILD, MIRAculously preserved by virtue of the holy Saecrament,
and patronage of our blessed ^uagrius ^ued a^out the ^are of christ 600 This
Me^^as was ^ishoppe ^Co^stannople.
Lady: written by Euagrius in his 4. book chap. 35.
IN the time of *Mennas, a notable miracle worthy of memory happened at
Constantinople. They had there an ancient custom, that when very many little
hosts, of the pure and immaculate body of Christ our Lord remained, to send
for young children that went to schole, to the end they might receive them:
which being done, it fell so out upon a time, that the child of a certain
Jew (who was a glasse-maker) went amongst them. Who being demanded of his
parents, why he had stayed so long, told them the truth, saying, that he had
also eaten in the company of other children. The Jew at this news inflamed
with choler and extreme rage, threw the boy into the burning furnace, in which
he used tomake glasses. But the mother after long seeking, not finding her
child, went up and down all the city, praying to God with much sigthing and
lamentable weepinge. After three days, standing at the door of her husbands
shop, with great grief and torment of mind, she called her son by his
name. The boy hearing his mothers voice, answered her out of the furnace. The
mother breakinge open the doors, with great have entered in, where she saw
her child standing in the midst of those hot burning coals, without any
hurt at all: and demanding by what means he was preserved from all harm. A
woman It is most likely that this woman was our Blessed Lady.
(quoth he) clothed in purple came often to me, which gave me water to quench
the flaming fire next about my body, and brought me also meat so often as I
was hungry. This miracle coming to the ears of Justinian the Emperor, he gave
order to have the child together with the mother baptized, and commanded, that
the father who refused to become a Christian, should be crucified in a place
called Syris.

OF THE MIRACVLOVS IMAGE of our Savior: taken out of Eusebius ^usebius lived
in the time of Costan ^ine, about the year of our Lord 320. Math. 9. v. 20.
the 7. book chap. 14. and Sozomenus.
IT is said, that the woman which was troubled with an yssewe of blood, and
was cured by our Savior as we read in the Gospel, was borne in Cesarea
Philippi, and that her house is there to be seen, and that certain admirable
monume^tes of our Saviors benefits toward her, and as it were joyful
records, do remain euene to these our days. For before the doors of her
house there stands upon an high bancke of stones, the brazen image of a woman
upon her knees, holding up her hands, like one that humbly craved for some
thing. Right over against it, there is an other image of a man, made likewise
of brass comely attired, with his garment down to the ankles, putting forth
his hand toward the woman: at whose feet, The reuerentvse of images
confirmed by miracle.
there grows out of the bancke a strange and unknown kind of herb, which
when it comes so high, that it touches the hemme of the brazen garment, it
has force and power to cure all kind of diseases. This image they say
represents Jesus Christ, which contineweth until these our days, and my
self travailing to that city, did see it with mine own eyes. Neither is it to
be maruailed, that the gentiles which received benefits from our Savior whiles
he lived in this world, did erect such monumentes, when as I have seen the
images of the Apostles Peter and Paul, and of Christ Note the antiquity of
images.
him self, represented in pictures, with varietye of colors, and kept to
these very times of ours.

WHAT HAPPENED CONCERNING this image, after the time of Eusebius: Sozomenus
in his 5. book, chap. 20. Sozomenus lived in the yea re 420.
reports in these words.
IVlian the Apostata, having intelligence that there was a famous image of
Christ at Cesarea Philippi (set up by that woman which was troubled with an
ysse we of blood, after she was delivered from that disease) commanded it to
be overthrown, and his own to be placed in stead thereof: which being done,
fire falling from heaven, cut his image in sunder about the (...) of sa^^^ma
(...) pu^ni^ed from (...).
breast, and threw the head tog^her with the neck upon the ground, and did
beat the face into the e^rth, in that part which was broken of from the
breast. Since which time to this d^ye it remains black, as though it had
been burnt with fire. At that time the Pagans drew the image of Christ, with
such violence, that they brake it in pieces. But the Christians afterward
gathering the fragments together, laid them in the church, where they do
still remain.

FINIS.

