A SERMON PREACHED AT St. MARY'S SPITTLE ON MONDAY IN EASTER Week, the
fourteenth day of April, Anno Dom. 1623. By Walter Balcanqual, Doctor of
Divinity, and Master of the Sauoy.

LONDON, Printed by F. K. for John Budge, and are to be sold at the sign of
the green Dragon, in Paul's Churchyard. 1623.

A SERMON PREACHED AT SAINT MARY'S SPITTLE.
Psalm. 126. 5. They that sow in tears, shall reap in joy.
WHen any one has sown tares, does he expect to reap wheat? Do men gather
grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles? says our Master, Matthew the
seventh, and the sixteenth. Ut sementem feceris, ita and metes: As you sow, so
you shall reap, says the old Proverb: Justified by Saint Paul's instance,
Galatians the sixth, and the eighth: He that sows in the flesh, shall of the
flesh reap corruption. And indeed from every seed sown, men do expect to
reap grain, or corn, eiusdem speciei, of the same kind. How can we then
expect from tears to reap joy, which differs from it in the whole species
or kind? To natural and worldly men, this is one of the paradoxes, wherewith
they use to charge Divinity, and indeed a paradox it must needs be to all
those who are not orthodox, and sound in the doctrine of spiritual tears and
joy which are here meant, who know no other joy but iollitie, nor tears, but
when they are troubled; who know not the joy of the Spirit which Christians
have here, nor their Masters joy which they shall have one day hence; who know
not that gracious rain of tears, which God sends upon his Inheritance,
whereby he refreshes it, when it is wearied. To such heteredox,
earthly-minded men, this Parable of the Prophets Sower is a plain paradox.

But here now unto Gods people, in this Psalm, or unto any other people who
have been in such a case, unto whose own experience God has justified it,
that after many years captivity in a strange Land, where they did sow nothing
but tears, eat the bread of sorrow, and drink the water of affliction, by
the waters of Babylon, where all their joy was suspended, their Harpes and
Instruments hanged up; yet he now brings again their captivity, like the
Rivers of the South: he now fills their mouths with laughter, and their
tongues with joy: He makes their joy, like the joy of Husbandmen in Harvest,
who after long expectation, come home loaded with sheaues To such of the
Children of God, who, by reason of their sins, after they have mourned like
Turtles, and chattered like Cranes, or like David, washed their beds with their
tears, and have had their belly full of them as he had; My tears have been my
meat day and night; Psalm the forty two, the third verse; do find, that God
afterward does make their broken bones to rejoice, to whom ( Esaias the sixty
one, and the second) God gives beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for
mourning, the garment of gladness for the spirit of heaviness. And lastly, to
all the Saints of God, who as strangers here upon earth, from home in Baca,
this valley of tears, sighing for the adoption of the sons of God, and the
redemption of their bodies, groaning and moaning with Saint Paul, till they may
be dissolved, look with him one day to be with Christ, and to enter into their
Masters joy. To all such now this is no paradox, but a proposition by
experience proved unquestionable, that those that sow in tears, shall reap in
joy.

IT is a figurative proposition, wherein The sense of the words.
the people going into captivity, is compared unto Husbandmen, committing the
seed to the earth, and as it were, with sorrow burying it there, as being
uncertain, by reason of many alterations of weather, whether ever it will
fructify and multiply; and the same people returning from their captivity, is
compared to Husbandmen, after many large hopes and fears, reaping with great
joy a plentiful Harvest, of the same seed so committed to the earth by them.
But now this proposition in general is true, of all, or any of the people of
God, not only in the case of captivity, but any other calamity spiritual or
temporal, that they that sow in tears, shall reap in joy. And in this
general sense will I handle the words.

THey may be divided into a Lent and The Division.
Easter; first, fasting, and secondly, feasting: First, a time of sorrow, and
secondly, a time of joy, or most seasonably into two known seasons of the
year, a seed time, they that sow in tears; and a time of harvest, shall reap
in joy. In the first season two things we must take notice of, the seed, and
the sowing or manner of committing of it, the seed, Tears: or indeed to speak
properly, it is the seasoning, rather then the seed, potius sal terrae; or
pluma, quam semen, rather the salt or shower, then the seed: for it is in the
text, not they that sow tears, but they that sow in tears: so that the seed
here properly is, any good a Christian does here in this life, be it an act of
faith, repentance, alms, fasting, etc. If these, or any of these, be sown
with, or in such tears as are here meant, you shall be sure to reap them
again with joy; so that as you see, when Husbandmen have committed their seed
unto the ground, if the earth be not afterward watered with the rain of
Heaven, their labor is lost; so whatsoever spiri tuall seed we sow in our
hearts, it will not fructify, unless it be watered with this heavenly rain,
and dew of tears: so that though Paul sow, or plant, if that Apollos, or some
other, do not water, God will give no increase, no reaping will follow; as
therefore in Scripture we are commanded, to cast our bread upon the waters; so
here we are commanded, to cast water upon our bread, or any thing that is ours:
and this water, Our tears, shall not be as water spilt upon the ground, which
cannot be gathered (...). 11. 1
up again, for our tears are put up in Gods bottell; Psalm the fifty six,
and the eighth Psalm. 56. 8.
verse, they shall be gathered and reaped again with increase and joy, like
the fruit in Harvest. Though strictly now it is here to be taken for the
seasoning, yet fitly we may here account it for the seed, because the
principal thing here intended by the Spirit of God, is the moving and stirring
us up to tears, and therefore I must entreat you at this time, to let them be
held not only for the seasoning, or the salt, but for the seed it self,
warranted by other places of Scripture so to do: for David calls tears not
only his Sauce, but his Meat too, in the place above cited; My tears were my
meat day and night: and in the 80. Psalm, verse. 5. Psalm. 80. 5.
he accounts them whole food, meat and drink; Thou have fed them with the
bread of tears, and have given them tears to drink: let tears then be here
for, The seed.

The manner of committing this seed, must be by sowing; they that sow in
tears; they must not be, as trees are planted, one far from another; nor
niggardly or sparingly scattered up and down, here a corn, and there a corn,
but sown, shed and powered out plentifully, as a sower sows corn with a full
and liberal hand. You know the Apostles rule, the second to the Corinthians,
the ninth Chapter, and the 2. Cor. 9. 6.
sixth verse, Qui parce seminat, parce metet; He that sows sparingly, shall
reap sparingly: If we sow our tears thin and sparingly, the joy we shall
reap, shall not be so much messis, as spicelegium; not a harvest, or reaping,
but a poor gathering, or gleaning. Tears then must be the seed, and sowing,
the manner of committing: and this is the first season, the seede-time, they
that sow in tears.

Now the second season, is the harvest, or time of reaping, they shall reap in
joy: where we must take notice of these three things; first, the Corn, Joy;
secondly, the 1. 2.
manner of gathering it, reaping; thirdly, 3
the reapers, only such as sowed ( they) shall reap: The Corn, joy, a
strange 1
grain, you will say, to be reaped from such a seed as tears, but you will
not think it so strange, after you have heard what tears are here meant: for
there are Lachrymae amoris, and Lachrymae doloris, tears of love, and tears
of grief: for tears of love, no wonder though they bring forth joy, for they
are tears of joy, and shed for joy: and for tears of grief in godly men,
they are never altogether without joy, they never sorrow as without hope: as
wicked men never know what a perfect and sincere joy is, but in the midst of
al their joys feel secret checks pinchings and griefs: so godly men in all
their sorrows have some secret smiles, and lightnings of joy: they, as it is
in the 2. Psalm, Serve the Lord in fear, and rejoice Psalm. 2. 11.
in trembling. Now as the seed must be turned after it is sown, before it can
come to be corn, and be fit to be reaped: so here these tears shall be
turned, and a little turning will serve the turn, to make these tears joy; the
Lord of the harvest has promised that he will turn them, John 16. 20. But
your sorrow shall be John 16. 20.
turned to joy: and so from the seed of tears, men come to gather joy, that is
the corn.

Secondly, take notice of the manner of 2
gathering this corn; we shall reap it; if we have not scattered but sowed,
we shall not gather or gleane only, but reap, that is, look how far the
corn which husbandmen reap in harvest, exceeds the seed which they did
sow in seedtime, which in some grounds is, thirty, Matthew. 13. 8.
some forty, some sixty, some one hundred fold, Matthew. 13 8. so far shall the
joy which we shall reap, exceed the tears which we did sow.

Thirdly, we must take notice of the 3
Reapers; they shall reap, which they? they that did sow, They shall, and
none but They shall; they shall: and good reason, that that man whose brows
did sweat, his hands should eat: that the same hand that did sow, should
reap; and as they, so none but they; for Psalm 84. 6. such only come Psalm.
84. 6.
to appear before God in Sion, who pass through the valley of Baca, that is,
the valley of tears. It is not here, as in the oppressions of tenants, where,
as the Apostle speaks; one man sows, and another man reapeth: They take all
the pains, and the cruel extorting Landlord reapeth all the profit: nor as in
your Impropriations abroad, and in the abominable crying sacrilege of this
City, where the Ministers of Gods Word, and the Pastors of your souls sow
spiritual things unto you, with the sweat not only of their brows, but
brains too; but you cheat them in their tithes, and reap that which is by
all divine and humane law, as due to their spiritual sowing, as your gowns
on your backs, or your bread provided for your bellies; But here they, and
none but they that did sow, shall reap. And so you have the parts of this
proposition, which I mean to handle in this order which now I have propounded,
as God and your good patience shall give me leave.

WE begin then first with the seed- The Seed.
time, and herein first with the seed, [ teares] they that sow in tears.
Tears are nothing else but a little water distilled by the heat of our tender
brain, through our eyes: and as in all distillations, the thing to be
distilled, ought to be choice and good: so it must be here; we must make
choice of our tears, these tears are a seed to be sown, from whence we
hope to reap joy: now husbandmen, you know, are ever very choice in their
seed, that it be the best, purest, and finest that may be; for rotten, musty,
empty seed can never promise any plentiful harvest: So it is with this seed
of tears, many sorts of tears there are, but all of them not fit to be
sown: but only from the best and choysest of them can we expect to reap joy.
There be three sorts of tears, first, natural 1
tears in themselves neither good nor bad, but as they are used moderately or
immoderately: such are the tears which are produced from the sense of worldly
losses, as of goods, friends, etc. or sense of sickness or injuries, or the
like: these are not the seed here to be sown, no joy nor blessing: to be
reaped from them, these tears did Esau plentifully sow when he Genesis 27 34.
38. Heb. 12. 17.
lost his birthright, but from them all could he reap no joy, nor Fathers
blessing: these tears plentifully sown by Rachel in Ramah, weeping for her
children, but she reaped no joy, for she would not be Ier. 31. 15. Matthew. 2. 18.
comforted, because they were not. These tears are so far from producing any
joy, as considered in themselves, they produce nothing but death, 2. Cor. 7.
10. 2. Cor. 7. 10.
Worldly sorrow causes death.

The second tears are wicked and pernicious 2
tears, such as are sown either by wicked men in this life, or by the damned
in hell: by wicked men in this life, produced by craft, dissimulation and
hypocrisy, from a desire to seem devout, or compassionate, that so they may
work their own ends: these be Crocodiles tears, good store of them sown at
Achabs feast, to drown 1. King. 21. 4, 5.
Naboths vineyard: many such tears sown at the funerals of Parents and
Husbands, when there is no more sorrow at the heart, then there used to be at
the hearts of the Praeficae, who of old were wont to be hired at all funerals
to weep, as now you do, poor people to come in mourning gowns: many such
tears no question sown, at the long prayers the hypocrites make, when they
mean to prey upon Widows houses: these are not the seed here to be sown,
no Joy to be reaped from the tears of Hypocrites, for the harvest and portion
of hypocrites, is nothing Luke 1^. 28.
but weeping and gnashing of teeth; nor are here meant, such tears as are shed
by the damned in hell, they reap no joy, but still more weeping, more cursing,
from their fellow weepers; derision and laughter from God and his Saints: so
that from them nothing is reaped wherewith as it is in the 129. Psalm, The
mower fills his Psalm. 129. ^.
hand, nor the gleaner his lap, nor they that pass by say, We bless you in
the name of the Lord. Of these natural and hypocritical tears, I will now
say no more, they are not the tears to be sown in the text.

The third sort of tears then are wholesome and saving tears, which proceed
from the holy Ghost, as from the fountain, and are distilled unto us by him
who in the Romans 8. 26. is said to request Romans 8. 26,
for us, with sighs which cannot be expressed: not that he himself asks,
but makes us to ask, not with ordinary and natural sighs and tears, nor
with acted and hypocritical sighs and tears, but with godly and saving
sighs and tears, which no man is able to express, and wring from himself*
only these tears are this precious seed, as they are called in the next verse,
from whence you may expect to reap joy, and of them only will I speak; and
though I know, that for the most part a discourse of tears is displeasing,
being as some suppose, too sad and melancholy, yet I hope neither shall you be
sorry for it, because it is to make you reap joy, nor I my self be sorry for
it, hoping with S. Paul, that this discourse, like his epistle, though it cause
a sorrow, yet it shall only 2. Cor. 7. 8,
cause a godly sorrow, a sorrow to repentance, 2. Cor. 7. 8.

These tears now are the seed, but where shall we have this seed? for though
natural and hypocritical tears flow from our selves: yet these precious
saving tears, come not from our selves, but from above; this water of life,
comes from the well of life, for these tears, though when we shed them,
they are Donum or vnguentum effusum; a sweet ointment powered forth: for I make
no question but that Mary's tears, wherewith she washed Iuke 9 38.
Christ's feet, were as acceptable to him as the box of ointment she powered on
his head. Verse. 46
For as that in the Gospel, is called a precious ointment, so in the words
after the text, a precious seed. Though, I say, in regard of our shedding
them, they are Donum effusum Deo, yet in regard of our receiving of them, they
are Donum infusum a Deo, an ointment or gift powered into us by God: and though
the words, precious seed, in the next verse, signifies semen acquisitum, a
seed purchased or bought with a price, yet they are not to be accounted semen
acquisitum, in that sense in which Divines* distinguish between Habitus infusi
and acquisiti, that is, infused and acquired gifts, but only tears here are
called semen acquisitum, because they must be aliunde quaesitae quam a nobis,
purchased from somewhere else, then from our selves. Where then must we
quaerere and acquirere, seek and purchase this precious seed? If it be a
precious seed, then you must purchase it with a price: what price? Must we pay
money for it? No, you know in Isai. 55. 1. There is a buying or purchasing
without money, Hoe, every one that Esaias 55. 1.
thirsts, come to the waters, buy without money, etc. What then must we pay
for this precious seed? there is another price besides money, there is operae
precium, as well as pecuniae precium, the price of pains: though it cost us no
money, yet it will cost us our pains and labor, which is precio aestimabile,
though not a penny, yet pennyworth. What labor, what pains, must this precious
seed cost us? I will tell you. When Jeremy went to seek this precious seed,
he asked the way to the Well head; he inquired for some wells and fountains
from whence they were to be had, Jeremy 9. 1. O that my head were a fountain
of tears! Now how use men to Jer. 9 1.
come by water out of wells or fountains, not without drawing of it? In the
fourth of John, the woman of Samaria John 4. 11.
wondered how Christ should come by the water of Jacobs well without drawing.
The well is deep, and thou have nothing to Esaias 12. 3.
draw with, Isa. 12. 3. With joy shall ye draw water out of the wells of
salvation. The price and purchase then of this precious seed, is operae
precium, the price of our pains, and this operae, or pains, is haurire, to
draw, and we must be sure to draw them, nec e paludibus, nec puteis, neither
out of pits nor puddles, where there is nothing but myry dirt, or standing
puddle, such as was in Jeremy his dungeon, such as are all the wells from
whence natural, hypocritical, and infernal tears are drawn. But you must
draw them e fontibus, from wells, and sinae, I called them salutares lachrymae,
saving tears, we must draw them e fontibus salutis, from the wells of
salvation, of which the Prophet speaks. Now the wels from whence we may draw
these precious tears, are so many, as if we should seek for them, as the
people of Israel did in the 15. of Exodus, Exodus 15. 27.
before we had gone half three days journey, as they did, we should find many
more then the twelve Wels or Fountains, which they found at Elim. But for
memory and methods sake, I will only send you to four Wels, from whence you may
draw your bellies full of these precious tears; of which, the more you drink,
you will still be, though not the more dry, yet the more desirous to mend your
draught, quo plus su^t potae, plus sitiu^tur aquae.

The first Well is, the consideration of 1
our sins, which (I hope) will draw tears from the driest and deaddest eyes
that can be. The second Well is, the consideration 2
of the miseries we are compassed with in this life: and from this Well we
cannot miss to draw (in regard of these miseries) tears; for this life of
ours is not only a Well, but a Valley of tears. As Rivers naturally seek the
Valleys; so our tears naturally run into this channel. 3
The third Well is, the consideration of Christ's passion, and tears for us,
and from this Well we cannot miss of tears; the driest eye in the world can
give him no less then tears; if not for tears, yet for torments and blood.
The fourth Well, is the desire of being at home in our own Country, which is
Heaven, the consideration of our absence and exile from God, and our longing to
be with him; and from this Well we cannot miss of tears, when with the people
of Israel, sitting by the Waters of Babylon, we remember our absence Psalm.
137* 1*
from Sion. And as it is the custom in Scripture, to give names to Wells, so
if it please you, for our better memories sake, we will name these Wells too.
The first 1
we may call Adams Well, because it is the consideration of that source of
sin, which is derived unto us from Adam, as the Fountain and Well of all.
The second 2
Well we may call Jacobs Well, as the Well of Sichem is called by the woman of
Samaria, in the 4. of John; and I John 4 6.
give it the name from Jacob, because the consideration of the miseries of this
life we best learn from him, who in one sentence did most significantly
express them all, Genesis 47. 9. Few and evil have the days of my pilgrimage
been. The third Well Gen 47. 9.
we may call, fontem Saluatoris, our Saviors Well, or the Well of salvation;
as it is called by the Prophet, because it is the consideration of his tears
and passion, who is both our Savior and salvation. And the fourth Well we may
call, fontem vitae, the Well of life, or Gods Well, because it is the
consideration of our absence from him, with whom is the Well of life, Psalm. 36.
9. With thee is the Well of life. Psalm. 36. 9*


I can make these four Wels, but two, and divide these tears in lachrymas
amaras ac dulces, salt tears, and fresh or sweet tears, tears of hatred, and
tears of love, tears of grief, and tears of joy: the tears we must draw
from Adam and Jacobs Well, we may call salt tears, tears of hatred and
grief, because we shed them out of a detestation of sin, and being wearied
of the miseries of this life. The tears we draw from our Savior and Gods
Well, we may call fresh sweet tears, tears of love and joy, because they are
shed out of a desire to be at home in our own Country with God and Christ. And
these two larger Wels of grief and joy, we may well compare to the waters of
Noah's Genesis 7* 20, 21.
Flood, which were wholly caused by God; yet partly from the Springs of the
Depth, which were let loose below, partly from the excessive Raines which fell
from Heaven above. For our tears of grief, and hatred, proceed from the
consideration of our sins and miseries which are here below: our tears of
love and joy, from our consideration of Christ and God, who are above; yet all
these tears, like the whole waters of the Deluge, are from God. Sure, if the
consideration of our sins and miseries, can not fetch tears from us, yet the
consideration of Christ and God will do it. If Moses first smiting will not,
yet his second Exodus 17. 6.
smiting shall fetch water out of the stony Rock. But I will let this latter
division of tears pass, and hold my self to our first four Wels. And though
I know, that in this valley of tears, there needs no great seeking after
Wels; for we may have just occasion of tears every where; yet it is our best
course to draw them from the Wellhead; Dulcius ex ipso font bibuntur aquae;
and of these four Wels, now I will speak in order. If only first I tell you,
that by the tears, here to be drawn from these Wels, we must not understand
strictly, only the moystnesse and water of our eyes, but the grief and sorrow
of our hearts, which many a time runs over, when we cannot shed a tear;
leaves loquuntur curae ingentes stupent. But as all tears are worth nothing,
without the mourning of the heart; so many times the heart may be drowned with
grief, when the eyes are dry; and we shall reap in joy, though we sow not
in tears, but in sorrow: blessed are they, not only that weep, but mourn:
for they shall be comforted, Mat. 5. 4.

WE begin with the first Well of sorrow, 1 Adams Well.
or tears, which I called Adams Well, because it is the consideration of
sin, which by Adam entered into the world; and who would not shed tears for
sin, if he do but consider, what a lamentable thing it is, that it is nothing
else, but one offending and grieuing of God, and al his creatures; making us
like Ismael, sets our hand against every man, and Genes. 16. 12.
every man's hand against us? It is a grieuing of God; for it was only sin
which made God grieve and repent, that he had made man. It grieved the Son of
God; the sins of Jerusalem (in the 19. of Luke) Luke 10. 41.
made him weep: our sins made him grieve in the Garden, and drew not only
Matthew* 2^. 38*
his tears, but his blood from him on the Luke. 23. 33.
Cross: It grieueth the holy Ghost; therefore Ephesians. 4* ^0.
in Scripture are we forbid to grieve (...)*
and quench the Spirit by our sins. It grieueth the Angels; for as they
Rejoice at Luke ^^* ^
the conversion of a sinner to God, so (no question) after a sort they grieve,
as God is said to grieve for the auersion of a sinner from God. It grieueth all
sorts of men; good men, whose eyes gush out with Psalm. 119. 136.
tears, when they see, that the wicked will not observe Gods Law. It offends
wicked men, whom sinners draw into sin by their bad example; and though
perhaps yet they do not grieve at it, yet it is the cause of many tears to
them afterward, and perhaps of weeping, and gnashing of teeth for evermore. It
grieueth and offends all the rest of the creatures, because it turns them
out of the service of God, into the service of sin and Satan; for God created
the Heavens, Elements, and al other creatures, to serve man, and to wait upon
him in his serving of God; but now, when man turns himself out of Gods
service, all the creatures, while they serve sinful man, are, as it were,
turned out of Gods service too, and, not without grieuing, are compelled to
wait upon a wrong Master* in which regard, the creatures, in the 8. Romans,
Romans 8 22.
22. verse, are said to groan, and to be in travel: nay, which you would
wonder at, sin grieueth and offends the very damned in hell; for the more
the number of the damned is increased, which is done by sin, the greater is
their torment, their groaning, weeping, and gnashing of teeth: for that must
needs be the cause why the Rich Glutton in the 16. of Luke, did beg of
Abraham, that Lazarus Luke 16. 27, 28.
might be sent to his friends and kindred, to forewarne them of coming
thither. One damned can ask nothing out of charity, but out of self-love,
lest his torment and grief should be increased, by seeing his brethren there.
Now, who would not shed tears, and grieve for sin, which makes all the
Persons of the Trinity, Angels, good men and bad, all the rest of the
creatures, nay, the very damned in hell to grieve, and will one day, if they be
not wept for here, make us weep and gnash our teeth for evermore?

Now when I tell you, that we must shed tears for sin, I mean not only
your own sins, though them principally, but the sins of others too, the
sins of the time, as well as the sins of your persons: for as we find David
washing Psalm. 6. 6.
his bed with tears for his own sins, so find we his eyes gushing with
Psalm. 119. 136.
tears, because the wicked would not observe Gods Law. Christ had no sins of
his own to mourn for, yet wept he for the Luke 19 41.
sins of Jerusalem. Dearly beloved in the Lord, when you have cried for your
own sins, spare some of your tears for the sins of the time: for unless
they be mourned for, Gods plague will be powered out upon the place, as well as
their persons: and if you do not mourn and cry for the sins of the time,
no body else will, for the sinners themselves will not weep. When the Sea for
Jonas his Jonas 1. 4.
sin raged, the men of the ship were crying hard, and throwing their-things
into the Sea; when Jonas, for whom all this Uers. 5.
tempest was raised, had got himself down to the bottom of the ship, and
there was laid fast asleep. Christ's Disciples sleep, when he is in an Agony
for Mat. 26. ^0, 43.
their sins. Wicked men, for whose sins all the tempests, wherewith the Church
is tossed, arise, never shed one tear in the storm, but stretch themselves
along upon beds of Yuorie, and short aloud upon Amos 6. 4.
the pillowes of security: it is only the godly in the mean time, who must
plead, and pray, and cry, and shed tears for the sins of the time; like
Daniel, who Dan. 9. 16, 17.
in the time of his peoples captivity, in fasting and tears, was confessing
his own sins, and the sins of his people; only such mourners are fit to
stand in the breach, with their payles of water in their hand, I mean* with
their tears, and strong cryings, like Moses, to quench the flames of wrath,
which go out from the Lord to consume us for our sins.

Now concerning these tears which we are to shed* both for our own, and other
men's sins, you shall do well to take notice of these two things; first, the
necessity of them; and secondly, the virtue of them. The necessity of them 1
appears, first, by precept; secondly, by 2
practice. By precept of God in the old Testament, continually calling unto his
people by his Prophets, Joel, Jeremy, and the rest; Turn you unto me with
weeping, Joel 10. 12.
fasting, and mourning. And in the ninth of Ezechiel, marking out all those for
life, Ezech. 9. 4.
who did weep for their own sins, and the sins of the people. In the new
Testament, by the precept of Christ, who forbade the daughters of Jerusalem to
Luke 23. 28.
weep for him, who was no sinner, but commanded them to weep for themselves
who were sinners: and by the precept of his Apostle Saint Paul, who commanded
the Corinthians to weep for the uncleanness of the incestuous person, 1. Cor.
5. 2.
1. Cor 5. 2.

The necessity of them appears by the practice of all the Saints, who have
been chief mourners for their own, and other men's sins. In the old Testament
David deserves to have the place of the chief mourner, since he used his
tears for sin, not only for Physic, and a Bath, as it is in the sixth
Psalm; I washed Psalm. ^ 6
my bed every night with my tears; but for food: for my tears were my meat
day and night. If he, who was a man according to Gods own heart, did thus
weep for his sins, how should we, who walk according to the lusts of our
own hearts, mourn for our sins? In this train of mourners you shall see
Lot, whose righteous 2. Pet. 2. 7.
soul was grieved and vexed for the filthiness of the Sodomites. You shall see
Ezra, Josiah, Jsaiah, Joel, Jeremy especially calling for fountains of tears,
for tears day and night, for pouring out their souls like water before the
Lord, writing whole books of Lamentations for their own sins, and the sins of
their times. In the new Testament we have a new train of mourners and
weepers, in which train you shall see Christ, the chief mourner, weeping for
the sins of Jerusalem; so prone unto tears, as Luke 19 41.
that the solemnity of the time, the joy of the people, the shoutings and
acclamations of Hosanna, could neither drown his voice, but that he lifted it
up: nor dry his eyes, but that he wept: after him, Luke 22. 62.
comes Peter weeping bitterly for his denial: Mary Magdalen wiping Christ's
Luke 9. 38.
feet with tears for her sins, and then Saint Paul crying out by reason of
his sins: but O miserable man that I am, who Romans 7. 24.
shall deliver me out of this body of death! You have seen sufficiently the
necessity of these tears for sin: see a little the virtue and efficacy of
them.

First, these tears and sighs for our 1
sins, make us the better to know our sins, both for their color and
weight. Alas, so long as we take joy and delight in sin, so long sin
seems little, light, easy and sweet unto us: but he that here increases
his sorrow, increases his knowledge: when we once come to smart, to grieve and
groan under sins, then we will confess, that the remembrance of them is
grievous unto us, and that the burden of them is intolerable. As a penny in
the bottom of a basin of water, shows as big as a shilling: so our sins,
which to us seem but little, steept once in the water of our tears, show
themselves in their just quantity and proportion.

Secondly, as our tears for sins make 2
us know them, so they wash and do our sins away, so as we shall never see
them, nor need to know them any more. I dare say, the tears wherewith Mary
Magdalen Luke 9. 38.
washed Christ's feet, did not more wash away the dust from Christ's feet, then
they did the sin from her own soul: for immediately after her tears did she
hear that happy sentence, Thy sins are forgiven Verse. 47.
thee: therefore are these tears called by the Fathers, Our second Baptism,
by which our sins are washed away; compared by them to the waters of the red
Sea, in which Pharaoh and his host, that Exodus 14 27.
is to say, Satan and our sins are drowned: To the waters of Jordan, in
which, 2. King. 5. 10, 14.
if like Naman, we wash our selves seven times, that is to say, often we shall
be cured of the leprosy of sin: to the waters of the poole of Siloam,
because if we John 9. 7.
bathe our selves in them, we shall be cured of all spiritual diseases and
infirmities: so that if you use to extol and magnify some waters, which you
distill from herbs and flowers, because they are good against sore eyes,
burnings and heats, what do you then say of these tears, which if you can but
distill from your own eyes, they will cure the lust of the eyes, the pride of
life, and all carnal heates and desires.

Thirdly, these tears for sin, do 3
not only wash away sin for the present, but wipe them out of all books of
account, so as they discharge us of our sins for ever: for you must know, that
every sin we do commit, we write, as it were, in the book of our own
conscience, a bill of our hand against our selves, whereby we acknowledge our
selves debtors to Go^d, and liable to his Justice. Now unless this debt be
discharged, and the bond cancelled, we must be cast in prison for it, and there
lie, til we pay the utmost farthing, which God knows will be long enough,
for we our selves are not worth one farthing. This bond is principally
cancelled by Christ, who, as the Apostle speaks, nailed unto his Cross the
Coloss. ^. 14.
handwriting of ordinances which was against us, who by his blood did wipe out
the letters of this black bill, which was against us Now what Christ did with
the blood of his body, that we in some sort do with the blood of our souls,
that is, our tears: for so they are called by the Fathers: and they do
indeed wipe and eat out that which we have written against our selves by our
sins, and stand where those letters did: as one color laid upon another does
away the former, and remains it self: just so, when the book of our
conscience shall come to be opened; if we have shed tears for our sins,
there is no score nor register of our sins to be found in the Book.
Whenever a sinner shall repent himself (say some translations, Ingemuerit)
bemoane himself for his sins, J will put away his iniquities out of my
remembrance, says the Lord. Then our sighs and tears put them out of Gods
remembrance, dash them out of his Register, and now our tears do come in
place of them: for says the Psalmist, Are not all my tears in Psalm. 56. 8.
thy register, Psalm 56. 8? Our tears then are registered as our discharge and
acquittance for our sins; for when he finds our tears registered, he lets
us go as those, who were marked for Ezech. 9. 4.
mourners, in the ninth of Ezechiel, who by their tears were acquitted from
destruction.

Fourthly, without these tears, neither 4
first, can we dye unto sin, secondly, nor live unto God: first, not dye unto
sin: 1
Can one think to be delivered of so huge a burden as sin, without grief
and tears? to have his shoulder when it is burst, set right, without pain? to
have a tooth pulled out of his head, or a thorn out of his foot, and not
cry? No woman looks to be delivered of the Child which she has carried
in her womb but nine months, without pain and crying; and can you expect to
be delivered of a man, the old man, a man of sin, without crying and tears?
Secondly, 2
and as no dying unto sin; so no living unto God, without crying and tears
for sin: for as in diseased bodies, when any member, by a violent hurt is
benumbed and dead, a token that it is dead is this: If the member feel no
pain, nor smart when it is pricked, pinched, lanched and cut, but if the
Physician by plying of it can bring it to that pass, that he complains and
cries out at the dressing of it, the Physician, himself, and his friends are
glad, because it is a sure argument, that the member is alive, and upon the
recovery: Just so it is here; If that after we have been dead in our sins and
trespasses, so past sense and feeling of them, that we did not sorrow nor shead
tears for them, we can be brought to have a sense of them, to weep and
mourn for them; sure, we are yet alive and upon our spiritual recovery.

Though I might, yet now I will say no more of the virtue of those tears for
sin, to which holy men have attributed so much as some of the Fathers think,
that God did indue man with this deaw of tears, for no other end, but that by
them he might wipe away and extinguish his sin. Chrysostom. hom. 7. ad pop.
Antioch. Chrysostom. hom. 7. ad Populum Antioch.
says, it is plain by experience; for when we weep, and grieve for the loss
of friends, money, for sickness, or any other temporal calamity, we are so
far from diminishing our grief by our tears, as we do rather increase it;
only if we weep for our sins, we diminish our grief and them, and many
times quite wipe them away. And it is very true which Chrysostom says, for
though by our tears we are not able to raise our Parents and Friends from
death, yet by tears we are able to raise our souls from the death of sin.
I have staid the longer at this Well, because it is deep, and the fire to be
quenched by it is very great; a huge mas^e and body of sin, in regard whereof
we must do that indeed, which Bonauenture (how true I know not) reports of
S. Francis, who because he did see, that he could not follow agnum immaculatum
sine macula, opera^ dedit vt copiosis and quotidianis lachrymarum imbribus
animam purgaret: The Lamb of God which was without spots, himself unspotted,
he did what lay in him, by his daily showers of tears, to wash away these
spots from his soul.

NOw the second Well from whence we Jacobs Well.
draw this precious seed of reares, is the consideration of the miseries which
attend upon us in this life for sin: which being rightly considered, are able
to draw tears from the stoniest heart. That John 4. 6.
is it I called Jacobs Well, because he dug it, and in one sentence
comprehended the miseries of man's life, for which we must shed these tears so
fully, as nothing can be more. The sentence you have in Genes. 47. 9. For
being asked of Pharaoh, how old he was? his answer was, Genesis 47. 9.
Few and evil have my days been. Mourn and weep then for these two, because
our days are few, we must die; and because they are evil, that is to say, all
the while till we die, we are sick, we have no good days, nor feel nothing
but misery; so that this Well differs from the former in this; that was the
consideration of sin, this, the consideration of the misery, which attends
us in this life as a punishment of sin: and though I know, that many men
think, they need not go to this Well, because they have none but good days,
and hope they shall live many years; yet I may ask them that question, which
the woman of Samaria, in the fourth Chapter of Saint John, and the twelfth
verse, asked of John 4* 1^.
Christ, Art thou greater then our Father Jacob, who did drink of this Well?
Though he had evil days, yet I dare say, if thou live in these days, thou
have and see more; and though thou think to live long, yet you will hardly
live the days which he had seen, when he said so, for he was then one
hundred and thirty years old. I have not time now to say any thing of the
^ewnesse of our days, I will only speak of the badnesse of them: I do not
mean the badnesse or evil of sin in them; for that we drew tears from the
first Well; but the evil vanity which attends upon us in this life for sin.

The consideration of which misery deserves so many tears, as that our life
(in regard of them) is truly termed, a valley of tears; into which valley, one
no sooner enters* when he is borne, but (as Job has it) he begins with
tears, and cries: so that being in this World, we are like Noah in the Arc,
or like Ilanders, who from no point of their Island can see any thing but
waters: so look any where in this life, there is nothing but occasion of
tears, and therefore it were not much amiss to make Logicians change their
terms, and say, that flebile, or lachrymabile, the faculty of weeping, is
more man's proprium, then risibile, or the faculty of laughing: for we know,
that never was any man but he, wept, at least, when he was borne, some men
there have been, who for any thing we know, never laughed, as the Fathers all
have observed it of Christ.

I have not time to bid you shed tears, for the miseries common to all men, in
regard of which, the Saints of God have never thought other-wise of this life,
then of a valley of tears, as of a place of exile or pilgrimage by Jacob,
Dauia, Saint Paul; of a place of strife and war, by Simeon; Lord, now let
Luke 2. 29.
thou thy servant depart in peace; as of a prison and place of bonds, by Saint
Paul, who accounts his going out of it, a Philip. 1. 23.
being dissolved, or unbound. Now how do men in exile, bonds, or under a war,
behave themselves? Not in mirth, but mourning; in tears, not in triumphing. I
will only now desire you to shed tears for some special miseries of this life*

O, you will say, that labor may be spared in this place, here are none
acquainted with any other miseries, then those general ones which humane
nature is subject to. Here in this City is no misery, poverty, war,
complaining in our streets, nor carrying away into captivity: We have our
Summer, and our Winter-houses, fulness of bread, beds of Yuorie to stretch our
selves upon, wine to make our hearts glad, oil to make our faces shine, every
one of us may su under our own vine and fig tree, and eat the fruit of them;
therefore let us feast and laugh, we have no other cause, let them mourn and
weep whom it concerns. O, but soft, God has not done so to every Nation;
other people in the world feel the weight of al these miseries aboue-named: we
are commanded to mourn with Heb. 13. 3.
those that mourn; we must shed tears for their miseries, as well as our own.
It is the devils cunning, when he means to stop up this Well of tears, to
present the state of this valley of tears to us, as he did the estate of the
land of Egypt to the Israelites, to make them remember the Rivers and clear
Springs there, but to forget their servitude and task of making of brick, to
remember their Garlic, Cucumbers, and fleshpots; but to forget their stripes
and bonds, or to present it unto us, as he did it to Christ; take us up Matthew.
4. 8.
to the top of a high mountain, and from thence show us all the riches, pomp,
and pleasures of the world, but shows us none of the miseries and calamities
of it. But now if any of us from some high Mountain, could but look down
into this large valley of tears, and there have at once objected unto us all
the special miseries and calamities, which men are suffering there, to hear
there at once, all the sighs of the sick, the tortures and rackings of many
men's limbs, both by the hand of Justice and Injustice, the lamentable cryings
of the poor for want of bread, the faint chillinesse, and chattering of many
one half starued with cold; hear the disconsolate weeping and tears for the
loss of parents, husbands, children, friends; should see the pitiful anguish
and affliction of such as are condemned to row in Galleys, work in Minerals, to
turn in Mils, to see how they eat nothing but the bread of sorrow by weight,
and drink nothing but the water of affliction by measure; to hear their
unpitied roarings and tears, at the smart of their unmerciful lashings: nay,
if you did see from thence the miseries of a besieged City, to hear the
roaring of the Canon, the sound of the trumpet, and the noise of the Drum; to
hear the pitiful groans of men, dying* and wallowing in their blood, or
swouning in the streets for famine; to see the women many times (as the
Prophet has it) to eat their own children of a span long; to see the
uncomfortable tears of fathers and husbands, for the barbarous rauishing of
their wives and daughters. If these, and millions of such miseries in the
world, were objected to us all at once, and we did but know what men were
doing abroad, perhaps it would draw tears from those* eyes, which now laugh so
much. See a little the necessity and virtue of these tears for others.

I he necessity of these tears appears, as did the necessity of the
former, 1. by precept, 2. practice: 1. precept of the Romans 12. 15.
Apostle, who commands us to mourn with those that mourn, Romans 12. 15. of
Job, ^0. 25. Did not J weep with him that was in Job 30* 25.
trouble? Was not my soul in heaviness for the poor? Of Jsaiah, Jeremie, all
the Prophets, who powered out their souls in tears before the Lord, for the
miseries God at any time brought upon his people. But let our Master be as the
chief mourner in this train, who shed tears for Ierusalems miseries, for the
grief of Lazarus his friends; for the text says John 11. 15.
there directly, John 11 15. that Christ was glad for Lazarus his death, that
his Disciples might believe, so that he wept only for his friends sake, who
were then a weeping; to show us the necessity of our tears, and mourning with
those that mourn, say the Fathers on that place.

Now in shedding our tears for others, we shall do well rightly to
distribute them. Shed these tears, for these special miseries of any men,
though they be both Gods enemies and ours, at least in this regard, that they
should have deserved them. Saint Aug 1. lib. de ciu. Dei, cap. 6. Aug de ciuit.
Dei, lib. 1. c. 6.
does highly extol the fact of Marcus Marcellus, which was this: When he was
besieging the famous City of Syracusa, he got himself up to an high Turret,
there to see the issue of the battle: and when he saw the Armies on both sides
in the fury of ^he fight, heard the clashing of the Arms, the horrible
outcries of those that were beaten, saw the flames of the fire which they had
cast into the Town, ascending up toward heaven, heard the noise and terrible
cracking of the falling of the houses of that ancient City; he could not
contain himself from tears, as if the battle were going against him,
notwithstanding the victory was sure enough on his side, only because he did
see men, though they were his enemies, endure so much misery. Shall not we
have as compassionate a mind, as a Heathen man had, when we hear of the like
miseries, which many in the world sustain, though they were enemies to our
State, to our Religion, though they were Papists, nay, though they were Pagans?
If his example cannot move us to be of his mind, yet (as the Apostle speaks)
Philip. 2. 5. Let that Phil. 2. 5.
same mind be in us, which was in Christ Jesus; who, when he came near the
City of Jerusalem, and with his bodily eyes did see the proud buildings, and
stately Towers, but with the eyes of his mind did see, that Titus and
Uespasian would not leave one stone of them above another, although they were
his utter enemies, and within a week were to put him to death, and his
judgments were to come upon them, for this his death and murder, and he
himself as a just God, was to send that destruction upon Jerusalem, yet was he
so touched with the sense of their destruction, that before they had shed that
blood from his veins, for which they were to be destroyed, he sheddeth first
tears from his eyes for them. Shed then these tears for such miseries of any
men, though your enemies, and Gods enemies.

But what now if the parties under these miseries be Gods friends, professing
the same Religion and Worship with us? then let us with David, and those that
were with him, for the burning of Ziklag, Lift up our voices, and weep till
we 1. Sam. 30 4.
can weep no more, 1. Sam 30. 4. then let us with Esaias, 22 4. cry out, Turn
away from Jsai. 22 4.
me, I will weep bitterly, labor not to comfort me, for the destruction of
the daughter of my people, for it is a day of trouble and ruin, and
perplexity, by the Lord God of Hosts, in the valley of Uision. Then let us
with Jeremy, call for Rivers and Fountains Ier. 9. ^.
of tears, for the destruction of the people of God. Who knows not, that God
within these few years, has given us just* occasion of sowing such tears?
there be people in the World, professing the same Religion with us, who this
time four years did think their souls as far from death, as we now think
ours, whose eyes were as dry as ours be now, whose feet, as they thought,
were as secure from falling, as ours are now; but since, their feet have
slipped, their souls have tasted of death, their eyes have bin drowned with
tears, because of complaining in their streets, and carrying away into
captivity, because the sword of their enemies has been glutted with their
flesh, and made drunk with their blood; and shall not we sow and shed some
tears for them?

I will add one step more: What now if these miseries reach not only to the
Professors of the same Religion, and worship with us, but to the Religion and
Worship it self; that the Turk casts out not only Christians, but Christ,
and places in his place Mahomet: That the Papists cast not out only
Protestants, but place there the Pope, and in the Temple of God set up that
Idol, the Mass? O then for that let us power out tears day and night, let us
be ready to weep and die. I beseech you remember the History of Eli and his
Daughter 1. Sam. 4. 13.
in Law, 1. Sam. 4. 13. a messenger comes to tell Eli the unhappy news of
the defeat and overthrow, which the Philistims had given Israel: he was then
sitting upon a seat by the way side; the Messenger comes in with his clothes
rent, ashes on his head, all his face blubbered with tears, so that in his
countenance Eli might have read the bad news, yet had he strength to ask
them. The Messenger answers heavily, Israel is fled before the Philistims: that
(no question) troubled him, yet he sat still. What more? And there has been
also a great slaughter among the people: that (no question) sunk deeper, yet
he sat still. What more? Moreover, thy two sons, Hophn^ and Phinehas, are
slain: sure, that made a deep cut in the heart of a father, yet he sat
still. What more? Can there be any worse then these? And Sir, says the
Messenger, the Ark of God is taken. Old Eli, who had strength to sit still all
this while, no sooner heard this, but his strength immediately forsook him, and
he fell from his seat backward, and broke his neck, and died. The report of
this comes to Phinehas wife, Eli his daughter in Law, who was big with child,
and near her travel; she hearing the news of the death of her Husband her
Father in Law, her Brother in Law, of the people of God, and taking of the Ark of God, her griefs were above the griefs of Childbirth; for she falls in
labor presently, and brings forth a son; the women about her begin to
comfort her, because she had borne a son (which Christ says, makes a woman
forget her pain, when she remembers, that a man-child is borne into the
world:) But (says the text) she 1. Sam. 4. 19, 20.
answered not, nor regarded it not, only cried out first, The glory is
departed from Jsrael, because the Ark of God was taken, and because of her
Father in Law, and her Husband. And because the standers by should not think,
that her grief for the loss of these two were alike, correcting as it were,
her self, she insisteth only in her lamenting the loss of the Arc, and
dies with that in her mouth, says the last Verse of that Chapter, She said
again, The glory is departed from Israel, for the 1. Sam 4 22.
Ark of God is taken; and so she died. We have heard of late years how the
people of God has fled before their enemies, how they have been slain by
them: perhaps some of you have lost your sons in these battles, some your
husbands, some your friends; Weep for that: But alas! the Ark of God has
been taken in some places, the Candlestick removed, false Lights and Dagons
set up: Now let our tears fall in great abundance. You have seen the
necessity of them: in one word hear the virtue of them;

Which is this, The keeping of the like tears from our own eyes; or if that
shall not please God, the drawing tears from others eyes, if ever it shall
please God to make our case such, as theirs is at this time: for they were not
the greatest sinners Lnke 13. 4.
on whom the Tower of Siloe fell: but unless we repent, we must also look for
judgment: if God find in us compassion for their passions, he may prove
compassionate to us, and keep us from the like passions. As therefore Christ
counts himself touched, when any of his members is touched; Saul, Saul, why
persecutest thou me? Acts 9. 4. So ought Acts 9. 4.
it to be among the members of his body, the grief of one, ought to be the
grief of all the rest. If therefore we mourn with those that mourn, then do
we draw this precious seed of tears from this second Well, which I called
Jacobs Well, or the consideration of the miseries of this humane life.

THe third Well, from whence you may Our Saviors Well.
draw these precious tears, is fons saluatoris, our Saviors Well, a Well so
deep and full, as we may draw tears from thence perpetually, and never draw it
dry It is a Well, from whence all the Fathers, holy men, learned men, these
sixteen hundred years, have bin drawing tears in their mournful
meditations upon our Saviors death and passion, which by their styles, it
should seem, they have rather written with tears, then with ink. And indeed,
who can choose but sow tears, when he shall think of this man, who as he was
called by the Prophet, Uir dolorum, a man of sorrows; so he might as well have
been called, Uir lachrymarum, a man of tears; so given to them, as that no
worldly nor divine joy, could make him refrain from them.

Four times we know he wept, and they were all four such times, as others
were, either rejoicing for him, or laughing at him: at his birth (no question)
he wept, as all other men do, then were the Angels singing: at Lazarus his
raising, Luke 2. 13.
the multitude was laughing, because he said, he slept; this Man of tears
weeping: John 11. 35.
Jerusalem in triumph shouting out Hosanna Luke 19. 41.
for joy; this Man of tears weeping: upon the Cross, the beholders mocking
and shaking their heads at him, this man of tears praying and weeping* for the
Fathers expound that place of the Apostle in the Epistle to the Heb. 5. 7. Who
offered up prayers and supplications, Heb. 5. 7.
with strong cryings and tears; of our Saviors prayer on the Cross. What,
shall no mirth keep him from mourning? No solemnity keep him from sorrowing
for us, and shall we ever forget to shed our tears, for this man of tears?
(which is my only apology unto you, for thus mentioning his passion at this
Easter solemnity.) But why weep for him? In these two regards; first, for
grief that he should suffer so much; secondly, for grief that we should be
the cause of this his so grievous sufferings.

First, whose eyes can be dry, when we remember the measure of his suffering,
that the Son of God should be humbled so low, as to be borne of a woman? The
earth is but a center to the heaven, and a man or woman, but as a center to the
earth; and yet that a centers center should contain him, who^ the whole
circumference, that is to say, the heaven of heavens cannot co^taine: that at
his birth his bed should be no better the^ a cratch, a bed nothing so well
furnished as that bed, which the poor Shunamite made 2. King 4. 10.
for Elisha; 2. Kings 4. 10. for there was neither a table, nor a stool, nor
Candlestick by it. O that He who made the World, and spread the heavens like a
curtain, should be cast in such a bed, as was neither made, nor had curtain
hanging about it* that he should fly by banishment into Egypt, unto whom God
gave the ends of the earth for his proper possession: that he should be put to
fast, who fills the hungry with good things, and was that Bread of life,
which came down from heaven to give life unto the World: that he should be
tempted of the Devil, whom he did usually throw out of the possessed by the
word of his mouth: that he should weep for Jerusalem, who at his passion would
not suffer the daughters of Jerusalem to weep for him; Weep not for me, ye
daughters Luke 23. 28.
of Jerusalem: that he should be subject Matthew. 11. 29.
to weariness, who is the refresher of all those that be laden and wearied:
that he through sense of Gods wrath upon him for sin in the Garden, should
sweat water and blood, who never knew John 1. 29.
sin, but was that immaculate Lamb of God, who takes away the sins of the
world: that he should be mocked and scoffed at, who one day shall have Psalm.
2. 4.
the sinners in derision: that he should be spit upon, who one day shall spit
and spue the wicked out of his mouth, as it is Revel. 3. 16.
Reuelat. 3. 16. That they durst scourge him with rods, who with a whip of
cords John 2. 15.
not long before, had scourged out the prophaners of the Temple: that they
durst bind him, who binds Kings in chains, and Princes in linkes of Irons:
that they durst set a Crown of thorns upon his head, at whose right hand (as
the Apostle tells us) there stands a Crown of immortal glory.

That they durst put a rod for a Scepter in his hand, Who with a Scepter of
Iron Psalm. 2. 9*
shall crush the wicked, and break them in pieces like a potters vessel;
Psalm. 2. 9. That he should die, who was the Resurrection and the life. That he
should die so accursed a death, as to be crucified, who was the blessed of the
Lord, and he in whom all the Nations on the earth were to be blessed. That he
should be crucified between two thieves, who was the John 14. 6.
truest man that ever was borne, nay, was Truth it self. That he on the
Cross should thirst, who in the 55. of Esaias, calls unto every one that
thirsts, to Esaias ^5. 1.
come unto him. That he should have Vinegar offered him to drink, who was
that tree that sweetened the waters of Marah. That he should be wounded in the
side, who heals the Nations, and binds up our wounds. That he who was God
himself, should ask, why God had forsaken him? Can we remember these things,
and not sow tears? Can we remember, that his blessed Head was pricked with
Thorns, and yet do not our hearts prick us, at the remembrance of it? That
our Saviors hands and feet were smitten through with nails, and his side with
a lance, and yet we not so much as smite our breast at it. That with the
spittings of his enemies, and his own precious blood and tears, his
beautiful face was all marred; and yet our faces not wet with so much as one
tear for it. That his face for faintness lost the color, and yet no man's
cheeks grow pale at it. That he should be thus offered a pure Virgin as a
sacrifice, and yet we not do so much, as the Daughters of Israel did in
remembrance of Iphtaphs daughter, bewail it with tears and lamentations. You
know, the senseless creatures could not hold, but testify their grief: the
Sun put on, as it were, a mourning robe for the death of his elder brother,
the Son of righteousness; the Veil of the Temple rent it self in two, for
grief to see it is Lord so dishonored: the stones in the street claue
asunder, to see that Stone refused of the builders, which was the head of the
corner; and shall we now be sparing of our tears?

Dearly beloved in the Lord, when I consider, how at the passion of the Son
of God, the rest of the creatures did testify their grief, but yet our hard
hearts cannot send forth a sigh, nor our eyes a tear; I am ready to allow of
the force 1. King. 13. 5.
and strength of Bonauentures Meditation on Ezech. 36. 26. and almost begin to
say Amen to his petition. The Lord there Matthew. 27. 51.
thus promises to his people; I will take from you your hearts of stone, and
give you hearts of flesh: No, Lord (says he) I will have none of that change,
give me rather a heart of stone, then a heart of flesh: for in the 1* King 13.
5. at the voice of the Prophet, the stones of the Altar went asunder; but the
heart of Jeroboam remained untouched* and when thy Son my blessed Savior
suffered, The Veil of the Temple rent it self in two, and the stones of the
street did cleave themselves asunder; Matthew. 27. 51. yet the hearts of the
Jews remained untouched: therefore Lord (says he) give me rather a heart of
stone, then a heart of flesh. Let us not (I beseech you) be slow to draw tears
out of this Well.

O, but Christ has forbid us, Weep Luke 23. 28.
not for me, ye daughters of Jerusalem, Luke 23. 28. But, O Lord, thou could
have taken no such ready course to make us weep, as to forbid them then to
weep; for how can we (alas) but weep to remember that thou thy self did
weep for Jerusalem, and yet that thou would not suffer the daughters of
Jerusalem to weep for thee? that thou make so small account of thy self, in
regard of us, that thou can not choose but weep, when thou considerest, that
in Jerusalem, there shall not be left so much, as one stone upon another; and
yet thou will not consent, that the daughters of that traiterous City shall
weep, to see thee keep not so much as one drop of blood by another? Weep
then first for the measure of his passion.

O but secondly, grieve and weep much more, that we were the cause of all this
his suffering: you are deceived, if you think it was either the hands, or
tongues of Christ's enemies, that did crucify and revile Christ, so much as our
sins did. Not all the hands of the soldiers could have done it; he said no
sooner John 8. 6.
to them; I am he, but they fell dead to the ground, John 8. 6. What was it
then? hear the Prophet, Propter scelus populi mei percussi eum; hear the
Apostle, Sinners do Heb. 6. 6.
crucify again unto themselves the King of glory, and make a mock of him,
Heb. 6. 6. What our sins do now, they did then; the Jews cried out,
Crucify him, crucify Luke 23. 21.
him; their malice was so great, that if it had been possible, they would have
had him twice crucified; and they had their wish: for they did it once with
their hands, and we did it with our sins: let us shed tears for that.

The necessity and virtue of these tears, drawn from our Saviors Well, see
both at once in one word: because we must be like Christ, that shows the
necessity of them, and they make us like Christ, that shows the virtue of
them; if the head weep, the hand must not play, nor the foot dance; and if the
members condole, when the head weepeth, it makes the members like the head.
Remember Vriahs answer to David, when he would have had him gone home to
rejoice with his wife: Does my Lord and Sam. 11. 11.
Captain Joab, and the Host of the Lord lie abroad in tents, and shall I go
home and rejoice with my wife? 2. Sam. 11. 11. Did our head weep, and shall
not our eyes shed tears? Let it be the answer we make to all the pleasures
and vanities of this world, when they would persuade us only to laughter, and
to forget tears. And thus much of the tears which we may draw from this
third Well, which I called our Saviors Well.

THe fourth Well, I called the Well of The Well of Life. Psalm 36. 9.
life, or Gods Well; With thee is the Well of life, Psalm. 36. 9. How can we
out of this Well draw tears? Even because we cannot come at this Well. Let us
weep, because in this life we are forced Psalm. 137. 1.
to sit by the waters of Babylon, and are yet strangers, and as it were,
banished and barred from being satisfied with the pleasures of that River,
which gladdeth the City of God. Alas, if we did consider that our Country
were Heaven, and did apprehend this place here below, to be our prison, or
place of banishment, the least absence from our Country would draw tears from
our eyes, and sighs from our hearts, with David, Psalm. 120. 5. Psalm. 120. 5.
Woe is me that J soiourne in Mesech, and am constrained to dwell in the Tents
of Kedar. Theodoret expounding that place, observes, that Kedar was the other
son of Ismael, and that they who were descended of him, did dwell not far
from Babylon; who calling to mind, that their father Jsmael was cast out of
Abraham's Family, did live like exiles, and bewail their banishment out of
their fathers House, the House of Abraham. What should we do then, when we
consider our long absence from Abraham's bosom, and our being banished like our
father Adam, for a certain time, from the heavenly Paradise? Do you remember
how the Jews behaved themselves in the 137. Psalm, in the time of their exile
and captivity, while they sat by the Psalm. 137.
Rivers and Waters of Babylon? they wept, would not be comforted, hanged up
their Harpes and Instruments. What are the waters of Babylon, but the pleasures
and delights of the World, the waters of confusion, as the word signifies? Now
when the people of God sit by them, that is to say, does not carelessely, but
deliberately, with a settled consideration, see them slide by and pass away;
and compares them with Sion, that is to say, with the inconceivable rivers of
pleasure, which are permanent in the heavenly Jerusalem; How can they choose but
weep, when they see themselves sitting by the one, and soiourning from the
other? And it is worthy your observing, that notwithstanding the Jews had many
causes of tears; the Caldeans had robbed them of their goods, honors,
Countries, liberty, parents, children, friends; the chief thing for all this,
that they mourn for, is their absence from Sion; We wept, while we remembered
thee, O Sion; for their absence from Jerusalem. What should we then do for
our absence from another manner of Jerusalem? theirs was an earthly, old,
robbed, spoiled, burned, sacked Jerusalem; ours a Heavenly new one, into which
no arrow can be shot, no noise of the Drum heard, nor sound of the Trumpet, nor
calling unto battle: who would not then weep, to be absent from hence?

The necessity of these tears you may easily see, because God gives none of
the water of the Well of life; that is to say, eternal happiness, but to such
who by the importunity of their tears do beg it, and obtain it of him.
The virtue of them is seen, because the Saints who sought heaven with these
tears, obtained it. David, whose meat day and night Psalm. 42. 3.
were his tears, while they said unto him, Where is thy God? whose heart
brayed, panted and fainted, after the living God, Psalm. 42. 3. The woman of
Samaria, who after she had heard Christ talk not above three or four words
of the water of this Well of life, made it her present suite; Lord, evermore
John 4. 15.
give me to drink of these waters, John 4. 15. Peter, who after he had seen a
little of the glory of that Country, made it his next suite; Lord, it is good
for us to Mat. 17. 4.
be here, let us build three tabernacles. Saint Paul, who after* his rapture
into that Country, made it his only moan, that While we dwelt in the bodies,
we were strangers 2. Cor. 5* 2.
from the Lord, and did sigh, till he might Phil. 1. 23.
be dissolved, and be with Christ. All these men's longings have been satisfied,
and that Kingdom which with tears they have sought, God (wiping all tears
Reucl. 21. 4.
from their eyes) has bestowed upon them. And this is all I have time to say
of the fourth Well, the Well of Life.

These now are the four Wells, from whence we may draw these tears, this
precious Seed, which here we are commanded to sow. Though profane men
think these tears, but the badge of hypocrites; yet know, that David did sow
them, who was none, but a man according to Gods own heart. That they proceed
out of childishness and simplicity, yet David did sow them, who was wiser
then his Ancients and Teachers: Ps. 119. 99, 100.
though they do account them womanish, and signs of weakness; yet David did
sow them, who had the heart of a Lion, and was one of the Worthies, and
valiant men of Israel. Though they think they proceed of idleness and
laziness; yet did David sow them, a man as full of business, both in peace
and war, as ever was any. And if David's example will not serve the turn,
remember Christ, the Son of David, one far beyond all the exceptions,
wherewith profane men use to charge the precious tears, which we are to draw
from those four Fountains. So that as from the bitter flowers of Wormwood,
by Simile.
the Art of distilling, and heat of the fire, sweet and wholesome moystnesse
and waters are distilled; even so, from the bitter consideration of our sins,
miseries for sin, the bitter passion of Christ, and our absence from God, by
the fire and heat of Gods Spirit, and this act of spiritual sorrow and
weeping, do drop and distill* tears of far more virtue and vigor, then all
the waters you use to distill, which you make serve for so many purposes.

O sweet waters! O precious seed! O divine tears! What can you not do? You
whom God makes so great account of, as that he puts you in his Psalm. 56. 8.
own bottle? You which keep us from everlasting tears, weeping and gnashing
of teeth? You that make fat, and fertile our hearts, like that Fountain which
came out of Paradise, Genes* 2. and make Genesis 2.
them bring forth a plentiful harvest of joy? You that both quench our thirst,
and cool our concupiscences? for as when we are thirsty, we run to the Well;
and when our houses are on fire, we run to the water; so these tears both lay
our thirst, and cool our lusts. You that do raise up our souls toward
heaven, as the waters of the Deluge did lift up the Genesis ^. 17.
Arc; for the peoples tears by the waters of Babylon, brought into their
minds the remembrance of Sion? You that are the viaticum, or provision at our
death, when we are traveling to our everlasting home, as you were to Iphtahs
Daughter, David, Job, and Ezekiah, who Esaias 38. 2.
upon the sentence of his death, turned himself to the wall and wept? You
blood of our souls, which cry louder into the ears of God, then either our
sins, or the blood of Abel; and therefore Heb. 12* ^^.
in our language is called a crying, who next to the blood of Christ speak
best things, who never held your peace, though you want tongues, and teach our
eyes to speak powerfully to the Lord, Lament. 2. 18. Ne taceat pupilla oculi
Lament. 2. 18.
tui; Let not the apple of thine eye hold its peace, or take rest. Of you I
will say no more, for such is the sweetness and force of your own eloquence
with God, that whatsoever the most eloque^t toungs, or happiest pens can say,
or write of you, it is far beneath your worth. Happy is the man who has his
bottle full of you, and his eyes running over with you: for you are the
precious seed here spoken of; They that sow in tears. And thus much of the
first thing in the first season, the seed to be committed, Tears.

NOw secondly, see the manner of The manner of committing the seed.
committing this seed, it must not be thin, or niggardly scattred, but sowed
plentifully, else our Harvest shall be no reaping, but a gathering: for he
that sows 2. Cor. 9. 2.
sparingly, shall sparingly reap: as the Lord in the parable of the Gospel
complained of the reapers, so may we now of the sowers; he complained, that the
Harvest Matthew. 9. 37.
was great, but the reapers, or laborers few.

We may on the other side complain, that the seed is great: here is seed
enough, never more matter and cause of tears, but the sowers few, few that
plentifully shed and power them out. Many now and then will drop a tear upon
the present occasion; as in extremity of heat, you shall see sometimes a few
drops of rain, or a few prodigious drops of blood to fall: but you know the
verse, Gutta cauat lapidem non v^, sed saepe cadendo: tears will never sink
into our stony hearts, but by often falling, as we see drops do hollow stones.
And who is there among us, that does thus sow them? We must shed them often,
and many at a time, often; Day and night, says Jeremy, without taking rest to
our eyes, ne taceat pupilla oculi tui: day and night, says David, and many at
a time. So many as will fill Gods bottell, so many as you may wash your Psalm.
6. 6.
bed, and water your couch with them at a time, so many as may serve a man for
meat and drink. They were my meat Psalm. 42. 3.
(says David) and I mingled my drink Psalm. ^02. 9.
with tears.) As many as would serve to wash ones feet with Marie Magdalen;
or if we cannot attain to that measure of spiritual moisture and perfection
of tears, with those holy men and women: yet let us do that which the strict
letter of the Text requires of us; let us sow them, observe a seed time for
them; that is to say, set out some certain times and seasons for the sowing of
them, principally those which the Church has, or shall set out; but every one
his own times, and seasons too, according as he feels his own wants, or is
touched with the sense of others miseries, especially the Church of God.

I doubt not, but that some such sowers there are; and these are they that
stand in the breach, and that the wrath of God does not burn among us, as it
does among many, perhaps less deserving then we: no question, a good part of
the cause is, the seed of these sowers, the many tears of these men of tears,
which they throw upon the devouring flames of wrath, which are gone forth from
the Lord, the number of which tears, unless they be increased, and in this
combustion of Christendom, we will show our selves as swift in running to the
four Wells above mentioned, as we can be forward to run and ride, if we hear
but of any new vpstart Well in the Country, and from them bring pales full of
tears to quench this flame; the fire may go on, and as now it is in our
neighbors house, so next it may take hold of ours.

Now as all are bound to sow these Matthew. 13. 3.
tears, so they especially, who in the Parable of the Sower, Matthew. 13. 3. are
designed by that name, I mean, Gods Ministers: for if the seed in that
Parable, be the Word of God, then the sowers must be the Ministers of that
Word. The Seers and Watchmen of Israel, as they ought with Joel, Jeremy, and
the rest (if from the Towers of Sion they spy any fire approaching unto it) to
call to all the people of God for tears, to meet and quench the flame: so
they ought first to power out their own tears; si vis me flere, dolendum est
primum ipsi tibi. Where only by the way, note how much these Ministers and
sowers are mistaken, who use to sow and preach the Word of God, not in tears,
but in laughter, and think they sow best, when their wit makes the people
laugh. But alas, it were more wisdom to make them weep. From this kind of
sowing, they shall reap but small joy from the fruit of their Auditors, and
less joy in their own consciences from the remembrance of it, when they shall
lie upon their deathbeds. Now I have done with the seedetime; They that sow in
tears. I come to the Harvest, and will dispatch it more quickly: Shall reap
in joy.

IN which, as I told you, we must take The Harvest.
notice of three things: First, the Corn, Joy: Secondly, the manner of
gathering it, Reaping; they shall reap. Thirdly, the Reapers, they, that is to
say, the Sowers. For the Corn, Joy, as I told you, that we were to be choice
in the seed: All tears not to be sown: so not every Joy here to be reaped,
nor expected. As I told you of three sorts of tears, so I pray you take notice
of three sorts of Joys. Three sorts of joys.


First, sensual joy, not that it is a Joy 1
indeed, but because men call it, and account it so: for it is a beastly
sensuality and voluptuousness, and though it does arise from the external
sense, yet because it arises only from sense, it is against all sense, that
it should be called Joy, and may as well be called a senseless, as a sensual
joy.

Secondly, joy is humane or worldly 2
joy, whereby a man is delighted with virtue and honesty, by the natural or
reasonable contemplation of them: neither of these joys be that Joy you must
here look to reap; for Christ has promised these joys to the World, Mundus
John 16. 20.
autem gaudebit; but the World shall rejoice: A world full of these joys will
never make a Harvest; for though to the sense they seem to grow fairer and
higher then true Joy, yet when you come to the haruest-field, they prove but
wild Oats, which many times grow higher then the Corn; or like the gawdie
flowers among the Corn, which rather disgrace it, then grace it, and prove
both the corn to be naught, and the ground barren; these joys be such, as
the Mower fills not his hand with them, nor the gleaner his lap.

The third Joy then, and that which is 3
here meant, is spiritual, which arises from the inioying of God and
spiritual things, and it is called spiritual joy, both because it is
apprehended and perceived not by our senses, but by our spirits, but especially
because the Spirit of God begets this joy in us, and is the cause of it, who
therefore is called the Comforter, John 14. 16.
or bringer of joy.

NOw this spiritual joy is twofold, here Division of spiritual joy.
and hence: first, in via; secondly, in patria: first, the joy which we feel
while we are upon our way or journey in this life; and secondly, the joy we
shall feel, when we are come to our iournies end, in the life to come, both of
which we shall reap from tears; the one we may for distinctions sake call
spiritual, the other heavenly Joy; the one, the first fruits or earnest of the
Spirit, the other, the harvest or whole sum: for whereas in other haruests,
the gleaning follows, but in Heaven there is no gleaning, but all harvest,
God is there all in all: Therefore God here before bestows upon us something
answerable to a gleaning; he bestows upon us here some ears of this Corn,
till the Harvest be ripe; the one is, the joy which the prodig all conceived,
Luke 15. 18.
when he thought but of returning to his father; the other, the joy of
kissing, weeping, falling on his neck, feasting, Verse. 22. etc.
and music, which he conceived upon his meeting with his Father: the Numb.
13. 24.
one, the bunch of grapes, which Joshuahs Spies brought to show the goodness
of the Land; the other, the whole Vintage, The milk and honey where with the
Land ouerflowed. Exodus 3. 8.
In a word, the one is our joy, which may enter into us, because it is not
without measure; the other, our Masters joy, which is so great, as it cannot
enter into us, but we must enter into it, Enter into thy Masters Joy. In a
word, look how great difference there was between the first fruits, and all
the rest, which was the Masters, or the Owners of the ground, so much
difference is between our joy here, which the Scripture calls, Primitiae
Romans 8. 23.
Spiritus, The first fruits of the Spirit, and our joy hence, which is the
Owners, and Masters own; and therefore is called, Our Masters Joy. The object
of both these joys is the same, God and heavenly things; but our joy here,
arises from our being united to these objects by hope and faith: but our joy
hence, shall arise from our actual being united to them, by vision,
comprehension, and fruition; so that look how much enjoying is above hope, and
sight above faith, so much shall our joy hence be above that which is here:
which I speak not for the vilifying of our joy here, but for the magnifying of
our Joy hereafter; I will speak a word of either.

A world of Joys we have here, according Joy in v^a.
to the number of the several objects, which the Spirit of God makes us to
take delight in, according to which number of objects, we have so many several
strains of joy; to speak of all which, were to slip from the proper place of
my Text, and to fall into the common place of joy; the joy which in this life
you shall reap, by the warrant of my Text, is fourefold, according to the
fourefold feed of tears, which I directed you to draw from the four Wells* I
will but name them.

From Adams Well, that is to say, tears 1
for our sins, we reap here the joy, first, of the forgiveness and remission
of them all, which is not only a joy, but a blessedness, Psalm. 32. 1. Blessed
is the man, whose sins are remitted. The Publican found more joy in this,
that after his tears and smiting of his breast, he returned home justified,
then the Pharise did in the enumeration of all his gifts and goodness; and
Marie Magdalen found more comfort in that one sentence of Christ after her
tears, Thy sins are forgiven thee, then ever she did in all the gifts and
pleasures of her Lovers. Christ called health and other gifts which he
bestowed upon men, by this name, as he told the sick of the Palsy, Mark. 2.
5. after his cure, Thy Mark* 2. 5.
sins are forgiven thee: as if that should be his chief joy: if there were
no more joy, here is recompense enough for all thy mourning. From the tears
we 2
draw from Jacobs Well, that is to say, for the miseries of humane life, we
reap a second joy, which is the joy of content, for they make us content with
that little God gives us here, because we see this life a veil of misery,
and that the more men have, the more misery they have with it. Now for one to
be content with his present estate, it is not only a great joy, but so great a
gain too, as that without it (as it should seem by the Apostle) godliness it
self were no gain: Godliness is great gain, if a man be 1. Tim. 6. 6.
content with that he has. From the tears which we draw from the third Well,
that is to say, our Saviors Well, we may reap a third joy, and that is no
less then the 3
joy of our salvation, as it is called by the Psalmist, 51. 12. Restore unto me
the joy of Psalm. 51. 12.
thy salvation: and to the waters of this Well, we have an express promise
annexed, Esaias 12. 3. With joy shall ye draw Esaias 12. 3.
water out of the Wells of salvation. Here is a joy indeed, for a condemned man
to be delivered from, I cannot tell how many sentences of death, temporal and
eternal curses here, and being cursed hereafter, and that with no less price,
then by the bitter death and passion of the Son of God* This may well be
called, The Joy of salvation. She that was saved from least, found great cause
of joy, I mean Marie, whose spirit rejoiced Luke 1. 47.
in God her Savior. And he that thought he was saved from most, Saint Paul,
who reckoned himself the greatest sinner, found so much joy in it, as he
resolved Gal. 6. ^4.
never to rejoice, nor glory in any thing else, but in the Cross of Christ.
From the tears which we draw from the fourth Well, that is to say, the Well
of life, we reap a fourth joy, the joy of 4
hope; Of what? Of inheriting our Country, from our absence, from which we
wept so much; and if it were not for this hope, the heart would break. It was
this joy, the joy of hope of looking after the recompense of the reward, which
made the Martyrs so merry; from this joy of hope came their rejoicing, singing,
kissing of the stake, as it is reported of Theodorus that young man, who when
by Iulians command, he was dragged to most terrible tortures, he is said so to
have sung and rejoiced, as he made his very torturers to blush; he persuaded
some almost, others altogether to become Christians. I can stay no longer on
these joys, because the gaudium magnum, the great Joy is yet behind.

Only let me tell you this, that the least of those Joys is worth all your
tears, and the least drop of them is worth a Sea of all sensual and worldly
joys; and indeed to speak of these spiritual joys, to such as have not felt
them, is ridiculous, because they are known by apprehension, not by discourse,
and to them who have felt them, it is needless to discourse of them; for this
doctrine is better learned by one experience, then by a hundred rules; as one
will know more of the sweetness of honey by one taste of it, then by a hundred
disputations and discourses of it. In this point only, if there were no more,
it is worth all worldly joys: it is purum purum gaudium; a sincere and sound
joy: so are not worldly joys, they are but shadows and figures of things we
take them to be. 1. Cor. 7. 30. Let them that rejoice, be as if 1. (...).
they rejoiced not; and them that marry, be as if they married not; and they
that buy, as if they possessed not; for the shadow of these things passes
away. The Fathers on that place have made this observation, that the joys of
this world are but quasi, as if they were joys, not joys indeed, but shadows
or figures; they are, as it is in the nine and twentieth Chapter of Esaias, Jsai.
2^ 8.
and the eighth verse: As when a hungry man eats in his dream, but when he
awaketh, his soul is empty: as Nebuchadnezzar did see Dan. 2. 31, 37.
the glory of the world, but it was in a dream. Next, this spiritual Joy is
a sincere joy, because as it is all joy, so it is always joy, any cross or
affliction will dash out a worldly man's joy: Balthasars Dan. 5. 5, 6.
joy dashed out with the dash of a pen upon the wall; Herod's joy dashed with a
Acts 12. 23.
few Lice and Vermin* worldly men's joys lie in the power of others; but John
6. 22.
(says our Master of spiritual joy) no man shall take your joy from you: It
is increased rather, then impaired by death it self, as I told you in the
Martyrs; or by scourges, as in the Apostles, who rejoiced, that they were
thought worthy to suffer for Acts 5. 41.
the name of Christ: So worldly joys are but like Towns and Countries, finely
painted in the Map, which as with a little water any one may wipe out; so are
they quite wiped away by the water of affliction: and if there be no cross to
dash out worldly joys, they will dash out themselves: for they are all, says
Gregor. Greg. Nyssen. hom. 5. in Eccles.
Nyss. in his 5. homily on Eccles. written in water, which retains no print
of that which passes through it: nam voluptatis cuiusque cessante operatione
cessat and sensus; when that is gone in which worldly men joy, their joy is
gone. It is not so with spiritual joy, which reflecteth back upon it own acts
and objects. When wicked men delight in sin, they rejoice for the time; but
when they remember what they have done, that reflecting upon it, grieueth and
troubles them, Pro. 14. 13. The end of their mirth is heaviness: but Prou. 14.
13.
a godly man is ioyed, not only when he reflecteth upon any joyful action, but
when he remembers his grief and sorrow, and rejoices even in the remembrance
of his sufferings. As Samson, Judge. 14. 8. being Judge. 14. 8.
set upon by a Lion, slew it; and after a few days going to look upon it,
found a swarm of Bees and Honycombes in it: So godly men, when they reflect
upon their temptations and crosses, find joy and sweetness in the remembrance
of them. I have done with the Joy which we shall reap here from our tears;
let us speak a little of the Joy of Heaven, which one day we shall reap
hence from the same tears: for he that draws tears from the four
forenamed Wells, shall be sure one day to reap eternal joy.

OF which Joy, I know not well what Joy in Patria.
to say, so much has been said already, and yet nothing has been said: in my
expression of it, I would gladly take a new course, and only tell you this of
it, that it cannot be expressed. Hear Saint Augustine, he tells us, that one
day, while he was about to write something upon the eighth verse of the thirty
sixth Psalm, which is this; Thou shall make them drink of the Rivers of thy
Pleasure; and he was almost swallowed up with the contem* plation of these
Heavenly Joys, that one called him very loud by his name; and inquiring who it
was, he answered; I am Hierome, with whom in my life time thou had so much
conference concerning doubts in Scripture, and am now by experience, best able
to resolve thee of any doubts concerning the Joys of Heaven: but only let me
first ask thee this question: Art thou able to put the whole earth, and all
the waters of the Sea into a little pot? No more is it possible that thy
understanding should comprehend the least shadow of these Joys. Will you hear
Paul tell us, that he cannot express them? 1. Cor. 2. 9. Eye has 1. Cor. 2.
9.
not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the
things which God has prepared for those that love him. The eye can see very
far: I will not stand to tell you, how far the Optics tell us that a man
may see, having all advantages: but it is certain, that a man may see
wonderful far in the night, because he may see the Stars of the Firmament;
which are so far distant from us, that Philo (laughing at the folly of the
Babylonish builders) affirms, That a Millstone would be four hundred years
in falling to the earth from the Sphere of the Moon: and Astronomers, That it
would be fifteen hundred years a falling from the firmament, where the Stars
are. And yet though our eye can see thus far, yet it cannot pierce into this
Joy: he goes on to the ear, which extends it self a great deal farther
then the eye, which only looks upon things present, but by our ear we know
things past, the glory of all the Monarchies and Empires that are past, the
glory of all things that now are, and all the things which are foretold shall
be; and yet our ears have never heard of any thing like this Joy: he goes on;
neither has entered into the heart of man to understand: That is more then both
the former, the eye apprehends things present, the ear things past, present,
and to come, they go no farther: but the understanding apprehends things that
are, and are not, and by a divine power calls things that are not, as if they
were: disputat de quolibet ente and non ente; it imagines Mountains of gold,
and heaven to be a place of infinite Joy: and yet the heart of man cannot
comprehend this Joy. Sure these are great expressions of the Apostle: Can we
find no other way to know this Joy? As Moses and Joshua sent out some Spies to
spy the Land: Numb. 13 18.
so we have 2. special me^ in Scripture, who have spied this joy; John in a
Vision, Paul in his Person: Can they tell us nothing of this Joy? Yes, John
tells us something of it, but his expressions are dark, in regard of the
light that is there; for he expresses it by floods, Rivers, Mountains,
Metals, stones, all which are but material things, and whatsoever he says,
is not good enough to be a shadow of this Joy: and S. Paul is forbid to tell us
what he heard, and was so ravished with that he did see, as that he is
confounded, and can say nothing of it: nay, not so much as now fourteen
years after he was there, tell us whether he was there in the body, or ^. Cor.
12. 3.
out of the body: it must be a great joy which so dazelled him. When men see
things in a dream or vision, then they think they see them in the body; but
restored again to themselves and senses, they know that they did not see them
in the body: but the Apostle fourteen years after, cannot tell whether he
saw that joy in the body, or out of the body. Now after these great expressions
of the impossibility of expressing it, I will never go about to do it; only
I will give you a taste of it by this one drop: One drop of this Joy, is able
to quench all the fire that burns, to dry and stop all the tears, weeping,
and gnashing of teeth, which is in hell; the rich glutton in hell desired
Abraham to send Lazarus with Luke 16. 24
one drop of water to cool him. From whence we must not infer, that the
pains of hell are so little, as they may be quenched with one drop of water,
but rather make this safe inference, that one drop of that water where Abraham
and Lazarus were, is of such infinite power and sweetness, that if it could
be but dropped into the flames of hell, it would quench them all. The
greatness of this Joy may be comprehended in these two words; in the fullness
of the object, and in the fullness of inioying this object. The objects are
many, but the sum of all is God, whom we shall see face to face, and in him
all the joys and goodness which is in Heaven with him: for as looking in a
glass, we see the glass, our selves, and all things about it; so in that
glass of the Trinity, we shall by a beatificall Vision, see the glory of the
Trinity, see our selves, and our own glory, and all the Angels, Saints and
pleasures of Heaven, which are round about that Trinity. And as our joy shall
be full, in regard of the fullness of this object, so it shall be full, in
regard of our fullness of inioying it; we shall feel this joy with all our
powers and faculties; and never have done feeling it, ever beholding, though
always satisfied; ever drinking and yet still thirsting, non per sitim
siccitatis, says the school, sed per sitim ardoris and desiderii, not with
any thirst of dryness, but with the thirst of desire. This is all I will at
this time say of the Joy of Heaven.

But now how come we to reap this Joy from our tears? It is a thing that both
stands with reason, and with good justice: with reason; for as sweet Spices,
when they are burnt in the fire, or beaten in the Mortar, send forth their
sweet smell and savor: so after our tears and grief, God may well send us
this pleasure and joy; with Gods justice and goodness it stands, that those
souls which have refrained themselves from worldly delights, which cannot be
without some sorrow and sadness, should one day be filled with joy and
gladness, that those vessels, which for the inioying of God, did empty
themselves of all joy here, should run over with joy in Heaven, that as Joseph
(Genesis 45.) after Genesis 45. 2, 3, 4.
he had used his brethren a little roughly at first could hold himself no
longer, but must needs ouer-ioy them, with making himself known to them: so
Christ our elder Brother, after he has used us here a little hardly under the
rod, and made us shed many a salt tear, should show us himself in Heaven,
wipe those tears from our eyes, and fill them with joy and laughter. Though
you see therefore the Children of God in tears, nay and perhaps in blood, both
brokenhearted, and broken-boned, despair not for all this, but that one day
you may see them shine in Joy, like the bright Stars of the Firmament. Dan.
12. 3.
When you see one in the streets from every dunghill, gather old pieces of rags
and clouts, little would you think, that of these rotten rags beaten together
in the Mill, should be made such pure fine Paper, as afterward we see: and so
from tears we do not expect pure Joy, which notwithstanding is the pure Corn
we are promised here from this seed of Tears. I have done with the Corn,
Joy; now I come to the manner of gathering it, which is reaping.

IF we have not scattered, but sowed, we The Reaping.
shall not gather or gleane, but reap; that is to say, Look how far the
corn which Husbandmen receive in Harvest, does exceed the seed which they
did sow in seede-time, so far shall the Joy which we shall reap, exceed
the tears which we did sow. When God suffers us to sorrow, he ever keeps
in his hand, and suffers tears perhaps, to enter into our souls, but not to
go over our souls; but in bestowing his mercies and joys, he ever
stretches forth his hand, and semper, say Divines, praemiat vltracondignum; He
fills our cup full, and makes it to run over. Isai. 40. 12. God Esaias 40.
12.
is said to measure the waters pugno, with his fist, and to mete out the
Heavens palmo, with his spanne. By the Waters, you know, in Scripture, is often
meant sorrow and afflictions; and by the Heavens, the Joys and rewards due to
the righteous. When therefore he measures out our tears and sorrows, he does
it pugno, with his fist, that is to say, his hand closed and contracted; but
when he measures our Joys and consolations, he does it palmo, explicata
manu, with his span, and open hands: says our Master; A little John 16. 16.
while and ye shall not see me, and again, a little while ye shall see me,
for J go unto my Father. The Apostles were to mourn and fast for the absence
of the Bridegroom, and their Master, to wit, all the time of his being dead
and buried in the Grave, and then afterward they were to see him from his
resurrection until his ascension, or going to his Father. So there was modicum
absentiae, and modicum praesentiae, a little while of his absence, and a little
while of his presence; but now which of these littles was the greater? that of
his absence while he was in the grave, was forty hours; that of his
presence, or conuersing with them, between his resurrection and ascension
forty days; so that for every hour of his absence, there was a whole day of
his presence: nay, Jsaiah makes the one a year, annum placabilem, and the
other but a day, diem vltionis, Isai. 61. 2. To preach Jsai. 61. 2.
the acceptable year of the Lord, and the day of vengeance of our God: but the
Apostle, 2. Cor. 4. 7. has cut the one so short, and 2. Cor. 4. 7.
so lengthened and loaded the other, as he will not have them come within the
compass of any comparison; Our light afflictions which are but for a moment,
cause unto us a far more excellent and eternal weight of glory. Let any man
show me a richer or fuller expression in all Tully or Demosthenes, then this;
our tears but light, our joy not only weighty, but a weight, our tears but
momentarie, past 2. Cor. 4. 17.
as soon as come, our Joy eternal, ever coming, and never to be gone. What
proportion between these two? our Joy then shall be as far above our tears,
as reaping above sowing; they shall reap.

THirdly, we must take notice of the The Reapers.
reapers, they shall reap. Which they? They that did sow: they shall, and
none but they shall: they shall, and good reason they should, because it was
they that did sow. And though some that have sown in tears, do complain of
the latenesse or thinness of the Harvest, that they have not reaped in Joy, as
is here promised, know, that some grounds are later then others, and some
years the Harvest falls later then others, and that God, who is the Lord of
the Harvest, in his good time will ripen thy Joy, and thou shall reap it: and
in the mean time, if we try it narrowly, we shall find the cause in our
selves, both of the latenesse of our Joy, because we were too late of sowing
our tears; and of the thinness of our Joy, because we did sow our tears too
thin. And if after our sowing of tears we find no harvest of joy at all, we
may be well assured, that either our seed was not good; that is to say, our
tears none of them which are here meant, or else some of the mischances is
come upon them, which came upon the seed that came to no good in the
thirteenth of Matthew, either they have fallen by the way side; that is to say,
they have been shed for false causes, not upon true grounds of godly sorrow; or
they have fallen upon stony ground; that is to say, only fallen from our eyes,
but never sunk into our stony and hard hearts, and so could take no root; or
else they have fallen among the Thorns, which choked them; that is to say, the
grief and cares of this present World, which drown many times our godly
tears: or else the envious man has sown Tares among our tears; that is to
say, false worldly joys, which we, as they sprung up, did not weed out, till
they ouergrew this seed: but let us sow this precious seed of tears in a
good ground; that is to say, in a contrite and broken heart, and have a care,
that the envious man sow no Tares among them, and they shall bring forth a
hundred fold; for all they that thus sow in tears, shall reap in joy.

And as all they, so none but they, Psalm. 84. 6. Such only come to appear
Psalm. 84. 6.
before God in Sion, who pass through the valley of Baca, that is to say,
tears. And indeed there is no other way to enter into Heaven but by
affliction, violence, grief, and tears. There are in the new Testament twelve
names especially given to the Kingdom of Heaven, and the celestial joy which
we hope to reap; but look to them narrowly, and you shall find, that quantum
honoris is in every one of them, tantum etiam and oneris; that as there is
pleasure in them, so there is toil and tears likewise, before you can come
thither. Matthew. 11. It is called the Kingdom of Heaven: but the Text tells
Matthew. 11. 11.
us, that it cannot be taken but by violence. It is called a Heavenly City;
the Spiritual Jerusalem. But the Apostle, 2. Ephesians. teaches us, that those who
are Citizens of this world, cannot be fellow Citizens with the Saints: there is
a changing of the Copy, which to flesh and blood is grievous. The fourteenth
of John, it is called, the House of God, in which there are John 14. 2.
many dwelling places: but the Gospel tells us, that the door of this house
is so narrow, as we shall have much ado to get into it, Matthew. 13. 44. A hid
Treasure, Matthew. 13. 14.
but that we must dig very sore for it: Matthew. 13. 46. A rich Pearl; but
rated at Matthew. 13. 46.
such a high price, as we must sell all we have to buy it: and that was a
grievous task to the young man in the Gospel; Matthew. 20. 9. A penny, but it
is given only Matthew. 20. 9.
to such as labor all the day long in the Lords Vineyard, Luke 14. 16. The
great Luke 14. 16.
Supper of the King: but such a one as those who minded worldly business, as
seeing of Farms, proving of Oxen, and marrying of Wives, were not thought
worthy of it: Matthew. 25. 21. Our Masters Joy: Matthew. 25. 21.
but into which no man must enter, unless by his toil and trading, he has
doubled his talent. Matthew. 25. The Marriage of the great King: but from whose
Marriage-chamber they that sleep too long, are shut forth. 1. Cor. 9. A prize;
but such as no man obtains, until he run to the end of the race 2. Tim. 4.
A Crown of righteousness, but none must we are it, but those, who with the
Apostle have fought a good fight. And lastly, A Paradise; This night shall thou
be with me in Paradise: but you know how Paradise was guarded, with a guard
of Cherubins, Fire, and the blade of a sword shaken, to pass through which
guard, it must cost us some pains and danger: and besides these twelve, herein
the Text it is called a Joy, but such a one as only those shall reap, who
first sow in tears: So that these men, who traveling to the Mountain of
God, take not the valley of Baca, that is to say, the valley of tears in their
way, but shun it; and had rather take the way of the flowrie and gaudy
Meddowes: So as there is no Meddow in their way, in which they leave not some
tokens of their merriment and wantonness, as it is 2. Wisd. They are out of
their way, Errant and errant toto coelo, they are wide, and as wide as the wide
Heaven. And so much afterward they themselves confess in the fifth of
Wisdom, Ergo errauimus, etc. Therefore we went astray from the way of truth;
as therefore all they, so none but they who sow in tears, shall reap in joy;
which is the proposition of the text, that by Gods assistance I have now
expounded unto you. And it is in the number of those propositions, which are
conuertible and reciprocal, for as they that sow in tears, shall reap in
joy: so it is as true, that those that sow in joy, shall reap in tears; if
by Joy you understand worldly joy; and by tears, uncomfortable tears here,
and desperate weeping and gnashing of teeth hereafter. Christ himself has
converted these two propositions, Luke 6. 21. for Blessed are you that weep
now, for you shall laugh. So it is in the 25. verse; Woe be unto you that laugh
now, for you shall weep. And as I told you of our joy, so I tell you of their
tears: for they shall find, that their weeping shall as much exceed their joy,
as reaping does sowing; al their joys are but momentarie, or for days, at
most, for years: but there shall be no end of their Harvest of tears, it shall
come in so fast upon them; never shall their tears fail to fall from their
eyes, nor never shall any tear that falls, be wiped from their eyes: and if
they should shed but every year that they must remain in that bottomless
valley of tears, one tear, they shall shed more tears then there be drops of
water in all the Ocean; for though we cannot number the drops of water in the
Ocean, yet God can precisely tell, how many there are even to one: but these
tears neither God nor man can number, because they are numberless and
infinite tears, which they shall reap, who sow in Joy; as that Joy is
infinite which they shall reap, who sow in tears. And so now by Gods
assistance and your patience, I have cleared my hands of my text: They that
sow in tears, shall reap in Joy.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page 2. line 20. for heteredox, read heteredox* p 4. l. 25. for large, r.
long. p. 5. l. 23. for pluma, r. plunia. p. 13. l. 21* for feast, r. fast p 15.
l. 2. for unto, r. into. p. 16. l. 14. after so* add these. p. 18. l. 14. for
opera, r. opera* p. 18. l 23. for (...)* r. since. p. 24 l. 10. for one, r.
ane. p. 36. l. 11. for lanched, r. lanced. p. 40. l. 8. after evil, add, of.
p. 59. l. ar. for Son, r. Sun. p. 62. l. 21. after it, add, once p. 69. l.
8. for act, r. air^. p. 70. l. 21. for held, r. hold. p. 76. l. 15 for
Secondly, r. the second. p* 82. l. 10. after promise, add, of joy. p. 83. l.
8. for from, r* for. p. 84. l. 16. for purum, in the second place, r. putum.


