THE COVNSELLOR.

Exactly pourtraited in two Books. WHEREIN THE OFFICES OF Magistrates, The
happy life of Subjects, and the felicity of Commonweals is pleasantly and
pithilie discoursed.

A GOLDEN WORK, REPLENISHED with the chief learning of the most excellent
Philosophers and Lawgiuers, and not only profitable, but very necessary for
all those that be admitted to the administration of a well-gouerned
Commonweal.

Written in Latin by LAVRENTIVS GRIMALDVS, and consecrated to the honor of the
Polonian Empire.

Newly translated into English.

LONDON Imprinted by RICHARD BRADOCKE.

Anno Salutis Humanae M. D. XC. VIII.

TO THE MOST excellent and most mighty Prince Augustus King of Polonia. etc.
AS every man well knows those commonweales be most blessed where men do
live in peace: so are those countries miserable where people are not maintained
in security. And as every commonweal is happy wherein subjects are good, so
in good commonweales no subject can be unfortunate: yet what does work the
welfare of commonweales and people, is and has been (even among the most
learned,) long disputed. Some suppose it proceeds of goodlawes: others have
thought that civil education does inform it: others imagined that the
temperature of the heavens does make men apt for civil life: some also do
think it proceeds from the endeavor of good kings: because subjects by
imitation of their Princes virtue, do (for the most part) become like unto
them. Which opinion I verelie think to be most true, so persuaded by
observation of your Majesty's example, Neither do I judge the great quietness
and blessedness of this commonweal and kingdom, does proceed from other cause,
then the excellent splendor of your princely virtues, which are such and so
great, as do not only incite all subjects to behold them, but also with
exceeding admiration and imitation to love them. Since every man endeavoring
(above all things,) to honor your Primcelie example, your justice, and your
clemency, is no less enforced to obey, then to love; and the greatness of your
authority is such, as your majesty is not only a moderator and disposer of
laws, but also (which in a free state is most) a just judge of each man's
virtue, praise, and dignity: and therewith also have framed a kingdom so
perfect, as on earth none more perfect can be. Moreover, this kingdom is come
to your majesty's hands not by inheritance, not by blood, nor by usurpation (as
are many others) but by public consent of all the Polonian Nation, thereunto
persuaded by the ancient virtue and wisdom of your Majesty, and your most
noble ancestors. For (to confess truth) the house of Iageloni, has been a
Seminary of Kings so plentiful, as not only our commonweal, but also diverse
other nations did desire to be thereby governed; and would to God that most
noble raze had still in Bohoemia, and Hungary continued. For by the valor
thereof, the Turkish empire should have been restrained of that greatness
whereunto it is now aspired. All which things as they are admirable, so are
they also the more noble, that holding in hand the Raines of so great a
government, your Majesty by your own judgment has called unto you a Counsel
both for nobility and wisdom excellent, by whose moderation and prudence the
quiet and glory of our kingdom has been greatly preserved. I Omit to speak
of other magistrates by whom the felicity of our commonweal is not only
ornified, but also enlarged: so as Polonia may be well called the habitation of
liberty, and seat of just government. And that your highness is author and
doer of these things, who does not see? I in my youth did behold them, and in
mine elder age found them agreeable unto the rules of excellent philosophers
and ancient well governed commonweals, which moved me to think it were no
lost labor, if by mine own endeavor or the observation of other men's works I
should somewhat say of that matter to the profit of all posterity. This work
therefore I determined to dedicate unto your Royal Majesty, as chief causer
of mine endeavor. Not meaning thereby to inform you (for such is your excellent
wisdom as needs not the instruction of any) but that by reading, your
Majesty may be delighted to behold your own virtues, and as a Prince of that
government, be glad, that the same is most just and respondent to other ancient
and praiseable commonweales* Yet do I well know that to discourse of qualities
appertaining to an excellent Counselor, is not only of great importance, but
also accompanied with many difficulties* But my hope is, that albeit my skill
cannot therein merit praise, yet (as I hope) my earnest desire of public
utility, shall hold me excused, assuring my self, that your majesty's
wisdom and princely Counsel (a virtue proper to all the house of Iageloni)
will take my humble endeavor in good and acceptable part.

THE FIRST BOOK.
WHO so wholly applies himself to those studies which concern not only
private pleasure, but also public commodity, does (as I think) seek a
knowledge perfect and most worthy commendation. For to be skillful in that
whereof others receive profit, does above all things best become a wise man.
Among such sciences as were wont to bring with them both profit and pleasure,
there is not (in my judgment) any more profitable or pleasing, then is the
skill of government, being a guide of human happiness, and tutresse of
public commodity, and common life. Which I by the example of many others,
and no small experience knowing to be true; being also assured that the
knowledge whereby commonweales be governed, is certain, and the proceeding of
all things directed by reason and judgment* not by fallible conceit,
chance, or fortune; have determined to discourse what ought be the duty,
virtue and dignity of a perfect Councellor, to the end that those that shall
be called to government, or take delight in such wisdom, may be thereof
partakers. For pe^forming of which intent, I have thought good to sound the
depth of civil knowledge, and with great diligence have serched the secrets
of most excellent Philosophers, not meaning to set forth any fained conceit,
but that which accords with authority of wise law makers and grave
Counselors. I do therefore think expedient, that in the person of our
Councellor, there should be such ripeness of age as might exercise the
virtues beseeming so honorable a personage, and in his calling, hold so
great a gravity and reputation, as all other Citizens and subjects may hope
at his hand to receive comfort, quiet, and council profitable to the whole
commonwealth. My intent is not to frame an Idaea, or Councellor imagined, such
a one as cannot be seen but only in conceit, or that the heavens have
skantly any so perfect, or the earth does not contain any shadow of such a
man; (as did Plato in his common weal and Cicero in his Orator) but our speech
shall tend to things possible, not exceeding the ordinary use of men. Yet my
meaning is to gather into this book, whatsoever has heretofore been spoken,
known, or found, either by learning of schools, by Councels in commonweales,
by policy, in gouernmente, by foreign experience by the Histories, touching
the quality and perfection of a Councellor. And as Plato has set down those
things which he thought fittest for the felicity of his City, the like will
we do in the description of our Councellor: and imagining to have met with
wise men of all nations, Cities and commonweales repayring to a market of
wisdom, we will take from every one, such virtues, customs, laws and
duties, as seems to us most excellent, and therewith furnish our Councellor.
But for so much as through the diversity of commonweales, it seems that the
quality and offices of Counselors be diverse, we have judged that form of
commonweal to be of all others most just and indifferent, where the Kings
authority and the peoples power, by the counselors wisdom and advise is
qualefied. We have therefore thought fit, first to discourse the diversity of
commonweales, as well in kind as form, of their felicity, of the happiness
of subjects, of the education and instruction of a Councellor, to the end he
may the rather understand the state where he governs, and be skillful in the
precepts of virtue. So as in that sort furnished, he may direct his life in all
honesty, and deseruingly be advanced to a charge of so great honor and
reputation. And we will, that the virtues of our Councellor be such, as are not
only profitable for the government of one state, but shall be of that
excelencie as the same may be practiced in the proceedings of all others. For
we have learned of Plato, that those commonweales be most happy, which are
governed by Philosophers, or where the governors are wholly disposed to the
study of Philosophy. Therefore from such a wise man, and such a civil
science, we have determined to take matter, whereof to frame our excellent
Councellor.

Among all creatures contained within the circle of the earth, that which we
call man, is the chiefest and of most reputation. For he alone, of all other
living things of what nature so ever, is made not only an inhabitant and
Citizen of the world, but also a Lord and Prince therein. Which authority,
honor and greatness, from God the supreme governor of heaven and earth is
given, who has also vouchsafed to receive him, as it were a companion in the
government of this universal City common to God and men, adorning him with
divine understanding, to the end that through his godly reason and council,
this worldly Empire, might be wisely, holily and justly governed. The cause of
this society betwixt GOD and men, proceeds from reason, which being
perfect, does make men like unto God, and seem as it were mortal Gods:
whereof may be conceived, that betwixt God and men, some affinity, aliance or
kindred remains. Notwithstanding, without the presence of God, no reason is
good and perfect, for the divine seeds being sown in men's bodies, so much
thereof as happens into the hands of good till-men, does bring forth fruit
according to him that did sow them: but of the rest being handled by evil
husbandry, does (like unto corn sown in barren soil) become br^mbles, and
within short space decay and die. Man therefore knowing himself, and
conceiving that within him all things are divine, shall be persuaded that his
mind and reason does represent an holy Image, and must therefore continually
endeavor to do and imagine things worthy so heavenly a grace. Thus being
made of God his society, and reputed of his race and progeny, it must needs
be, that in the government of this world we have from him The science of
government proceeds from God.
him the authority of rule and commanding. Since then he is the author and
director, and that our being proceeds from him as the creator of all
things; every council, law, and ordinance is at his hands to be required,
to the end that this divine world may be known and governed not by men, but
the will, wisdom, and providence of God. For as brute beasts cannot without
a heardman, of other beasts be governed* Even so men by men, without the
guiding of GOD* cannot be ruled. For if it so happen, that any man does take
in* hand to govern without GOD, that is to say, without his divine will,
wisdom and knowledge: It must needs be that every commonweal so governed,
and the life of every private Citizen therein, shall become unhappy and
miserable. For in vain it were to study the welfare of any state, if God be
not the defendour and keeper thereof. It may then be conceived; that all virtue
and wisdom of man proceeds from God, which was the cause that our
ancestors in times past, were wont to dedicate public temples to virtue,
faith, concord, wisdom, and peace. But are the Councels of gouermente to be
asked of God? or ought all requests and prayers, as well for small as great
graces, ascend unto his heavenly hearing? Yea surely. So that our suite and
prayers do not discente form reason. Good laws therefore are obtained at Gods
hands by intercession of wise men, and not by holding up the hands of
fools, or be their loud cries, or prostrating their bodies upon the earth.
For God is only present with wise men, and as Ouidius says well. Est Deus in
(...) agitante calescimus illo
Spiritus hic sacrae lumina mentis habet.


The wisdom of GOD does enter and possess their minds, Wherein a wise man
is like unto god
and as they do honor it, so does it honor them, whereby they are made (as
it were) Gods. Without GOD no good or wise man lives: For he only is
prouidente, politic, and full of council. The wise man by his virtue
resembles the likeness of God, which proceeds of perfect reason. It
behooves us therefore, (not as some men teach) only to be men, and understand
things human and mortal, but also if possibly it may be, excel all
mortality, The best thing in man is reason.
and live according to that part which is in us most excellent. But what is
that which in man is most excellent? surely reason, by mean whereof we
know God, use virtue, embrace good and eschew evil. This is that which
makes men perfect, wise, valiant and just. Thus it appears, that through
divine reason the world is governed by man. It shall therefore behooue him in
all his proceedings of government, to follow the direction thereof, and as of a
divine Oracle in all his councels, laws and cogitations, to pray for the grace
and assistance of the almighty, whereby he shall govern all things wisely, godly
and justly. For as the reason in God is the law most supreme: So the reason of
a wise man being perfect may be called God or law. In respect whereof the
Lacedaemonians called those men Gods, whom for wisdom and justice they thought
to excel all others. And as such a one Homer describes Hector, saying. Non
hominis certe mortalis filius ille
Esse videtur, sed di^^ semine natus.


Who so therefore obeys reason, and by her in all his words and works is
governed, ought be reputed as a God among men. He only for King, Prince and
Ruler of the universal world is to be accounted. And finally he knows what
is to be done, what to be thought, what to be determined, and what proceeds
from divine reason and council. Now for as much as this Prince and Governor
shall live in the society and company of men, which society consists partly
in the universal conversation of the whole world, and partly of private
Cities: It behooves him for preservation of the common society and love among
men, that he endeavor the whole force of his capacity, reason, and council,
to gain the good will and favor of Public government to be considered in two
sorts*
men. We will therefore commit unto his charge two diverse countries, or commonweals, to be governed. The one is that which contains both God and men, not
confined within the bounds of Africa, Asia, or Europa, but is by the course of
the Sun, described. The other is, the place where our mortal condition has
appointed our birth and being, as Greece, Italy, Germany, France, Spain,
Polonia, or such like. To^^hing government of commonweals: It shall behoue
the governor with reason and understanding, to comprehend the order and nature
as well of the universal world, which the Latins do call maiorem mundum, as
of the other wherein we have our life and aboade: which they likewise do name
maiorem mundum. For whenever the mind has shaken of the bondage of body,
it presently recouereth the perfect nature thereof, performing the true
offices; embracing these things which be good, and rejecting the ^uill, It
loves virtue, and loatheth vice, it suppresseth lust, and commands it
self. What Empire or government can be said or thought more divine or godly?
Moreover, when the mind has discovered the nature of heaven, earth, seas,
with every other thing, and knows whereof they be made, what beginnings,
cause, and end they have, what is the disposition of Stars, what is the
reason of the suns rising and going down, what moves the Moon, what is
the destruction of all things, what the nature of Elements, of living
creatures, and the virtue of herbs, when all these things (I say) be known,
and God the supreme governor of all, well near comprehended, the possessor
of such wisdom and knowledge of nature, shall he not deseruinglie be
accounted a Citizen and dweller of any town or place, or rather a Prince of
the world universal? Socrates being asked of what country he was, answered,
A man of the world; imagining himself to be, not only a Citizen and
inhabitante, but also as it were a The world a City common to all creatures.
Prince universal. What does La^rtius report of Diogenis other, then he was
such a one. This City yields no obedience to Tyrants, nor is subject to
laws invented by men, nor can be environed with walls, but is contained
within the universal circle, with motion and order natural, as it were by
law certain and everlasting, constantlye governed within walls made of
Elements. The Citizens of this town, are by a name divine called
Philosophers, commanded only by themselves, bearing about them minds
invincible, and armed against the force of all misfortune. Such Princes no
force of enemies can depose, no violence of arms remove, nor fury of fire
disturb, for they be always invincible, valiant, happy, and free from fears
and dangers.

When King Demetrius the son of Antigonus had surprised Megara, in which
City S^ilpho the Philosopher lived, he caused him to be brought to his
presence, and asked what had been taken from him, offering restitution of all
his losses. Whereunto S^ilpho answered, that he never had seen any man that
could offer violence to Philosophy, much less take the same from him that
was thereof possessed, imagining himself to be only owner of such riches,
accounting the rest of his goods to be no more his, then the enemies that
besieged Megara. But seeing the science of Philosophy consists Philosophy of
two sorts.
partly in contemplation, and partlye in action, it must needs be that the
skill of government, does also consiste upon two. Those that apply themselves
to contemplation, do only labor to attain the knoweledge of truth, and not
desiring, to proceed further, stay their imaginations wholye in considering by
what means the world might be guided with the raines of wisdom. This sort
of men were wont to delight in private and solitary life, careless of
authority, house, or famelie, as Homer does describe them. From which rest or
rather idleness, we ought first by desire to persuade them, and that not
suffising, by inforcement to draw them to action of gouernmente, which is the
second part of civil duty. For the knowledge Contemplation without action
improfitable.
and contemplation of nature proves improfitable, if no action thereof do
follow, which appears in the preservation of all commodities belonging to
men. Who is there so studious in natural knoweledge, that being informed, his
friends, his neighbors, his kinsfolks, and country shall perish without
his present help, but will prefer the safety of them, before the
contemplation of all the Stars, Elements and world universal? We therefore
do exhort all wise men to action, and recommend unto them the commonweal,
not that common weal containing all the world, and is bounded by the
perambulation of the Sunn, but that which is subject to ordinances and laws,
and composed of the congregation and society of men: hoping that through them
(possessed Philosophers men most fit to govern commenweales.
of divine knowledge) this worldly gouernmente may with more wisdom and
justice be directed. The contemplation of things divine do teach and inform
the mind of a wise man, and he being accustomed, to the cogitations of
heavenly reason, wisdom and law, does become as it were an other GOD. Solon
endued with such knowledge, governed the Athenians. Lycurgus the Lacedaemonians,
and Parmenides the Eleati.

The like laws and ordinances Lycis the Pythagorian invented for Epaminundas,
Plato for Dion, Aristotle for Alexander the great, Anoxagoras for Pericles,
Pythagoras for the Princes of Italy, and Agrippa for the Emperor Octauianus.
Which examples have moved many writers to affirm, that those commonweales
were most happy where Philosophers governed, or where the governors were
accompanied and councelled by Philosophers. Cato that most excellent Senator,
for the love he bare unto wisdom, entertained Athenodorus; Ulysses (as Homer
says) embraced Caritus. Pirrhus esteemed Artemius. Traian desired Plutarchus,
and Scipio was councelled by Panetius: A man (as Plutarch writes) learned in
all sciences both good and evil. But if this diuiue knowledge do hap unto
any man, that delights only Phiosohy in, private men improfitable
in rest and idleness, not indeuouring to do other then lurk at home, as it were
within the compass of a magical circle, stretching himself in the sunn,
accompanied only with staff and wallet; careless of all action and desire to
do good to others* surely such wisdom proves to no purpose, and with
himself in short space utterly perishes. Where contrariwise, if the same be
possessed by any Prince or person disposing himself to the affairs of
government, he becomes thereby divine, noble, wise, and provident. But
happily some man may demand what common weal that is which should be
committed to this wiseman or Divine Philosopher? which doubt does not arise
from the name of What a commonweal is.
common* weal, being a certain order among the inhabitants abiding in one
city, but of the diversity and difference of the commonweals. The government
of commonweales diverse.
For as men's manners, delights and estates be diverse, so also is the
government of commonweals manifould. And though the end of every of them is
but one thing, that is to say, good, or well being, which consists in the
felicity of men, and every state does labor to attain, yet are the means of
aspiring to that happiness diverse, and so consequently laws and customs of
sundry sorts are by them used. For who so shall confer the laws of
Hipp^d^mus framed for the Miletians* with those of Mi^^s made for the Candians,
or will compare the ordinances of ^ic^rg^s with the decrees of Solon, the one
writing the government of the Lacedaemonians, the other of the Athenians* shall
easily conceive their laws to be most diverse, their Magistrates unlike, and
the form of their states far discrepant. The seven wife men also (Thales
except who refused to intermedle in the common weal,) brought in sundry
exercises, sundry laws, and sundry governments according to the quality of
the peoples capacity, and their own fancies, and by sundry orders and ^ses
did execute them. Which variety of gouerments, have ministered matter of much
controversy and contrariety of opinions. In so much as the learned men both in
our universities and foreign schools, have presumed to dispute how many
sorts of commonweales, there are, and which of them ought deseruinglie, to be
most^ commended and imbra^^ds Plato and Aristotle in that matter do seem to
have excelled all others. For they with great judgment, and respect to the
nature of men and the Regions of the world; have learnedlie allotted laws and
gouerments agreeable with the disposition and humor of the places! Following
therefore the opinion of these Philosophers, we The division of commonweales.
will first frame three sorts of commonweals. The first is called Monarchia,
the second Aristocratia, and the third Democratia. The Latins have named them
R^gnum, Optimatum principatus, and Popular is resp^^^* God by his heavenly
providence has appointed, that the powers of man's mind should rest in three
sundry parts of his body; seeming thereby to represent three Idaeas or forms
of commonweales, appointing reason as King to have his abiding in the head and
hiest part, as only Lord and Prince to command all. The second part as
vigilant and ready to obey, he has placed near unto it in the breaste,
making the same as a companion and helper unto the head. Plato calls it vis
irascendi, and affectuum seeds. The third resembling a multitude, witless,
froward, and full of sensual desires, he has harbored beneath the heart,
secluded far from both the other. In these parts of our soul (as in an
image) we may behold three forms of commonweales. The highest has the place
of king, as destined and appointed to command all, the second though in
place inferior, yet in quality is of no less regard, being well obeyed. For
where reason rules without the guarde and aid of the affections, all actions
are weak and Reason without the affections, feable
without force. Even so a Senate not assisted by reason, which partly as
Captain, and partly as Soldiour in all actions and consultations is used,
becomes fearful and effeminate. Aristotle has therefore divided the power
of reason, making one part absolute and standing upon it self* the other as
it were depending and serving, like unto a son that obeys his Father. Which
Titus Liuius has well expressed in setting forth the error of Minutius in his
unadvised fight against Hanibal, which Fabius does reprehend in these words. O
soldiers, (quoth he) I have often heard that who so can by himself rightly
judge, is to be most honored* next unto him are they that obey the good
advise of others. But he that can neither council himself, nor knows how
to follow an other man's advise, is of all others, of least wisdom and
capacity. As touching the Optimatie, it has not only the force of reason,
but in all actions is helped and encouraged by the affections, as the Poets
have written. Non hic ^ine numine diuum, furit.


The third part of man's mind resembles a popular government: wherein the
multitude has authority to hear all matters, and determine all laws, many
contentions and discordes do there ensue, like unto the nature of men
licentions and proane to lust, containing such life Commonweales resembled to
private families.
as accords with reason and virtue. Aristotle does also write, that the image
of commonweales, may be found in private families. For the authority of the
father over his children, may be likened to principality: because the children
are the fathers charge. He alone must provide for them all, and their faults
are by him rather chastised then severely punished. In like manner ought a good
king to behave himself toward his subjects. Therefore Jupiter the God of
Gods and men, is by Homer called Father. The husbands authority over his wife
may be compared to the Optimatie. For the husband ought to govern his wife
according to justice, and command her to do things honest. The populer
state is likened to brotherly society. For they ought to live in equality,
differing only in the degrees of age. But as the Father that uses his
children wickedly, cruelly and unnaturally, is reputed a tyrant and no father:
Even so a king that studieth for private commodity oppressing his subjects,
contemning his laws, and living dishonorably, does lose the name of a King and
is called a Tyrante. Also a husband and wife living in discord, either through
negligence or wilfulness rejecting the care of their children and householde,
do thereby abuse their authority and become unworthy the name of natural
parents. In like manner brethren disagreeing and quarrelling, neglecting the
common profit, and giving By evil government, commonweales are changed.
themselves to sloth or lascivious life, are not to be accounted brethren. Thus
it appears that through the default and imperfection of governors, true
commonweales be converted into false and contrary gouerments. The Monarchy or
kingdom, becomes a Tyranny. The Optimatie, is reduced under the authority
of a few. The popular common weal is converted into plebeiall insolency.
Policy (which the Graecians call Politeia, and is by Plato and Aristotle
sometimes called Respublica popularis,) may be referred to all kinds of
commonweales well governed, because that word is universal and includes all
civil government. Plato adds a seventh kind of government, The opinion of
Plato touching kings.
that is to wit, A King subject to his laws* making a Monarchy of two sorts,
and consequently framing two Kings, the one bound and confined, the other
free and not restrained to any law. This is the opinion of Plato touching
Monarchy. The power and authority (says he) of one Prince governing with
good laws, is among the six kinds of commonweales, the best and most
perfect. But such government being without laws, is heavy, and hard to those
that live therein* Yet if the other states be also without laws, that is the
best, the seventh except. For a King governing in that sort, is of all other
governors to be obeyed and honored as a GOD among men. The diversity of
commonweals does not proceed from fortune, nor the disposition of the heavens,
but every government is framed according to the minds of Every government ought
be framed according to the men, and place.
men, their wits and education. Also the variety not only of men's
inclinations, but also the nature of commonweales is made diverse, through the
diversity of countries, their climate and being. What shall I say of
sedicions, war, and factions? for they oftimes do utterly subvert
commonweales, or change them into states contrariwise governed. Such is the
condition of worldly things, that mischance stands next to good fortune, and
vice is mixed with virtue* so as with facility men fall from good into evil.
Sometimes it also happens, that commonweales well framed, through evil
ministers are either extinguished, or altered into other forms of government.
Hereof it comes that kingdoms become Tyranies; Optimaties are made the
government of a few, and populer states are converted into licentious liberty,
and from that, brought back unto Tyranie. Plato writes that the change of
commonweales is fatal, through disposition of the heavens and planets. The
variations of states do also otherwhiles proceed from the variety of What
sorts of men are fit for every kind of co^monweales.
men's minds and order of life. For in some state there be many rich men, in
others many poor, in others plenty of noble men, soldiers and ploughmen, in
others plenty of merchants, crafts men and artificers. Then whenever the
number of merchants, artifizants and ploughmen do surmount the rest, that
state most commonly beeommeth popular: But where rich men are most plentiful,
there grows the government of a few great men. Where the most part of
Citizens be good men, wise and virtuous, that state is apt to be governed as an
Optimatie. There are three things (as Aristotle thinks) which contend for
the government, Liberty, Riches, and Virtue. For nobility, (which holds the
fourth place) is companion both to virtue and riches, because the equal
mixture of rich and poor men, is called a popular state. A faction only of
rich men* is named the government of a few, and the consent of all three, that
is to say, free men, rich men, and good men, is accounted an Optimatie. Such a
one was the Carthagenian commonweal for rich men, good men, and noble men,
were therein equally esteemed. Thus have we discovered all kind of commonweals, which either by man's experience have been found, or by the industry
of law makers or Philosophers could be devised; but which of them is most
perfect and excellent, cannot (as has before been said) easily be
determined. For there is no man that prefers and praises not the state
wherein he What people do most willingly obey the king.
was borne and bredde. Some more willingly do live in kingdoms then any other
state, who are chiefly such men as are naturally apt to honor those, that be
virtuous and fit for action. The Cappadocians having many ages lived under
kings (whose raze was extinguished) were offered by the Romans, to have their
state converted into popular liberty, but they refused it. Then the Romans
appointed Ariobarsanes their friend to be King of Cappadocia. The contrary
course was followed by the Athenians, for they affecting a popular state, would
neither consent to be governed by one nor many. Yea some there are that do
most allow the Tyranical government, as in oulde time the Siculi, whose state
was always accustomed to tyrants, and so are The people of Asia naturally
servile.
well near all the people of Asia, who being by nature servile, are even till
this age subject to tyrannical government. Such as are fittest to be ciuilly
governed, are men accustomed to honest riches and glory for their virtuous
enterprises in war. For they not forgetting the The best common weal is,
where the people be best ordered.
condition of their government, are content by turns as well to obey as
command. But let us now discourse of the best commonweals. Whosoever shall
take in hand to speak thereof, it behooves him first to understand what is
the best kind and order of life. For being thereof ignorant, a perfect
commonweal cannot be conceived. It stands him also upon to understand, by
what means men be brought to good order of liueing. For the state is alvvaies
like unto the men that live therein, but which kind of life ought be
accounted best the Philosophers have not by consent determined. The Stoics,
the Peripatetickes and the Epicures do diversely judge of that matter, and
into diverse sects and opinions have divided the world. But our intent is to
concur with the Perepatetickes, because their schools have brought fourth
men of most perfection, and to their virtues they have joined the use of
external things, vvherevvith the felicity of man is not only ornified, but
also perfected. We therefore accounte their precepts to be most profitable,
asvvell for men as common weals. The Stoics loving austeritie of life, do
ground their felicity upon virtue only, which we mislike not, so as
therewith they consent, that to the use of virtue men have need of external
goods, which both nature and fortune have made for use of man, to the end he
might become the more happy, better and perfect. For seeing that felicity of
man, is numbered among things of perfection, and that thing is only perfect,
which wants nothing: surely whosoever desires to be happy, must of force be
furnished fully, so as his felicity may be absolute and without want. It
behooves him therefore to be wise, just, temperate, valiant, rich, honorable,
The felicity of man whe^in it consists.
comely, healthie and strong. And since the happiness of man's life consists in
his felicity, and that he is made of body and mind, it is necessary that he
be no less happy in mind, then in body: For being in any of them
unfortunate or disabled, he cannot be called perfectly happy. Moreover if all
good things do tend to man's felicity, it is requisite to have of them
abundance, which whosoever has, must understand, that only for himself he
was not borne, but (as Cicero says) his country, his friends, his kinsfolk
and aliance do claim their share in the fruits of his felicity, because to
every of them, if he will be thought happy, it behooves him to give part, not
only of his treasure of mind, as justice and wisdom, but also of all other
things bestowed on him for the use and life of man. The liberal man needs
money to perform the actions of liberality, and the just man therewith must
reward, and make satisfaction. The valiantman requires force and power, to be
thereby enabled to execute somewhat worthy his virtue. The temperate man asks
authority and liberty, whereby he might show himself to be such a one. The
Man's life of three sorts.
Philosophers affirm, that there are three sorts of life. The first consists
in action, the second in contemplation, and the third in pleasure, which
being exercised in lusts and licentiousnes, is beastly and proper to men of
basest condition. That which rests in action* unless it be also accompanied
with wisdom and virtue, proves improfitable, and is subject to great vices
and imperfections. That which is employed in contemplation, not beieng joined
with some action, becomes vain and without effect. For as men that earnestly
behold the brightness of the sun, with the vehement heat and light thereof are
made blind: Even so the mind of man continually wrought with imagimations and
speculation of hie mysteries, does become dull, heavy and languishing. Who so
therefore desires to live virtuously and happily, must participate both of the
civil and philosophical lives, which are action and contemplation. The
mixture of which two, does make man to be like unto GOD, blessed and fortunate.
For he that uses his mind to the cogitation of things divine, is thereby
made most acceptable to GOD, who does greatelye esteem of those men, that
live according to the spirit and reason; because it appears thereby, that
they labor to be like unto him, who is also a spirit, and things of one
nature do willinglye conioyne in love. They that unto speculation do add
honest action, may also be called divine and happy. Reason the most precious
gift.
There is nothing more apparante, then that GOD among many other graces, has
given reason unto men, as a gift most singular, to the end that through
virtue thereof, he may behold the nature of all things as well celestial as
terrestrial, and therewith honor reverence and love him. Who so therefore
being mindful of GOD and natures benefits, does well employe this heavenly
gift of reason, and both in action and contemplation, imitate the eternal
GOD, does thereby become as his child, and is holden as a God among men.
Contrariwise, such as do forget nature and humanity, delighting only in
sensuality, neclecting or utterly forsaking reason, are accounted to have of
men nothing but the face and name: because the true and proper nature of man,
is in them wanting.

Why some are free, and others borne to bondage.
Hereof proceeds the diversity of men, that through the exercise of reason
and virtue, some are borne free, noble, wise and fit to govern: others
slaves, rusticall, and witless, destined to servitude and bondage. Every
society of men does also willingly obey Diversity of men's natures
the wisest, aduauncing them to offices and honors with great respect and
reverence. Plato writes that God in the creation of men's natures has taken
such order, as in the generation of those that are apt to govern, he has
mixed gold; To them that are destined to assiste the governors, he has put
silver; And with the nature of Plowe-men and Artizanes, Brass and Iron is
compounded. Which similitude, Aristotle does apply to the manners, virtues,
and capacities of men. For albeit that every man naturally desires his
children might resemble himself: Yet does it often happen, that of gold
comes silver, and of silver some mettell of other nature. God has therefore
commanded Princes to vndestande the nature of their thildren, to the end tha^
they, whose disposition is like unto Iron, should be converted to gold, or that
proving impossible, he has willed the government should be to others allotted.
It has been also oraculously prophycied, that those Cities which are governed
with Brass and Iron, should perish and come to confusion. Xenocrates
appoints the first part of man's life to the exercise of virtue, the second
to good health, the third to honest pleasure, How man's life is employed.
and the fourth to the gathering of riches justly. As without virtue man's life
is vile, so is it without health, weak and feeble: For the mind shut up
within a sickly body, does languish and become disable to perform his own
duty. All men therefore through force of good laws, ought be trained unto
happy life, for by such means, commonweales become good and blessed. Let us
now consider with which of these three states first remembered, the divine and
happy life does best agree, which being known, the face and form of a
perfect commonweal What things are chiefly considered in the election of
kings.
is easily discerned. To the election of kings men are induced, by their
virtue, and beholding their egregious acts. For whenever we see a man to
excel in those things, we accounte him as a God among men, and forthwith
consent to make him king, following the common proverb. Rexeris, sirecte
facies. Because that government is just, where the governor is virtuous,
commanding himself, and ruling his subjects, not as as Master governs his
servants, but as a father rules his children. The Athenians (as Demosthenes
in his oration against Neaera writes) when Theseus had framed their
commonweal, were wont to choose some one of the virtuous number, and by
holding up their hands elected him King. In old time, the election of kings
was among all people holden a thing divine and holy. Romulus after the sight of
twelve Ravens, (as Liuius says) or rather because the lightning had pierced
his body, from the left to the right side; (as Dionisius writes) was by
divination chosen king, which was the respect, that by law it was provided,
that no man should take upon him any magistracy or be made king, without
divination. In so much as that ordinance called Ius Auspiciorum was obeyed and
religiouslye observed. The authority of kings has ever been accounted a
thing divine, for Homer The authority of kings divine.
and Isocrates affirm, that he who governs alone, does reprepresent a divine
majesty. The kings of Persia were honored as Gods, and the people believed
their authority to be the only defendour and mainteynour of the commonweal.
The anciente Latins called their Kings Indigetes, that is to say, deified,
(as Eneas and Romulus were) whose bodies after death could never be found.
The election of kings, was in time paste proper to the most virtuous people,
unto whom the government of Tyrants was odious. Yea the ancient law of God,
does as it were allow, or rather commend Optimacy.
the government of one. An Optimatie consists of virtuous Citizens, who
deserve commendation in respect of virtue, because they govern the
commonweal, as becomes good men, in no Popular states.
wise digressing from the rule and line of law. In popular commonweales all
things be contrarily handled: for liberty being the end thereof, the state
is ruled according to will, and popular fury, most commonly without virtue and
reason. In such Cities men are called good, because they are profitable to the
commonweal, not for that they are endued with honesty, which confisteth in
action of virtue: So as virtue is measured, not by honesty, but by common
profit and liberty. For popular justice (called Ius populare) is, where the
honors are given, not according to virtue of him that receives them, but the
number of those that give them, who think those things not to be just which
by justice ought be, but that which to the greatest number does seem just,
esteeming that also to be honorable, which by popular fame is accounted
glorious. Therefore although in all sorts of commonweales the laws of virtue
are sometimes perverted, yet does the same most commonly happen in popular
states. For if any good man living there, shall happen to mislike the plebeyall
life, and does labor by admonishing, reprehending, and correcting the
Citizens, to reduce them to honesty and virtue, he is forthwith judged an
enemy to liberty, and by the law Ostracismo arested, and many times put to
death. With this kind of persecution, many notable Citizens inhabiting the
popular states of Graecia were afflicted, as Cymon, Aristides, Thucydides,
Socrates, Themistocles, and Damon: also in Rome, Camillus and Scipio were in
like manner handled. The fame of Aristides is of all posterity worthy to
Aristides*
be remembered* he being a man singularly virtuous and wise, for his integrity of
life and honest co^uersatio^ was with the assent of all men surnamed Iustus. At
such time as the law Ostracismas was used in Athens, a certain rude and
rustical fellow, bearing a scrol of paper in his hand happened to mete him, and
with great earnestnes required, that the name of Aristides might be therein
written. Aristides much marueiling thereat, asked whether any man had ever
been by him injured, no, (quoth he) but I cannot in any wise endure thy
surname of Iustus. Cicero reports, that at such time as the Ephesi banished
their Prince Hermodorus, they pronounced this sentence, Let none of us excel
an other, but if any so do, let him no longer here dwell, but inhabit
elsewhere. O most strange customs of popular commonweales* Plato uses that
speech before of us remembered, that no state does continue, being governed
with Iron or Brass, that is to say, by foolish men, borne rather to obey then
command. For they after some fortunate success of war, taking unto them
lofty minds, have at hand tutors and popular Captains to extol and
commend their virtue. Then after long hunger, allured with the sweet bait of
glory* they reject the authority of their leaders and all wise men, taking the
government wholly into their own hands, directing the same by their The
original causes of states popular.
own wills and discretion, which is the cause that such commonweales are not
of long continuance. For through diversity of minds, those men become void of
council, and after much insolency, contention, and faction, they yield their
obedience either to a few, or some one mighty personage. So did the people of
Athens which being author of the victory by sea, against the Medians, puffed
up with pride of that fortune, stirred great troubles and seditions in that
state, and all good Citizens labored in vain to preuente that mischief. Also
the original of popular states, does sometimes proceed of Rebellion attempted
against the nobility: as it many times happened in Rome: when the people took
arms against the Kings and Senate. Sometimes also the cause of such popular
government, proceeds through good success of some action enterprised by the
people. Who taking upon them the mind of Lords, do usurp the state, as did
the Athenians when they had vanquished the Medians, and as the Romans having
overthrown the Carthaginenses. The same also otherwhiles chanseth, when the
people is made desperate, by tyranny of their Prince and governors, for then
by force of arms, or oppression of their king, they frame a form of
government among themselves, which in our days the Swisseis have done. A
popular state established with good laws is many times governed justly and
poletiquelye, but the same wanting laws or consent of the people, does not
merit the name of a commonweal. Of the Oligarchia or Tyranny I mean not to
entreat, The virtue of every people known by the laws and government.
because such government is in all respects unjust, contrary to virtue and
civil life. The excellency of every people or commonweal, may be known by
the gouermente, laws and liberties thereof. For those people are accounted the
best, which within a good commonweal do live with justice and liberty, and
they deserve the more commendation, that do continue the same with most
constancy and long preseuerance, which things are thought chiefly to
appertain, to the antiquity of men living in honor Lacedaemonians*
and nobility. The Lacedaemonians are highly praised, for having continued
seven hundred years without any alteration of their customs, Venetians.
their laws, or their government: But the Venetians have in that respect
deserved greater glory, because they, till these our days, have constantly
lived in one form of government, by the space of a thousand years, or more.
Thus have we discoursed the diverse forms of commonweales, with the natures and
disposition of men there living. Among them (as easily appears) the
Principality and Optimatie are the best. This, for that therein most good men
do exercise the public functions: and that, because the public commodity
is preserved by one with general consent of mind. So as if any do excel
the rest, to him the commonweal is committed. In these two states men do
live best, because the order of them does not only preserve Cities, but also
make the Citizens happy. Some men have thought the most perfect commonweal,
should be tempered and framed of all the three estates. Which is the cause,
that they prefer the Lacedemonian government The form of the Lacedemonian
commonweal.
being compounded of the nobility, (which was the Senators) of the authority
of one, (which was the King) and of the people (which were the Ephori.) For
they were always chosen among the The Roman state.
number of popular men. Polibius extolleth the Roman state, because it
consisted of the King, the Nobility, and the people; supposing that the king
for fear of the people, could not become insolente, and the people durst not
disobeye him, in respect of the Senate. Which form of commonweal was with
good reason accounted most just. For as perfect harmony is compounded, of
treble, mean, and base tewnes: even so a good commonweal, and the surest
agreement amongst men, is (as Cicero says) made by mixture of the best, the
mean, and the base people. We are also of opinion, that commonweal is
perfect, which contains good and virtuous* subjects, and is governed by a
king, a Senate, and consent of the people; wishing the King should observe his
laws, and do those A perfect co^monweale.
things which be honorable, and agreeable to the advice of his council. For
the law is most perfect reason, whereunto whosoever obeys, does seem a God
among men. We wish likewise, that all Counselors should be men of much
virtue: for they being a mean betwixt the king and people, may the rather give
council, by what means the state may be safely governed. The authority of
Counselors The authority of Cou^cellors*
consists in consulting, judging and commanding. The king uses these men as
friends and Counselors, employing their virtue and advise in matters of most
difficulty, which is the cause that men say, the king has many hands, many
eyes, and many feet. Moreover, for that it seems a thing rather divine their
human, that one man alone should govern the whole state, it is necessary to
have the aid of many others; yet referring the determination to the king
alone, all things are like to proceed well. But he that does manage all
matters without Council, trusting only to his own judgment, is thought rather
a selfe-liker, then a wise man. As therefore the advice of Counselors is
profitable in commonweales, where the resolution is reserved to the king only.
So where the determination rests in many, the same becomes unprofitable.
For as a man having many servants, and commanding somewhat to be done, every
one runs, and yet nothing is done; but committing his business to one alone,
finds the same performed: So happens it in commonweales, where many have
authority, one trusting to another, they become careless, and the affairs of
the commonweal receive prejudice. The multitude of gouernours' does (as
experience teaches) prove unprofitable, and therefore the proverb says, Rex
vnicus esto. And as the head, without peril of life, cannot be taken from the
heart, so may not the king be removed from his Council, because such
disjunction breeds discord to the common The necessity of Cou^cellors
weal, and in the end confusion and destruction may follow thereof. In every
commonweal a Council is of great necessity, for it gives advise, not only
to the king, but unto the state also; not unlike unto the vital part of man's
soul, which being in the heart, gives life to that which is pertaker of
Reason, and is placed in the head. The king also through advise of the Senate
does more profitably direct the commonweal, because he only does govern,
although in government he uses to be councelled. For as reason does in all
proceedinges thereof, employe the service of the senses: Yet is it that alone
which determines, and ought above the rest to be honored. A Prince
therefore content to be councelled, becomes of all other men the wisest,
because he bears about him a judgment perfect and fullye furnished with
the instructions and advise of many. Thus doing, a King shall well govern all
things, not only through his own opinion, which may many ways be deceived,
but also by the common advise and council of others, whereby his reason and
judgment is brought to perfection. Of which two things who so ever is
possessed, may deseruinglye be thought a GOD among men. Even as the hand
divided into many fingers, is thereby made strong and apt to lay hold of all
things. So he that governs with the assistance of Counselors and ministers,
shall do all things with better discretion and wisdom. For one man is not
fit to perform all actions. Alexander of Macedon with his small hand
conquered great enemies. Pyrhus excelled in choosing places of fortification.
Haniball was often victorious, yet ignorant how to use the victory.
Philopemen was skillful in the wars by sea. Cleon could manure lands and
possessions. Cicero was an excellent Orator, Pompeius a Captain, Cato a
Councellor, and Scipio skillful both in war and peace. So were diverse others:
for every man (as says the proverb) is Roscius in his own Orde popularis.
faculty. We will, that the popular order or mean officers of this our
commonweal (who ought also to participate of the government) shall be chosen
amongst the better and most virtuous sort of subjects, wherein an Optimatie
is resembled, for they are as a Seminary of Counselors and other magistrates.
Betwixt which two sorts of men, this is the only difference, that those
which are placed in the sovereign offices, being both for age and dignity
the worthier persons, shall be most esteemed and honored. As for the rest of
the people, it shall suffice, that they be maintained in civil life, and
obedience of the Magistrates. For our meaning is not, that any of the
multitude, as Plowemen, Artizanes, and other persons of vile occupation shall
aspyre unto the offices, which ought be given unto welthye Citizens,
Gentlemen, and others of good education and wisdom. Moreover, for so much as,
all our discourse tends to describe a perfect commonweal, which is that
wherein the people do live happilye: and happiness proceeds of virtue, it
behooves that men being borne in that state should be capable of virtue,
felicity, and honesty. We may not therefore permit, that any Artizan,
Merchant, or bondsman shall exercise the government, because their trade of life
is vile, and void of Merchantes, Artizans, and servants repulsed from
government.
virtue. And albeit they are necessary for the society of men, yet in respect
they be occupied in actions unfit for free men, they are not to be admitted
to govern the commonweal. Which was the reason that moved Constantinus the
Emperor to determine by law, that none of the base multitude, or mechanical
people should bear office in the state, because it is presumed, that Cities
were builded as well for the habitation of wise and honest men, as persons of
necessity. Yet are not such men to be contemned or reputed miserable, for it
were unjust, and against the unity of a commonweal, to deprive them of all
honor and reward, being partakers of every burden, and also of such
condition as without them, the state cannot be maintained. It is therefore
necessary, that they do participate of such offices as are fit for their
callinges, and receive rewards according to their quality. For as the noble
and wealthy subjects be honored in their vocation, so these having
vertuouslye deserved, ought to be advanced. Aristotle and Plato his Master,
do affirm there are six things wherewith every City should abound, Six
things in all states required.
and that without them it cannot be. The first is victual or food, the
providing whereof belongs to husbandmen and heardemen: The second is
necessary handie crafts, which is performed by the Artificers: The third is
Arms to resist foreign enemies and repress civil disorder. It is therefore
expediente to have Soldiers prepared, and exercised, to the end that the
commonweal may be defended from foreign invasion, and conserved in liberty
and in peace. Fourthly the state has need of money, both for civil and
military uses. Fiftlie it requires ministers of divine sacraments. Sixtlie
Judges and Counselors are needful, because every commonweal is governed by
good Council, to the end that injustice, and the iniquity of men may be
extirped. By mean whereof iniurers, contemners of law, and all iniust persons
The com. consists of six sorts of me^.
be punished. Thus it appears, that every commonweal consists of six
sorts of men, to wit, husbandmen, Artizans, Merchantes, Soldiers, Priests,
Judges, and Counselors. Of this number we will leave aside three, as men
unfit to govern, which are husbandmen, Merchantes and Artizantes, being
borne rather to serve, then command. For to the happiness of every
commonweal, the council of wise and free men is required, and the state
needs liberal, quiet, and honest aid, which wants in men that are
occupied in Two sorts of men only fit for the places of government.
unclean and illiberall arts. Two sorts of men therefore are only to be
employed as governors, that is to say, Soldiers and Counselors. For seeing
that in all commonweales, two time are looked for, that is to wit, a time of
peace and a time of war. It behooves, that those only should be accounted
governors, unto whom the care of peace and war is committed. For in time of
war the commonweal is defended by Arms, and in time of peace the same is
preserved by Council. Therefore to Soldiers and Counselors the
conseruatition and authority of government ought to be committed. To the The
office of mean subjects.
inferior officers, which we call Popularis ordo, we give power to elect the
great Magistrates, with other rightes belonging to public liberty and
felicity: Yet not to all men in general, but to every one in particular,
according to his virtue and office. The younger sort shall be employed in
war, because they are the strongest and of most force, and the elders must
govern and direct, as men of more wisdom and experience. Of such
distribution, this good will ensue, which in every commonweal is commendable
and holy, that men of gravity and wisdom shall without injury to others
exercise the sovereign offices, and the younger sort wanting experience, shall
not in those places intermeddle The office of Priests.
nor deal in the affairs of most weight and greatest importance. Among these
degrees and sundry sorts of men, the order of Priesthood has the
precedence, because the same is employed in the administration of divine
ceremonies. The dignity of that office has always been holden most holy,
for in AEgypte it is unlawful for any King to govern, unless he be also
a Priest. Their duty was to sacrifice to GOD for the peoples welfare, and
pray for those things which were profitable, as well for private persons as the
weal public. When Alcibiades was condemned by the Athenians, order was taken
that the religious people of either sex should curse him, which one of them
refused to do, saying they had entered Religion, not to make unjust but just
prayers. Plato Ordinances of plato touching Priesthood.
in his common weal wills, that the election of Priests should be left
unto GOD, to the end that those whom he thought fittest might by lotte and
fortune aspyre unto that dignity. He commanded moreover, that those which
were in election to be chosen, should be examined whether they were persons
honest, sound, of good education, and borne of noble parentage, and whether
they were free from murder, and all other vices, contrary to Gods
commandments. He ordained likewise, that no Priest should exercise that
function longer than one year, nor be of less age then thirty years. These
and such like ordinances of priesthood, Plato the wise Philosopher (as it were
by divine inspiration) has written.

For they seem to have been gathered rather from the Law of Moses, then the
discipline of Socrates. This Philosopher had his education among the Priests
of Egypt, where he learned such instructions as made his Philosophy so
perfect, that whatsoever proceeded from the mouth of Plato, was accounted
divine. Aristotle excludes this spiritual minister from the administration of
civil polecye, giving that authority, to the well deserving Citizens. Seeing
then it is nessarie that GOD should be served, and that the Citizens of
authority (as is aforesaid) are of two sorts, that is to wit, Soldiers
and Counselors, it appears no bondeman, Artizan, Marchante or other person
of base profession ought be received Among what sort of men Priests should be
chosen.
into the ministry, but that every Priest shall be elected among the
number of Soldiers or professors of learning, and that with respect of age
and quality of body, to the end they may be fit to exercise the office
of that divine calling. For it seems reasonable, that those who in their
youth have carefully and manfully employed themselves in the service of their
commonweal, being become weried and unable for action, should in their age be
admitted to live contemplatiuelie, and die in Gods service. Among those kind
of men therefore he commands, that the ministry should be distributed. Of
the Athieste, we will say nothing, neither will we discourse of the
Philosophers religions, who though not so impiously, yet otherwise then we, do
honor God. Because ours is the true God, the true religion, and our ministers
far unlike to theirs. It has been also determined in schools and
Universities, that the most ancient and sincere religion should be known to
all men. But in what sort the Priests of our commonweal ought to be chosen,
our intent is not here to discourse, nevertheless let us consider, whether
they ought to be admitted to govern in the state or no. It seems apparently,
that the Priests in most ancient time were made by the author all good, and
first lawemaker Jesus Christ, who being himself before all others, a Priest
according to the law of Melchisedech, did thereby declare he was the head and
foundation of that order, and that nothing was in heaven more holy, nor in
earth more divine, nor in the whole world better, and to those men he gave the
knowledge and judgment of that divine law and ordinance. It was therefore
thought expedient, profitable, and necessary, that the Princes of every
commonweal should be accompanied and councelled with spiritual ministers* and
that not without cause. For what is more worthy, or in government more just and
godly, then that those who be endued with wisdom (not learned in the temple
of Delphos but received from the heavenly spirit,) should execute the laws
thereof justly and holily. Who so then does banishe those men from the
commonweal, seems unjust, barbarous, inexpert, and no Citizen of our
Christian state. And i^ every commonweal be conserved by the religion of God,
wherein the ministers have most knowledge, those states seem to do most
godly and justly, that in their gouerments have employed such council; as the
Romans, the Egyptians the Jews, and many other have heretofore done. To such
men therefore God has committed the welfare and felicity of men. Who is then
so simple or senseless, that thinks not their council necessary for the
conservation of liberty, goods and fortune? Heetherto we have declared which
is the best commonweal, and what order of life the Citizens thereof ought to
embrace. A commonweal then so framed, accustomed to virtue, and plentifully
furnished with fortunes gifts, does seem of all other things to be most
noble, most holy, and most fortunate. In the description whereof, least we be
thought to have one self conceit with Plato, so as what has been said of his
commonweal, may be likewise affirmed of ours, (that never any such thing is,
has been, or can be,) it seems necessary to produce examples of those forms
of government. And although our intent is not to abandon the reason of
Philosophers, yet whensoever they rely over much to their own wisdom, (as
sometimes they do) esteeming more their private judgment, then the opinion of
others, our meaning is not to believe them. For there be many things in their
books and sayings, which with the times present, and use of civil life, are
not in any wise conformable. For if the Venetians, the Scoises or Gene^oies,
should imitate the government of Plato his commonweal, in vain they should do
it, or if we did follow the ordinances Plato his commo^weale*
of Cyrus written by Xenophon, happily the same should not much inform our
Princes. Of other commonweales I speak not. The description of that state
which we intend to frame, shall be ordinary, reasonable, and according to the
custom of men, yet accompayning the fame with Philosophical histories. The
form of our perfect commonweal was described in the ancient Athenian
Monarchy. That people being dispersed* The Athenian co^monweale.
and like unto beasts wandering in the field, were first by Cecrope, and after
by Theseus constrained to inhabit a City, which was then called Cecropiae,
and since named Athens, and at length (reduced to a kingdom) descended to
their posterity. But what authority the Senate, under those kings had, (which
order did represent the Optimatie) by reason the time is long since passed, and
few writers have thereof written, cannot be to us apparently known: yet must we
believe, that those kings had about them wise men, whose council they
employed in governing. The kings of that age (as Thucidides affirms) did
rule by consent of the people, and with their suffrages determined many
things, whereof themselves were doubtful. Yet that government endured not, but
was through tract of time (which alter^th all things) committed to the
multitude, whose force and power utterly subverted the commonweal. The
Lacedemonian state (as is before said) seemed The Lacedemonian commonweal.
to contain all three sorts of government, that is; the King, the Nobility,
and people. What should I say of the Romans? Shall I not The Roman Monarchy.
call those times golden, when kings were content to be Councelled? Romulia*
as Liui^ writes, being by consent both of Gods and men elected king,
notwithstanding the state was then little, refused to govern the same alone;
calling unto him an hundred Senators for his assistance, whom either in respect
of their age or virtue, he called fathers. And least the people should hold
themselves ill satisfied, and defrauded of all honors, and thereby hatred
might ensue, either toward the King or Senate, he made them capable of the
judicial offices, and suffered them to have voices in determining war, and
concluding of peace, with many other privileges. And would God that form of
commonweal had still continued in Rome: For then so great effusion* of blood
had not been made* in the aspyring to liberty, and extending the bounds of
the Roman Empire. Neither should the happiness of that state have been with
so many seditions disturbed, whereby scarsly at any time it has lived in
peace. But let us now consider of The Empire of Germany.
commonweales in our age: we see that the Empire of Germany consists of the
Emperor, the Princes and the people. That state being governed by diverse
potentates, and the pollecy drawn into sundry gouermentes, The French
Monarchy.
cannot easily be described. The french Monarchy, has in it a king who rules
at his own discretion, and although his authority be not confined to law,
yet against law and honor he does not anything, but lives as a just and
honorable Prince. In that kingdom, the noble men whom they call pears,
represent an Optimatie, the people is divided into three sorts, Gentlemen,
Priests, and popular multitude, and a choice number compounded of these three,
and assembled by the kings commandment, do determine of matters, which in the
commonweal are of most importance. This Council was anciently called
Pauceltium, as the Aet^oli named their general assembly Panaetolium* or as
the universal Councels of Ionia was termed Panionium. The Monarchy of Spain
In Spain the king has authority sovereign, the Council royal resembles the
Optimatie, and the three chief orders of knighthood, may be likened to the
popular state. For the order of S. ^ago, Callatraua, and Al^antara, assembled
with the king, do determine of matters most important* The Monarchy of Polonia.
The kingdom of Polonia does also consist of the said three sorts, that is,
the king, nobility and people: But it is to be noted, that this word people
includes only knights and gentlemen. The liberty and fellowship of those
orders is so great, as the king, without advise of his counsel and their
authority does not any thing, neither ca^ the counsel determine without the
allowance of the King, and consent of the people. In that kingdom the laws
are of so great force, as every man religiously swears to keep and observe
them, and ifcontrarie to that oath any thing be done, the same is accounted
iniust and impious. That oath which they swear for the observation of their
laws and liberty is in their language called Captue, which signifies in
Latin Tegmen capitis, for as the head is kept from cold by being covered, so
through virtue of that oath, their laws, liberty and welfare is conserved,
because in maintayning thereof, no good man fears to adventure his life
against Tyrants, and all others that labor to violate the bounds of public
liberty and happiness. That people therefore do live in great liberty, being
persuaded that to live according to law, is indeed perfect freedom. In that
kingdom, the Prince governs by laws, and proceeds not according to will.
In making of war or concluding of peace, he uses the advice of his Council,
never transgressing the laws; which works this effect, that among the people
the kings person is not only highly honored, but also for a God rightly
reverenced and adored. For who is he that would not entirely love, honor, and
reverence that Prince, who in governing, is of one self mind with the law,
contented to be led by the line of reason, directing his doings, according to
the expert wisdom of his Counselors. If authority be thus used, what consent,
love, and mutual affection does it make among subjects? To conclude, the king
of Polonia seems such a Prince, as Plato, Aristotle, Xenophon, and other
lawmakers have wished to be in commonweales, and as nature and God himself
does allow. The Senate does in that state represent the Optimatie, and has
(as is aforesaid) great authority. For being chosen amongst the most grave and
wise gentlemen, they only with the king do consult of the commonweal. Their
authority is not unlike to the Homotim^ in Persia, or the Ephori in
Lacedemonia. The gentlemen of Polonia do represent the popular state, for in
them consists a great part of the government, and they are as a Seminary from
whence Counselors and Kings are taken. The The kingdom of England.
kingdom of Brytannie now called England, obeys one King, who choseth his.
Counselors, unto whom the rest of the Nobility and popular order being
joined, do make one common Council: which in their language is called
Parliament. The Venetian state, seems framed The Venetian state.
after the same fashion, but they within the name of people, do only include
Gentlemen and Citizens, taking great heed, least any other should usurp that
title, because they only are capable of the magistracy. Out of that number
the Senate is chosen, which represents an Optimatie, and is as foundation of
that state. The Duke is also elected of that number resembling a king. And
surely there is no Monarchy or commonweal that can compare with it, for quiet
government and long continuance; whether the cause thereof proceeds from God,
from fortune, from the observation of Justice, or from the natural seat of
that City, I need not now to discourse. But true it is, that all occasions
of civil discention and subversion are removed. Of good commonweales, let
this we have said suffice: and consider what are those things that do
chiefly make them perfect and happy.

In every co^*monweale three things required.
In every good and perfect commonweal, three things are specially required,
that is to say, Magistrates, laws, and civil discipline: for without these,
no City nor society of men could ever be preserved* The office of
Magistrates.
The office of Magistrates is, to rule and command the people to do those
things, that be just, profitable and agreeable to law and reason. Cicero no
less learnedly then eloquently says, that as the laws govern the
Magistrates, so the Magistrates ought to govern the people: and the Magistrate
may be justly called the living law: and the law a dombe Magistrate. He
therefore in all commonweales is of great necessity: for without his
wisdom, council, fidelity, and discretion, no state can stand nor be
governed, whereof also the state and order of every commonweal may be known.
As the ship in tempestious seas is endangered, and many time drowned unless
by the labor and industry of the mariners it be saved: So the commonweal
tormented with tempest of seditions and discord, must perish, if through the
diligence and wisdom of the Magistrates it be not preserved. Or as man's body
is ruled by reason* so every City and Law, the soul of co^monweals.
society of men must of necessity contain a soul (which is the law) to be
thereby governed, and that law proceeds from the reason, council and
judgment of wise men. For where no laws nor Magistrates are, there no God, no
men, nor no society can be continued. The true law of man is reason, which
wisemen do give unto themselves, and others receive from the Magistrates,
persuading them to eschew things forbidden by law, no less then if the same
were contrary to reason. They therefore that in wisdom and discretion do excel
others, and are (as is aforesaid) made of golden or silver nature, because they
can deserve best of man's society, are to be above others advanced. For as
Cities well walled and fortefied, are thereby defended from the fury of
enemies: So tranquillity and happy life is by the council of wise men
preserved. Therefore What knowledges ought be in Counselors.
it behooves them first, to be endued with such virtues as may make the
commonweal happy, then, that they be affectionate to the state, and live
therein contented, to the end they attempt no innovation, and lastly that they
be authorized to execute those things, which they think profitable for the
commonweal. For so shall they command with more reputation, and the subjects
more willingly obey them. Surely whosoever shall without indignity aspyre to
the place of supreme government, has need to use great art and singular
wisdom. For such a one is to govern, not one only house, not one only
famely, not one only wife, not one only raze of children, but the
commonweal, divided into infinite and contrary humors of men, which by his
wisdom must be reduced to one consent, equality, and concord. Moreover What
magistrates are most profitable in the state.
for so much as in commonweales, there are three degrees of magistrates, among
whom the king holds the most supreme place, next unto him is the Senate, and
the third is distributed to the people, what profit may be reaped of every of
them, let us now consider. The kings The office of Kings.
authority contains great virtue, high understanding, and divine wisdom; for
as God is prince of the universal world, so is the King Lord of the whole
commonweal. It behooves him therefore to govern justly and godly, because
in the commonweal he is accounted the Lieuetenant of God. For the Council,
wisdom, and knowledge of kings is not their own, but given them of God.
Also, for so much as, no king can with his diligence and only wisdom, equally
govern the whole state, (for it is rather the virtue of God then man, exactlye
to know all things apperteyning to good government) they have therefore used to
call unto their assistance some wise men, whereby the commonweal might be the
better governed. Those men being as a mean betwixt the king and the people,
do on the one side, know the office of the king, and on the other, what are
the customs and laws belonging to the people: thereof conceiving, what ought
be done for preservation of the kings honor, and what apperteyneth to the
profitt of the commonweal and people. We thereof infer; that these
magistrates or counselors, are of all other most able to stand the co^monweale
in stead. The king being but one only man, cannot look unto all things, and
sometimes it happens that either by giving liberty to his appetites, or
yielding to his affections, he is seduced from true reason: and the ignorant
multitude, being (as they say) without head or discretion, cannot be capable of
that knowledge. Yet the Senate being A Senate in all co^monweales of much
necessity.
chosen, and made of virtuous, wise and expert men, may from their place (as
from a watchtower) look about, and provide things needful for the state,
preventing all seditions, tumultes, and perils that can be attempted: which is
the respect, there is not skantlie any commonweal, which uses not to commit
either the whole, or the greatest charge of government to the Senate. For
albeit they were indeed called Kings, who first assembled the habitation of
men into Cities, living before sauagely, dispersed in woods and fields; yet
with that course of government, the kings could not alone retain them in
obedience. Neither did the authority and wisdom of one Prince suffice, when
the minds of men were reduced to civility, and their The original of
Counselors.
wonted bestialitie rejected. It therefore behooved kings to be accompanied with
the Council of wisemen, to the end the commoweale might be the better
governed: which we read, was done by Romulus. For he supposing that the
government of one without advise of Counsel, would prove either perilous,
odious, or without gravity, did call unto his assistance a hundredth Senators,
whom either in respect of their age, or wisdom, he named Fathers. The like
was done by Theopompus, king of Sparta, who appointed the Ephor^, giving them
great authority in the state: whereat his wife offended, and saying, that he
^ad thereby diminished the power of his posterity in that kingdom, answered,
that it was enlarged and strengthened, being persuaded, that thorough Counsel
and authority of the Senate, the state would be exceedingly increased and
enforced. Whereby it appears, that the advice of Counselors were from the
beginning by kings embraced, and all men have thought those resolutions to be
most firm and assured, What a Senate is.
which were by Council and wisdom of the Senate digested. I call that a
Senate, which is the chief magistracy appointed to give Counsel What sort
of men ought to be made Senators.
and govern the state. And consequently, the Senator is a man lawfully elected
into the number authorized to counsel, and govern the commonweal. It has
therefore always been, that the order of Counselors was framed of the most
discreet, wise, and noble sort of subiectes^ because there is not any society
of men so barbarous, but desires the government should rest in men of such
virtue, and thinks it a thing honest and just to obey them. Among all sorts
of men, there is not any so wise, and of such perfect and absolute virtue, as
is the Senator, because all others, either through want of years, lack of
experience, or inconstancy, are (for the most part) withdrawn from the best
course of life; but a Counselor is not by any affections troubled, by
appetites transported, nor by youth inueigled, but by reason governed, by
Counsel directed, and by ag^ made perfect. Counselors also in respect of
their capacities, reason, Counsel, judgment, and Whereof the Senators be so
named.
ripenes, may be called Senators, because in them all youthful appetites and
furies be decayed, and the force of reason increased* which being grown to
perfection in men, does make them like unto Gods. Furthermore, for so much as
there are (as the Philosophers affirm) in all things three degrees, Great,
Small and Indifferent, that is thought most perfect, which does participate of
either. So the Senator being The duty of Senators.
as it were a mean, betwixt the king and people, may the better find the
perfection of all things, and consider, what are the offices of Kings, and
what the duty of people, with the right, liberties, and laws apperteyning to
either, least the people, for want of good government, do coue^ immoderate
liberty, or the King lacking advise, do fall into tyr^n^y. It behooves the
Counselor to be of high wisdom, great understanding, and much experience*
endeavoring himself to ^e careful and vigilant, for the well doing, quiet and
happiness of all the commonweal, which ought be the study of him that is of
high capacity and supernatural understanding. Scipio says, that as the end
of the Saylors endeavor, is good passage* the Physicians travel tends to
health; and the captains labor to victory: so the happy life of subjects,
their wealth, their glory and virtue, ought to be the endeavor of our
Counselor; and from him, as one amongst the rest, of most singularity and
perfection, the same proceeds. We shall now therefore discourse, what
foundation of great wisdom has, and what exercises, knowledge and virtue
ought to be in a Counselor: which being known, the ways and degrees, whereby
he may attain to so excellent qualities, shall be the more easy. For as much
as the foundation and root of every commonweal, is the inhabitants thereof,
we will first above all things The Councellor must be of natural birth.
determine, that our Councellor shall be naturally borne within that state
where he governs. Because that birth and being, does not only bind him, but
also lead him to believe, it is honorable, just and necessary, to spend his
blood in defense of his country: for the only love which men do bear unto
their country, does exceed all other piety. And how is it possible that any
man should not love that country, wherein he has his parents, his children,
his neighbors and friends; The love of our country natural.
and that which has freely given him life, name, and honor, with every other
thing requirable, either for delight or necessity? Surely Nature has so
deeply and firmly planted in the minds of men the love to their country, as
never any good subject did fear, at necessary occasions, to adventure his
life. Yea we have found the force thereof to have been such, as even the wicked
and most unnatural subjects, attempting the subuertion of their country, at
the only sight of their natural soil, have stayed their hands from
performing so wicked an enterprise. Did not Veturia dissuade her son Martius
beseging Rome? only by reducing to his memory, the love he ought to have unto
his natural country, calling him impious and audacious, for daring to disturb
that City wherein he was begotten and bred, forgetting that within the walls
thereof his mother, wife, children, famelie and friends lived? Great was the
love of Veturia toward her country, and no less was the piety of Martius in
pardoning his country: which through the cruelty of the Tribunes; at that time
persecuting the Nobility, had been to him unthankful. Sertorius in like
manner desired Pompeius and Metellus to procure his reuocation, saying, he
desired rather to be called an obscure Citizen of Rome, then else where an
Emperor. Therefore Ouidius Naso the Poet says truly. Nescio qua natale solum
dulcedine cunctos
Ducit, and immemores non sinit esse sui.


Great is the obligation which binds us to our country, whereunto our goods
and persons are (as it were) impawned. Pythagoras (as Plato says) being asked
in what sort a man should be ungrateful to to country, answered, as to his
mother, because all injuries are to be pardoned for our countries sake: neither
is there any offense so great, which the love of our country ought not delay
and diminish. Let our Councellor therefore be a subject naturally borne,
Strangers suspected in the co^monweale.
since no man of foreign birth ought be preferred to that dignity, because the
Council of strangers, is accounted suspicious, perilous and dangerous. The
Athenians therefore did not only seclude all strangers from their Councels,
but also suffered them not to dwell within their City: least by such means
they might aspyre unto the magistracy, and induce the Citizens minds to
innovation, whereby change of laws, customs, manners and seditions might
grow. Which manner of proceeding, we see the Venetians have carefully
observed. For among them great heed is taken, least any under false tide,
should intrude himself into that number; which is capable of the government.
Whereby all forenners and strangers be utterly excluded. But happelye it may
seem considerable, who those are which ought be called Citizens. This word
What a Citizen is.
Citizen, has been as well among Philosophers as lawe-makers, diuerselye
defined. Some have called the whole number of Inhabitants by the name of
Citizens. Others, only those that are descended of Noble and free Citizens.
Others have called them Citizens, who have one of their parents free borne
within the City. And some would that the Citizen should fetch his Pedigree
from his ancient grandfathers. Some do also think that strangers received
into the society of Citizens and naturallized, should be called Citizens.
Aristotle does call them by the name of Citizens, that are capable of the
offices in the state, and are descended of free and honest parentage. Surely
the opinion of every of these touching the name of Citizen is not to be
thought strange, seeing that custom and law does in every place give
direction what is to be done, framing their reasons according to the quality
of the state wherein they live. In popular states all they are commonly Who is
called a Citizen in states popular.
called Citizens that do inhabit the City, as well poor as rich, bad as good,
wise as learned, not being bond men, for every one is capable of the
gouernmente, and live all in one equality. Of this nature was the Athenian
commonweal, so long as it was popularlye governed, and in our days the
Cantons of Switserlande do observe the same customs. Diverse other cities in
Germany are called free, where the inhabitants do live popularly, secluded
Who is called a Citizen, in A Monarchy, or an Aristocratie.
from gentlemen and noble citizens. In Monarchies, and Aristocraties those are
named Citizens that live according to virtue. And in the one, only good and
virtuous men do exercise the government, and in the other, one alone for bounty
excelling the rest does command all, who Whereof the king is called Rex.
either a regendo, or recte agendo, is called Rex. Those people which are
naturally slaves or wicked, do for the most part obey Tyrants, and that
government is called Imperium despoticum, because they govern by will without
law. Such people are servile, barbarous, and without virtue or honor. Yet are
not they to be accounted slaves, that be oppressed with power, ambition and
covetousness of Tyrants, if that therewith they be not base minded and vicious.
For we may read of many such, that have revenged the servitude, both of their
own persons, and of their country, by sleying or expelling the Tyrants, or not
being able so to do, have chosen rather to loose their lives then their
liberty: as in Rome, Brutus, Cato, and many other had done. In an Who is a
Citizen in an Oligarchia.
Oligarchia, because men are chiefly respected for their riches, they who are
most welthy will only be reputed Citizens; which kind of men ought be holden
dishonorable, because they are careless of all virtue, and study for nothing
else, then how to become rich by what mean soever, to the end, that not as
wise and virtuous; but as rich men, they may aspyre to the offices and honors
in the Who wear Citizens in Rome.
commonweal. Among the Romans, there were diverse kinds of Citizens: for some
were called, Municipes, some Col^^i, and some Latini, every one retayning those
conditions that were granted them by the people of Rome, some were free, some
confederate, and some stipendarie. Some were made Citizens pleno iure, which
was by consent of voices, and they were capable of all honors: or Iure
honorario, which were they, that were only admitted into the City without
suffrage, and for honors sake called Citizens, as were the Company and Equiti.
He was also accounted a Citizen of Rome, whose name was written in the Censors
book, and was an householder in Rome. By these things we have said, it
appears, that in all commonweales those are properly called Citizens, that in
their City have right to bear office, and give suffrage in the state, which
privilege who so wants, is rather to be called an Inhabitante or Clyant,
then a Citizen. In other things, requisite to the perefction of a Citizen, as
virtue, natural birth, riches, and Nobility; the custom and law of every
state, is to ^e observed. Of all these we will only allow of two sorts, the
one Noble, Two sorts of Citizens.
the other plebeiall. For every City consists of the people, and the
multitude; within the name of people (as Caius the Doctor writes) all
principal Citizens, Noblemen, Senators and Gentlemen are contained. The word
plebeiall, includes the rest of the inhabitants, and others that have being
within the state. So as the one sort ought be called Citizens properly, and the
other so termed by imitation and courtesy. But our Councellor shall be of the
number of noble and free Citizens. A noble Citizen takes his title of that
nobility which The Councellor must be of the number of Noble Citizens.
has the original of virtue, which is partly his own, and partly as
ornified and increased by the virtues and riches of his ancestors. They
therefore, that as well by their own as their ancestors virtue be made noble,
are to be preferred, honored and reverenced before others, because of good
parents good children are begotten: as the Poet says. Fortes fortibus creantur
and bonis,
Est in iumentis, est in equis patru^
Virtus, ne^ imbellet feroces
Progenerant ^q^ilae^o ^^mbam.


To the perfection of a Noble Citize^ three things required.
To the perfection of a Noble Citizen (as Aristotle says) three things are
chiefly required; good parentage, riches, and virtue. Who so possesses all
those, wants nothing appertayning to true and perfect nobility, and such men
were ever wont to be called most Noble Citizens. But because it seldom
happens that one man can be owner of them all, virtue alone does challenge,
(as her right) power to make men noble. Touching riches and honor of
ancestors, as Nobility for virtue.
they do ornifie Nobility, so do they greatly disgrace the beauty thereof in
those, that live not vertuouslye. For such men do make the name of their
ancestors obscure, and through the vices of their posterity, they become
utterly unknown. It is therefore better (as Tullius says) to be noble by a
man's own virtue, then by the opinion conceived of his ancestors, because the
beginner of Nobility Nobility by descent.
is most praise worthy. Who so is descended from Noble parents, does deferne
undoubtedly to be commended and honored, so that he does endeavor himself to
equal, or excel the glorious acts and virtue of his ancestors. And who would
not greatly commend them for so doing, declaring themselves thereby thankful
toward their ancestors* by not burying the fa^e of the dead, and increasing
the The Rhodian law.
same by their own virtue yet living? The law of the Rhodians seems
commendable, for thereby it was enacted, that those sons which followed not
their fathers virtue, but lived vitiously* should be disinherited, and their
lands given to the most virtuous of that raze, not admitting any impious heir
whatsoever. It is an office of our faith and piety, to leave unto the
posterity of men, a declaration how mindful and thankful we are toward
our ancestors, whose heirs we are; not only of their worldly goods, but of
their virtue, glory, faith* and religion; which is the true inheritance, and
may indeed be called the true possessions. For it is not a Hall painted full of
proud Arms or badges, but virtue which makes a man Noble. As ^uuenall says*
Tota licet veteres exornent vndique cerae
Atria, nobilitas sola^st^^; que vnica virtus.


For wheresoever virtue abides, in all estates the same is more praise worthy
then fortune, because it refuses no man, but may be by every one embraced.
Cleantes was a poor water drawer: and virtue found not Plato ^^oble man, but
made him noble. We c^^ld also tell, that of diverse bondmen, kings have been
descended, and of kings of^ spring, some have become bondmen: such variety
long tract of time brings, and fortune turns all things vpside down. Was
not Ag^thocles from a potter advanced to be a king? what was Romulus, Tullius
Hostilius, Tarquinius Pr^s^u^, and all the progeny of Romans? whereof Iuuenall
writes thus. Et tamen vt long repet^^ long que reuoluas*
Nomen ab infami gentem dedu cis Asyl^.


Who is therefore a Gentleman? he that by nature is made virtuous. If any
goodness be in nobility, it is as Boethius thinks, a certain necessity
imposed upon Gentlemen, that they should not degenerate from their ancestors.
Moreover, as the exercise of our qualities and actions are diverse, so are the
degrees of Nobility proceeding of virtue, likewise diverse. The Nobility of
private men, and all such as live in contemplation, may be called
Philosophical nobility, but the same in those, that either gain glory by
counselling the commonweal Nobility civil.
wisely, or that show themselves valiant in the war of their country, is
called civil nobility. The force of this nobility extends to all posterity,
and the memory thereof to be recorded by portratures, badges and monuments,
wherewith men are incited to imitate and honor the virtue of their ancestors.
For the badges of nobility do represent Badges and Arms of Nobility.
nothingelse, but the title or claim to nobility, and is a monument of ancient
virtue and dignity, wherewith we are (as by a pledge of honest life) bound to
follow the ancient virtue and actions of our forefathers. As in every
commonweal, there is two times, the one of peace, the other of war, so be
the noble Citizens of two sorts: the one for war, the other apt for peace.
The first of them by Arms do inlaige, or at the least defend the confines of
our country, the the second with counsel and wisdom does govern and
preserve it. They ought therefore be mixed, to the end the commonweal may
receive the more profit. For in all things consultable, action follows
Consultation to be preferred before action.
Counsel, which was the respect, those men whose counsel in time of peace,
governed the commonweal wisely, peaceably and happily, were preferred before
them, that either defended or enlarged the same by arms. For as the soul is
more worthy then the body, and peace more precious then war, so is the one
sort of men to be preferred before the other. Homer induces Agamemnon saying,
he could more easily surprise Troy* with the Counsel of ten Nestors or
Ulysses, then with the force of twice so many A^aci or Achilli. Pirrhus was
also wont to say, the eloquence of Cyneas had conquered more Cities, then he
with all his soldiers. But who excels both in wisdom and martial
knowledge, is deseruingly above all others to be esteemed and honored. For who
so possesses most virtue is to be reputed most worthy and honorable. We will
therefore that our Councellor shall not only be a good Citizen, but also a
good man. For the virtue of The virtue of a good Citizen, and the virtue of a
good man, is diverse
a good man differs from the virtue of a good Citizen, in that the one uses
all virtues agreeable to honest life, the other observes only the laws made
for preservation of civil commodity. And as sometimes we see a cunning
Artizan an evil man, so a good Citizen in service of the state, may be
politic, diligent, and stout, yet otherwise iniust, intemperate, and
cowardly. It is said that Julius Caesar was such a one, because his manner of
life was not unfit for a good man, yet such as did differ from the quality of
a good Citizen. But we will that our Senator shall be such a man as has been
described.

The felicity of commonweales and men, as one thing.
Those commonweales have ever been accounted fortunate and happy, wherein the
subjects be also blessed. For every City is such as are the manners of the
Citizens. The felicity of men and commonweales does seem to spring from one
fountain, from one self cause, and through virtue they do become both happy.
Yet all states and By what means the commo^weale is made^ happy.
men are not only happy by the benefit of virtue, but do also need the aid
of fortune. For that state only is happy, which is good. It behooves therefore,
that therein be the goods of mind, the goods of body, and riches* The goods
of mind are gained by virtue, by aid whereof By what mean the commo^weale is
made wise.
only, the City is wise, strong, temperate and just. That state is wise, which
is endued with wise and good Counsel, understanding what belongs to
knowledge and learning: which wisdom or knowledge, cannot be in bace people
and men mechanical, but in civil persons destined to honor and virtue: as
Princes, Counselors, Judges, generals and governors: in respect of whom the
state is called wise. For if those sorts of men be foolish, inexpert and
unlearned, the same By what mean the commo^weale is valient.
does cause the whole commonweal to be vain and simple. The valor of the state
consists in Captains and Soldiers, whose industry, courage and expertnes in
causes military, does make the commonweal valiant. Such men be formidable to
foes, and defend the commonweal from dangers, whereby it becomes assured
and quiet. It greatly behooves every state to have expert and well trained
soldiers, whereby the same continues quiet from terrors and tumults. It is
therefore necessary, that in time of peace the use of Arms be not
discontinued, and that soldiers be exercised for virtue and not for violence.
For to employ Arms against friends, or the commonweal, seems not only the
part of a bad soldier, but also of an evil man. Wherefore The office of
Soldiers.
the chief virtue of a soldier ought be, to show himself toward those of his
own country, modest, courteous and merciful, and toward enemies, fierce,
courageous, and cruel. For while fury of war reigns, and enemies do
assault subjects, into their hands, the common welfare, religion, fidelity
and liberty of the commonweal is committed: because they only do support the
lives and goods of all other subjects. Every soldier then that deserves to be
called a defender of his country, does know, his delight ought not to be in
pleasure, idleness, or domestical delicacie, but Arms, weapons, lances, labor
and sweat. A soldier ought also to avoid, private quarrel and factious
enterprises; neither shall he entermeddle with civil conspiracy or rebellion,
but at all times be careful to withstand the perils attempted against his
country. Do thou delight to hunt the Bucke, the Boar, the Bear and Hare?
or take pleasure to teach thy Dogs to kill them? why should thou not
likewise study to assault Castles, lead soldiers, and vanquish thine enemy?
If in these things thou be ignorant, and care only to fill thine own paunch,
then thou make war with savage beasts only, and lie in wait for thy
neighbors goods or life, whereby certainly thou live a seditious, ignoble
and idle life, not worthy to be called a soldier, but a sluggard; not a
Gentleman, but a Iugler; and therefore as a slave, unworthy thy dignity we do
repute thee. Is the war proclaimed? then must thou without delaie be ready,
least in long thinking what pay is prepared for thee, thy enemy has fraught
himself with spoils, and is escaped, whereby thy country shall afterward too
late lamente thy slooth. It is therefore more profitable spedely to take arms,
then with long musing to mar all. Buthappely no wages is given, what then?
will thou rather sell thy service, or give it to thy country; which has given
thee life, honor, riches, with all other things, in hope of this only duty,
that thou should hold it most dear, and as a faithful and voluntary
soldier freely defend it. God forbid thou should think, that thy virtue
were to be made Noble with money, or that thou would be called rather a
covetous soldier, then a true servant to thy country. Be persuaded that the
duty of a soldier is, to know how to handle Arms and be fit for the war,
to live justly and equally with other subjects, not offending their quiet or
reputation. For if thou fight for peace, having peace, why do thou make
war at home? Certainly it stands the commonweal upon, to provide by law,
that soldiers may be compelled to honest life, and feared from offending
others: For there is nothing more terrible, then injury armed. The boldness of
soldiers not bridled by law, does pass on so far forward, as may either
subvert the state, or enforce the good and modest subjects, yea justice it
self to obey Arms; which we read heretofore happened among the Romans,
where the soldiers for diverse years having authority to choose the Emperors,
usurped the State, when neither the Senate, the people, nor the law, could by
any means resist their insolency. But of soldiers we have perhaps to long
discoursed.

By what mean the commo^weale is made temperate and just.
That commonweal is temperate and just, where the Prince and Citizens therein
do live temperately and justly, which things are brought to pass by the
execution of laws. For they only are the directors as well of life as honest
living. From this fountain are sprung laws to reform superfluity in
building, apparel, and festing, with all others apertaining to excess. Also
from temperancie, other ordinances do proceed belonging to judgments: whereof
the foundation, is justice: a By what means the commo^weale is made strong and
fortunate.
virtue, giving to every man that which is his own. As touching the goods of
body and fortune, they shall be plentiful in those commonweales, where the
subjects be healthie, strong, valiant, rich, honorable and glorious. Of all
which things, in the end of this work we will more at large entreat. Thus
have we already discoursed what a commonweal is, and wherein the felicity
thereof consists. It remains now to speak of the Citizens happy life;
whereby shall be conceived, in what arts and sciences our Counselor ought be
instructed To the perfection of man three things required.
to enjoy both private and public felicity. To the perfection of man three
things (as the Philosopher affirms) are required, that is to say, Nature,
Custom, and Reason. As touching Nature: to be thereby good and happy, it
rests not in our power, but in the gift of God. For whomsoever he blesses,
is by the instinct of Nature good, wise, and of perfect judgment. It many
times also happens, that as one man begets an other, and one beast an
other, so of wise and good ancestors, wise and good posterity does desce^d,
which nature always indeuoreth to bring to pass, but not therein prevailing,
appears how corruptible our nature is, either through education, or (to
speak in Christian wise) through the sin of our forefathers, who^ the bad
Angel diuerted and corrupted. Wherefore nature has only left in us certain
sparks, wherewith to kindle our inclination to virtue and become apt for all
things, the rest is performed by reason, art, and use. It behooves man therefore
to cleave fast unto that nature (which The office of man.
is good) and at his hand desire felicity and perfection. The chife duty of man,
is to know that his original proceeds from God, and from him to have
received reason, whereby he resembles his maker. But for that the reason of man
is shut up within the body, as a prison, whereby it knows not it self; It
behooves the mind to break forth from that place of restrainte and win
liberty, whereby it may behold, know and perceive, how much it resembles
God. For man is most properly so called, when he lives according to that part
of the mind which is partaker of reason, and is furthest removed from pleasing
and obedience of the body. Learning therefore is to be desired of men, since
thereby reason and the perfection Wherein the perfection of man consists
thereof is chiefly obtained. For as nature, unless it be perfect, wants her
good, so the good of man is not absolute, unless therein be perfect reason:
which being in man is called God, Nature, Law, Virtue and goodness. Whereupon
may be inferred, that such learning By what studies the perfection of man is
attained.

Philosophy.


is requisite, as brings with it understanding and knowledge of God, Nature,
Laws, Virtues and all good things. This learning is called Philosophy, the
eternal and immortal gift of God, instructing us in the knowledge of all
things both divine and humane, and conteyneth the skill whereby to know, the
beginning of virtue and vice, with the nature of all other things. So that,
whosoever shall (as in a glass) look therein, may see, the forms, the
Images, and Idaeas of every thing, and ^hal well near behold the counterfeit
of his own body and mind. It was therefore not without cause of Cicero called
the universal knowledge, the guide of life, the sercher of virtue, the
expulser of vice, the medicine and health of the soul. For there is nothing in
this world to be done or The profit that proceeds of Philosophy.
thought, either in Court or Judgment, be it great or small, which proceeds
not from Philosophy as mother of all Counsels, actions and resolutions; whom,
if in all thy words and works thou do follow, whatsoever thou shall
speak or do, will be wise, discreet, divine, and in all respects perfect.
For in whatsoever commonweal, the Prince that reigns is a Philosopher, or
counseled by Philosophers, there is seldom any war, sedition, hate,
discord, or violence of evil men. But now me thinks, I hear some one saying;
do thou Sir Philosopher think, that the felicity of commonweales, and the
wisdom of Kings and Princes, does proceed from thy lasie discipline? For
that art of thine is rather to be termed the science of prating, then a
knowledge whereby men attain unto felicity. How do thou dare infect the
commonweal with those things, which will be the destruction thereof? and as
thou have filled the schools with contention and scoulding, so will thou divide
the state into sundry seditions, which discord in schools may be without
blood disputed, yet think thou that in a commonweal they can be without
blows determined? How shall the happiness of commonweales be conserved by
Philosophers, whose opinions are diverse* doubtful and contrary? Whether shall
our state trustvnto the Epicu^e, the Peripateticke, or the Stoicke? Who contend
not only for the confines, but the very possession of felicity? And they that
are not agreed what is the chief good, do they not descent upon the whole
substance of Philosophy? For who so knows not what is the chief good, must
of force be ignorant what course o^ life to lead. I do therefore think, that
the teachers of such doctrines (who trust only unto Philosophy as the
Tabernacle of their life,) are rather to be removed, then received to govern
the commonweal. For what do thou think will be said or done, where
Philosophers consulte of war and peace, of laws and judgments? Surely they
will imagine themselves to sit in Counsel of Cyclops and Giantes, and think
Arms already in hand, so soon as they hear the war^^ consulted upon. Is
it reasonable that he should be a lawe-maker, that obeys no law but that
which he prescribes to himself? using only his own reason, or rather his
own private opinion, accounting all others as beasts, himself only excepted?
I^ not this the guise of your philosophical flock? What think ye of
Diogones, Zeno, Epictetu^ and many others? would you wish such wise men to be
Princes and Governors of What kind Philosophers are unfit to govern.
the commonweal? Whereunto may be answered. There are two sorts of
Philosophers, whom I think in deed unfit to govern the commonweal. The
first are they who have scantly tasted of Philosophy, whereby the thirsting
heat of vices and desires, is not with virtue quenched: So as, those men do
lead a life diverse from the grounds of true Philosophy not yet well rooted
in them. For the knowledge thereof does make men no less good then learned,
and by knowledge they become learned, and through Justice, Temperance, and
Fortitude, they are made perfect. Surely there is not any thing in Philosophy
more notable, then the iustitutions and precepts of virtue, whereof who so
has the understanding, does lead a happy and blessed life. An other sort of
Philosophers there is contrary to these, who having in their youth learned
Philosophy, do (as it were) unto the Syrene rocks cleave thereunto* even the
whole course of their lives. Such kind of contemplation and Philosophy which
concerns not the profitt, nor civil affairs of men, is in truth
improfitable for the state. For albeit those Philosophers be learned and wise,
yet only applying their thoughts to Philosophy, not having experience of
court or civil affairs, are utterly unfit for government. Therefore Plato
commands that those solitary worshippers of wisdom, being by nature apt
for action in the commonweal, should be found out, and compelled thereunto,
thinkng them fit to govern Cities, and appease the sedition of people. And
touching the rest, which are not apt for that purpose, he suffers them to
enjoy their rest, and were out their life in contemplation. Wherefore neither
they that be lightly learned, nor those that are become overmuch in bondage to
Philosophy, ought be admitted to govern the commonweal, because the one have
not by Philosophy attained any end of honest life whereunto to lean, and
the other, being persuaded they have a life much better then civil, do pass
their age solitary (as they think) among rocks of the fortunate Islands. For
there is not any life (as Plato writes) which has civil magistracy in more
contempt, then that which is exercised in true Philosophy. The mean sort of
Philosophers are therefore (in our judgment) What Philosophers are fit for
government.
most fit for government: because they do not by the study of Philosophy
search deeper then the knowledge whereby men may attain to happy life, and
become fit to govern the commonweal. To which kind of Philosophy we exhort
our Counselor. For thereby not only the knowledge of human happiness, but
also the science of government is attained. First we will that his nature be apt
for philosophy; that is, temperate, docible, and just: because there is no man
that can well exercise himself therein, if naturally he be not of good
memory, docible, courageous, a and lover of truth, justice and temperancie,
which disposition being bred only by good education, it is necessary that from
his childhoode he be so trained. The Good education the root of wisdom.
ground of all wisdom, Plato says, is good education, for thereby as it were
in sport, we profit in all kinds of virtue. Men must therefore from their
tender years be instructed to rejoice or be sorry for those things, which
ought justly to glad them, or sad them. It is therefore a virtue to know how to
rejoice, or to be sorry, for such knowledge, as Aristotle thinks, is true
educatio^. And as it behooves a perfect co^monweale to have good subjects
whereby it may also become good, so ought The Com. must be careful in the
education of youth.
there be great diligence in their education. For as a good husbandman
diligently proyneth his plants, to make them grow the faster: So the
commonweal which is the mother and house-wife of subjects, ought The
Lacedemonian education.
to be exceeding careful for the education and virtuous instruction of young
people. The Lacedaemonians were wont for the education of their Citizens, to
elect Magistrates among the number of their most ancient and grave Citizens,
and them they called public Tutors, for which respect, they were holden
virtuous men in action, valiant and excellent in military discipline. It is
written that Diogenes returning from Sparta to Athens, was by the way asked
from whence he came and whither he went: Whereunto he answered, he came from
men, and was going to women, noting thereby the effeminacie of the Athenians,
who were for that vice, by the Lacedaemonians and the other Grecians mocked to
scorn. Upon which occasion, Agesilaus then King of Sparta, hearing an Athenian
boasting the thicknes of Athens walls, said, that the same did well become
them, because high walls were wont to be built for women. But let us return
to education, whereof in these days to small care is taken: for children, are
neither by their fathers taught any liberal or honest science, nor committed
to the tuition of any skillful The Roman education.
instructers. I cannot therefore but commend the diligence of Cato in the
nurture of his son, for he disdained not to be present, and look upon his
wife, at such time as she washed and swathed his young children, and so soon
as years had abled them for learning, he took them into his own tuition, and
taught them. At that time he kept Chylo the Grammarian in his house to instruct
children, who was in deed learned, yet thought he not fit that Chylo being a
servant should correct his son, and when he erred pull him by the ears, also
he disdayned to be beholding to a scholemaster for the education of his son.
He therefore himself did teach his son learning, laws and manners, and
likewise instructed him how to darte, to handle weapons, ride, swime, and
suffer heat and cold. It is said moreover, that with his own hand he wrote
an History, and gave it to his son, to the end he might therein see the
Acts of his ancestors, and learn the skill how to govern the commonweal.
In his sons presence he never uttered any unclean, foul, or angry speech,
but used so great respect, as if the vestall virgins, or Priests had looked on
him. Such was the domestical discipline of Cato, and the most of the Romans,
in education The education of Graecia
of their children. The Philosophers in Graecia made plays for the instruction
of young men: which discipline, eternal memory has preserved till these
ourdaies. From them is also come the understanding of virtue and knowledge,
which we have taken by tradition. Those Philosophers were not only Tutors of
good and happy life, but also teachers of civil government. Yea this present
age, has (according to the Grecian custom) universities, which are as
Seminaries of learning and virtue. Thither young men (as unto a harvest of good
science,) may daily resort, and gather the fruits of good discipline and
virtue. Would God the Masters of those schools, would frame the wits of
young men there, rather to live well, then dispute well: for happily, so
should they both of the commonweal and life of men deserve better, and their
scholars not desire (as they say) rather to hear a lester then a Philosopher.
In ancient time Philosophers taught their pupils first to be silent, but now
their chief instruction is to speak a pace, which breeds so many prattling
Orators and witless Philosophers: For they study not to fill their breasts
with virtues and honest discipline, but teach their tongues plenty of words:
So as, we see them commended of their teachers, for wrangling and strength of
wit in argument, not for modesty, wisdom, and justice. But all learned men
The office of learned men.
ought know, that they should not keep schools for such drousie and slothful
Philosophy, but teach civil knowledge, the commendation whereof consists in
well doing and thinking truly. The ancient Academies of Graecia were the
nurseries of all commonweales, and out of them (as from the Trojan horse) came
forth most excellent kings, singular Captains and governors. Alexander and
Scipio (two most noble Chieftains) were brought up in schools. I omit many
others. Thus it appears, that men ought to be trained in schools, and there
to learn honest life and the skill of government. Also every state should be
careful to have schools, as shops filled with all sorts of virtue. In such a
one therefore as shall become a Counselor, we wish good nature, and education.
For that being evil, is not only to be bettred by Philosophy, but becomes
much the worse: for man's nature is most prone to evil, and being strengthened
and instructed with science and Philosophy, gains thereby more force and skill
to do evil: since the best knowledges possessed by a man of perverse nature,
are depraved, and changed into a contrary disposition, whereof evil counsel
proceeds. The cogitations of an angry mind in an evil man, do increase
fury: which is the cause, that a subtle spirit moved to collar, is converted
into madness. It may then be concluded, that a good nature evil instructed,
becomes worst of all, and evil nature well instructed, is also oftentimes
abused and employed in wicked actions. For every good evil used, becomes
worse then evil it self: not unlike to good seeds sowed in evil soil,
which do for the most part change their nature. Great is the force of
education, which changes, and rechangeth the tender mind of youth, as well to
good as evil. Diogenes being asked, how man might lead a quiet life, answered.
First he must honor the Gods, who are the makers of all felicity: Secondly,
he must bring up his children in virtue, for being evil instructed, they
become the greatest enemies to their aged fathers: Thirdly, he must be
thankful toward his friends. The saying of Apollo is true, that the
unthankful Education of children.
man is most hurtful, and odious to the whole world, Moreover, it behooves for
the better institution of children, that they be instructed in the property of
speech, eloquence, and knowledge of the truth, whereunto he attaineth by the
sciences of Grammar, Rhetorike, and Logike. For these knowledges, are as it
were gates and entries of wisdom. From them he may receive the rules of
speaking, which are confirmed by use, domestical exercise, and the reading of
ancient Poets and Orators. For being instructed in these, he will leave the
cogitation of common and known things, and call unto his consideration matters
of more importance. Because the mind beginning to know it self, does then
seek for true food, whereof to feed and be satisfied. The true food and
medicine of the mind is Philosophy, because it heals all sorts of sickness
and sorrows therein, making a perfect path unto happiness; and by virtue
thereof, our minds are stirred to more worthy cogitations. The reason thereof
is, that the mind abandoneth the body and all terrestrial thoughts, and
studieth upon things high and celestial. Philosophy of two kinds.
This knowledge of Philosophy is of two sorts, the one consists in the
subtlety of nature and is subject to the universal contemplation of the whole
world: the other shows the true institution of man's life, and manners, how
commonweals should be governed, and private housholdes maintained. To the first
appertains these parts of Philosophy, called Physica, Metaphysica, and
Methematica, and to the other; Ethica, Politica, and Oeconomica. The end of
both those knowledges is not diverse. For as by the contemplation of things
divine, the mind disioyned from the body, by it self is made blessed and like
unto God. So does it come to pass in honest actions, that reason being guarded
by virtue, does withhold the mind from the unclean actions of the corrupt
body. The mind by these two means disseuered from the body, becomes like
unto God, and may justly be accounted happy and blessed. In this only, those
two knowledges do differ: that the one by action, the other by contemplation
represents the similitude of God. Whereof a double felicity follows, the one
Two kinds of felicity.
private, the other public. Those that put their felicity in the exercise and
action of virtue, are at all times most profitable for the co^monweale, and
that which is good, the more common it be, the better and more profitable it is
accounted: So that felicity whereby many receive benefit, is reputed better then
that, which is contained in one only head. Yet must we confess, that the
contemplative felicity, has the precedence and more noble place, because it
shows the causes and occasion of all things to be done. God allo without
action, by his perpetual conte^plation, forseing all things, does by his
example, move Philosophers to prefer the conte^plation of things divine, before
all human action and felicity. Now for so much as, the felicity What (...) is
(...) for a Counselor*
of every Counselor, and all knowledge consists in action, to the end lie be
not ignorant what is the best course of good and honest life, what is required
in the administration of matters both private and public, and may know how to
govern people, ordain laws and correct judgments, it behooves him to be
studied in that part of Philosophy, which contains the rules of men's actions,
and the science of gouerme^t. Let him therefore be perfectly instructed of that
part which entreats of ma^ners, whereby he may attain the skill, not only of
life, but also of well living and counselling. For how should he speak of man's
life agreeable to virtue, that knows not what virtue is? Or what discourse can
such a one make in Counsel touching justice, fortitude, te^perancie, or
wisdom? How should he appease seditions, or qualefie laws, unless he partly
knows the precepts of Justice and prudence? What counsel can any wise man
give of war, peace or contracts? if he beignorant what war is just and unjust,
what honorable or disonorable peace, what treaties are godly and what ungodly?
For all the precepts and force of honesty and virtue ought be to him known,
not only by name but in mind exactly conceived. The sum of which knowledge, in
the book of Ethics, Politics and Oeconomicks is contained. From the^ as
treasure houses, he may take the knowledge of virtues, the skill of government,
the manners of men, and the order of domestical life. Moreover that discipline
shall furnish him with knowledge, whereby to judge of all things, and inform
him, what is in every thing honest, and what the contrary. It The knowledge of
histories.
behooves him besides these, to know and consider deeply, the notable sayings
and acts of men that heretofore have lived. Which things are not so
plentifully found any where, as in the monuments of Annals and histories. This
was the cause that Tullius called an history, the witness of time, the light
of truth, the memorial of life, and the report of antiquity. For can any man
describe better the virtue of fortitude, Justice, continency, frugality, and
contempt of pains and death, then the acts of the Cornelu, Valerii, Fabritii,
Curi^, Dec^i, and Mutu? what may likewise be said of our own countrymen? was
there not singular virtue in the L^skies, Piasties, Boleslias; and Iageloneys.
This knowledge is not only to be gathered from late and present times, but
from the memory of all posterity, honest life, and acts most praiseable. From
thence he may draw the precepts of civil knowledge, and the imitatio^ of
virtues and valiant actions. He ought also to know all those things, which
appertain to the use of subjects and professions of men. What accidents
Political knowledge.
do happen in man's life, in the commonweal, in civil societies, in the common
humors of men, in their natures and manners. It is also more then necessary,
that our Senator be perfect in all ordinances, concerning war, peace,
provisions, the quality of subjects, the administration of the state, and
natures of men, knowing also those things, wherewith their minds be exalted or
dejected, what virtue is, what ought be the discipline of youth, what the
education of subjects, what customs should be confirmed, what honor
belongs to God and religion. Besides those, let him not be utterly ignorant,
in contractes, leagues, and aliences with other Princes and Potentates. For we
see all these things laid before the eyes of men, and daily used in their
proceedings and in Court. And it were very unseemly, that a Counselor should
be a stranger in customs of state, in examples, in laws, and the disposition
of that people he governs, It seems therefore that Antonius has well
described a Governor or Councellor saying, he should be such a man as
understands, by what means the commonweal is pro fited or enlarged, and at
occasions to use them. For (says he) such were in Rome the Lentuli, Gracchi,
Metelli, Scipioni and Lelii. In this our age, there are many, that aspyre to
offices of state, without sufficiency, without knowledge, and without
wisdom. And if any man seems sufficient for Counsel, the cause thereof is,
either one years experience in war, practice in the law, riches, or
domestical authority: but in all good and honest sciences, and and in the
knowledge of virtue, they are utterly ignorant. And in mine opinion, no
Counselor deserves true commendation, who knows not, or wants will to
think well, and do justly. For it were unseemly, that he should swear
others to the execution of law, unless himself be a man for high Wisdom
and Counsel most perfect: because he ought be just, indifferent, and praise
worthy: which proceeds from virtue, law, and perfect reason. All wisdom
does assuredly come from the knowledge of things, which unless man attaineth
unto by experience in great matters and learning, he shall never think, speak,
or do any thing worthy a Counselor or wise man. A great part also of
wisdom required in a Counselor, consists in the knowledge Travel in
foreign nations.
of manners, laws and customs of diverse nations, which is best attained unto
by foreign travel, as Homer writes of Ulysses. Di^ mihi Musa virum captae
post tempora Troiae
Qui mores hominum multorum vidit, and vrbes. What to be observed in travel.



But in traveling, great respect ought be used, to learn those manners and
foreign customs which are honest, eschewing others, that be evil and
ungodly. The trauellor shall likewise carefully inform himself, what laws,
jurisdictions, liberty, what order of life, what discipline of war, what
civil government, what domestical life is in every nation used. He shall
also note the site of every region, the building of Cities, their
fortification and munition. Let him also understand the virtue of each Prince,
and how their people are effected toward them, the wisdom of their senate,
the form of their judgments, the nature and wit of the people, what virtues
they delight in, what vices they follow, what learned men, wise men, soldiers
and chieftaines are in every country to be found. Many other things there are
which a man of judgment can well discover and report: so as if the use of them
be necessary in his country, they may be observed and exercised. Nevertheless
great heed must be taken, that by using foreign fashions, our countrymen be
not made newfangled, effeminate, or careless of their own ancient virtue,
customs or laws: for the nature of base people, is desirous of novelties,
which being pernicious, may greatly molest the commonweal. Such things
therefore as are honest, agreeable with the nature of our country people,
profitable for the state, or not contrary to the earth and air where we live,
may be received from foreign Nations: for such fruits of travel, and no
other ought be commended. Many most notable men have taken pleasure in travel:
as Nestor, Menelaus, and Alexander the great. The words which Diodorus Siculus
reports to be written upon the tomb of Osiris are rightnotable, Osiris.
containing this effect. Osiris rex sum, Saturni antiquior filius, qui nullum
orbis locum reliqui, quem non attigerim, discens ea omnia, quae generi humano
vtilia sunt and necessaria. But if he wants means to travel, let Geography
and Cosmography.
him read histories, Geography and Cosmography, indeuoring himself to know all
things. We think also very convenient, that he have some taste of natural
Philosophy, but to consume much labor in that study, we account superfluous.
For among the manifold actions of man's life, it is lawful to be ignorant in
somewhat. The field of knowledge is immesurable and infinite, which was the
cause that men applied themselves Things to be known of three sorts.
to particular studies, as impossible for one man to excel in all. And for so
much as things to be known, are of three sorts: that is to say profitable,
pleasant, and honest; the knowledge of things pleasant and honest, is not for
government of the state so necessary, as to him that knows them, sweet and
contenting. Yet is such science very fit to recreate the mind of him that is
wearied with hearing, thinking, and consulting of causes concerning the
commonweal. At which times, knowing how to entertain himself, it will
greatly content him. This kind of Philosophy therefore is very profitable in
the commonweal, chiefly if those that be therein learned, do lead a civil
life, being conversant with other Citizens, and not lurking within their
private houses or solitary places. Nevertheless if either for lack of
health, or other impediment they be known unfit for the government, then do
we permit them to live according to their own nature, pouring oil upon their
heads and crowning them with wool, and dismiss them to their studies,
schools, In what sort private Philosophers be profitable.
and caves of contemplation. This kind of Philosophy although it be private,
yet may it greatly profitt the commonweal. For they are not only to be
allowed whose knowledge does govern the state, but those also that in writing
do leave eternal Monumentes of their wisdom, or that by their precepts do
instruct others in virtue and the knowledge of government. For out of their
books we gather many things touching the laws, customs, and felicity of the
commonweal, so that their studious quiet, seems greatly to aid our action.
Such kind of men were Theophrastus, Heraclides Ponticus, Dicaearchus, Socrates
and Pithagoras. The scholars of Dicaearchus wrote a book of the commonweal,
requiring, the same might every year be publicly read in Sparta, and
commanded that all the youth of that City should be at the reading present.
The precepts of Philosophy are to bring virtue and knowledge into the minds
of men, and not to maintain disputation and contentions. For in my judgment,
all strife, wrangling, anger, and evil speech, are things unworthy of
Philosophy, and I hold him unwise that thinks Philosophy to consist in
words. For constancy, felicity, Which is the true Philosophy.
and honesty, are in deed the true Philosophy, because the other sciences are
not virtues, but the instruments and ornaments of virtue. Neither do I
think it good, that the minds of men should be drawn into fectes. Wherefore
first we will utterly extirpe all Epicurisme out of our minds, because that
knowledge supported of sensual pleasure, ought not to be in him, whom we
seek and desire should be a Cheiftiane in public Counsel and government.
With the Stoickes I find no fault, yet do I think them worthy to be
dismissed, as unfit for the company of our Counselor. Because (as Cicero
says) they affirm only Philosophers to be wise, and all others to be
thieves, enemies, barbarous and mad men. Neither will they consent, that
there is any wise man living. It were therefore absurd, to admit him a
Counselor, that thinks no Counselor to be wise, a Citizen, or a Freeman.
Betwixt the sects of Stoickes and Peripatetickes touching this summum bonum
discention has ever been, but our intent is, to concur with the
Peripatetickes: because they are the more true Tutors of manners and virtue,
and out of that famelie, perfect Citizens, Emperors, Kings, and Philosophers
(as out out of the Trojan horse) have issued. These most Eloquence.
noble sciences and arts in a Senator, shall be greatly beautified and graced
by eloquence, which is is the true ornament of wisdom. For without that we
see all other things (though commendable) are as it were drowned. An eloquent
and excellent Oration, (...) made good and of honest conversation. For men are
not only to learn the skill of commanding, but also the order of obeying,
and that they ought as well to honor and love the Magistrates, as perform
their commandments. Which thing proceeding from the due execution of law,
the Counselor must in that point endeavor himself to become a skillful and
learned lawier. The first degree to the attaining of virtue and honesty, is to
obey the laws and Magistrates. For What law is.
the law of every state, is nothing else but virtue and good order of life,
reduced into rules certain. Theopompus king of Sparta being told that the
Lacedemonian commonweal flourished because the kings thereof were skillful in
governing, answered, no. But the reason thereof is, that the subjects know
well how to obey. Among many other The Lacedemonian discip ine.

The Grecian discipline.


Lacedemonian disciplines, the chief was (as Plutarch reports) to obey the
laws and magistrates, to endure all travel patiently, and be persuaded to
fight manfully, and die willingly. The like discipline was observed in all
other places of Graecia, and therein the youth were exercised: to the end that
through such instruction, they might learn, in time of war to defend their
country, in time of peace to govern, and such as lived in private life, to
employ their leisure honestly, that is to wit, in learning, well gracing their
iesture, music, painting and swimming: deriding all those that were ignorant
both, in good letters and the skill of swimming. A certain Ciiizen of Thebes
being asked how the state of every commonweal might be preserved? answered, by
the observation of justice, and chiefly where is discipline among young men,
and no covetousness among old men. Great assuredly is the force of civil
discipline in every commonweal, for through it, every subject is made apt for
all kind of virtue. Yet is it a thing notable, that some men with little or no
study, utterly void of art, nothing learned, and such as never tasted of
Philosophy, nor scarsly ever heard thereof, do nevertheless seem wise,
good, just and valiant, bearing office and governing civil affairs with great
reputation. Which so being, may happily move some men to require an other kind
of Philosophy, rejecting that we have spoken of, supposing those precepts
unfit for their years and capacities, alleging the saying of Physicians,
that, Art is long, but man's life short. And Plato also, that he is commonly
called happy: unto whom in age, or rather in the declination of life,
knowledge and true opinion of all things is granted. Experience tries what is
best, and time does teach us to be more wise. I confess wisdom is hardly
gotten, and (that which is most to be lamented) the frailty of man's life does
cause many impedimentes, which hinder the attaining thereof. Many there are,
whom fatal death in the midst of their life, or rather sooner, have taken
away. Some also more willing to follow the delights of body, then the virtue
of mind, do (as it were from Scilla and Caribdis) flee from knowledge, as a
hard and unreasonable life. What should I say of those that in dispite of
Minerua, are not content to do or think any thing worthy Philosophy? All
which reasons, albeit they do in some sort cut of our hope, to attain
Philosophy and perfect wisdom, yet ought they not utterly discourage and
make us desperate: For the length of man's life is not to be measured by number
of days, but by virtue, which wanting, although thou survive the years of
Nestor, or the Phoenix age, thy life shall be short, miserable, and unhappy.
What harm is it for thee to die young, if after this death, virtue does give
thee an other being? Silenus the Poet taken by thieves, and brought before King
Midas, wanting money wherewith to redeem himself, desired the king to grant
him liberty; offering in recompense thereof, to give him a thing for his
Majesty more precious then any silver or gold, which gift, pleasantly and
truly, he Man's life miserable.
described in these words, saying. The greatest good that God can give man, is
not to be borne, the next is, to die soon. Which after he had by diverse
reasons proved, the king did not only deliver him, but also reward him. Who
is he that desires more this frail, miserable, and incertaine life, then the
other blessed happy and eternal? the possession whereof is gained by the
exercise of true virtue? we live to die, why should we not rather die to live?
virtue has given thee happy life, thou shall then die happy. Therefore our
whole endeavor and study ought be, to attain unto virtue; whereof Philosophy is
the nurse and Tutresse, for thereby we shall either aspire hiest, or at the
least, behold many under us. It shall suffice, that albeit we are inferior to
the first, yet we are equal to the second or third, so shall we be chief of
those that come after us. Among things excellent, those which be next the best
are accounted great, for he that cannot aspire to the martial glory of
Achilles, needs not be ashamed to receive the praise due to Ajax or Diomedes:
or who so attaineth not the knowledge Vulgar and ordinary wisdom.
of Plato Lycurgus or Solon ought not therefore to be reckned without learning.
Many (as is aforesaid) have gained the possession of wisdom and skill of
government, not by reading the books of Philosophy, but by the observation of
their ancestors, example, custom, experience, domestical discipline, law,
manners, and a certain sagacitie of nature, being somewhat graced with honest
and liberal education. Of such men, in all commonweales many examples have
ever been. The Court is their learning; and use, law, ordinances, which the
customs of their forefathers have taught them. Demades, a man very wise and
well practiced in state, being asked what Tutor he had to instruct him
wisdom, answered: The Tribunal of the Athenians; thinking the Court and
experience of things to excel all the precepts of Philosophy. Neither did the
ancient Romans frame their just and honest form of government, so much
according to the books of Philosophers, as their own natural wits. What
should I say of our ancestors? who devised a commonweal, not unlike to the
Roman state. The discipline of Plato, Licurgus, Solon, Aristotle, and other
most notable Philosophers, and lawmakers, do differ from the Polonians, whose
greatness grew only by the virtue they received from themselves, and not from
books. Their wisdom was to honor virtue; and contrary to it, neither to
do, or think any thing. Therefore they used not their Kings and Senate, to
compound controversies, suppress contentions, or pronounce judgments, but to
receive from them examples and rules of virtue, and as cheiftaines in war
follow them in defense of their country. The golden world.
That old world (which the Poets called Golden) produced a race of men, of
themselves most happy and wise: and truly not unlike, for in that time of man's
first age, (virtue only reigning) the misery of vices and wickedness was not
known, for they loved an upright, just and simple life, whereunto virtue and
reason consents. They were therefore enforced to virtue and honesty, even by
the spur of their own nature, fleing vice, which because it was to them
unknown, might more easily be eschewed. Of that time Ouidius Naso writes most
excellently. Aurea prima sataest aetas, quae vindice nullo,
Sponte sua, sine lege, fidem rectumque colebat:
Poena metusque aberant, nec supplex turba timebat
Iudicis ora sui, sederant sine iudice t^ti.


But so soon as the son of truth declined, and with the clouds of vices
began to be darkened, forthwith the minds of men fell into wicked nesse, as
desirous rather to know vice then virtue, delighting in the one and shunning
the other. Then every man armed himself against virtue, thinking it was
lawful to offend others, to live ungodly, abusing reason, and employing it in
evil exercises, as the same Poet says. Protinus erupit, venae peioris in aeuum
Omne nefas, fugere pudor, verumque, fidesque;
In quorum subiere locum, fraudesque dolique,
Insidiaeque, and vis, and amor sceleratus habendi.


And surely that floode and rage of wickedness, had utterly drowned all
mankind, had not the force of nature and reason which remained in a few;
opposed it self against the fury of so great calamities. Those few then (as
it were proclaminge war with vice) persuaded other men, Who those were that
restored the golden world.
(who then lived as brute beasts) to reduce themselves to humanity, enforming
them not only by words, but also by writing, what was civility, virtue, and
honor, whereof grew laws in Cities as a tutresse to good life. So as men
might there learn to think and do those things which were honest, just and
godly: and to the end those laws might never perish, they caused them to be
written in books which are records of immortality, and preseruers of eternal
memory. From hence the precepts of virtue did take their beginning, and many
volumes of manners and duties of men have been written. After them followed
others, who aspyred not only to knowledge of the offices and duties belonging
to men, but also serched the nature of all things. This consideration of
human nature and world universal, was in one word by the Graecians called
Sophia, and the inuentors thereof were named Sophi: who afterward more
modestly (by example of Pithagoras) called themselves Philosophers. By this
mean, the light of reason, and human nature which lay hidden, and was made
dark with clouds of vice, did recover his virtue, and brought unto us the
knowledge both of divine and human things. Which knowledge is called
Philosophy: by the benefit whereof, mortal men recovered the ancient virtue,
simplicity, innocence and happiness. Whosoever in those days desired to live
honestly and well, flee vice, and know virtue: applied himself to read the
Philosophers books and mark their sayings, as men that utterly mistrusted
their own nature and wit infected with knowledge of vice, evil education,
sloth, delicacie, Idleness, opiniatry, and wicked conditions. Thus was that
golden world by Philosophers restored, and the old estate, nature and
felicity, was recovered. Therefore, whosoever does receive from thence the
precepts of virtue, honest life, and that ancient and golden humanity, is made
not only civil and wise, but also happy and Who is without Philosophy wise.
most blessed. All those that without Philosophy and learning are indeed wise,
do attain to their wisdom by one of these two ways. The one, by being
endued with divine nature, the virtue whereof comprehends, foreseeth, and
understands all things. In old time, amongst the Graecians, Theseus and
Cecrops: and among the Latins, Romulus and Numa governed commonweales, not
with Philosophy, but were instructed by the celestial Muses. The second mean
to govern without learning is, to be perfect in foreign experience, and a
vigilant obseruer of civil cautions. Such men if they be good, and permit all
things to be directed by law, are praiseable, albeit their wisdom is
imperfect, and subject to many perils and mutations: but if they be evil, then
are they so pernicious and hurtful to the commonweal, as nothing can be more.
Therefore Mitie said well, that there was nothing more unjust then ignorant
man; for he not knowing the true rules of government, thinking that the
experience of one court is the whole sum of civil discipline, does fill the
state full of tumultes and seditions, not conceiving by what means, reason,
cunning or counsel, such mischief is happened: and so being, wanteth-both
wisdom and judgment. Of which two things, ignorance the mother of vice and
all evil, has bereft him. Since then by the benefit of nature only, we cannot
be made happy and wise, our minds being ouercharged with burden of body,
endued with the knowledge of things evil, and that we live in such an age, as
does not (as in old time) bring forth plenty of good men: It behooves to
devise good means, whereby the mind may shake of the incumbers and vices of
body, so as cleared from the rage of time present, we may be revoked to the
ancient divine and perfect life of men: which thing may be done, by the help
of art and exercise, the one is attained by labor, the other gotten by
Philosophy. For the name of Philosophy.
Philosophy includes all things human and divine, the knowledge of all arts,
all virtues, all government of state, and every other thing which is either in
heaven or in earth contained. This is that, which delivers the mind
imprisoned in the body, from all affections, and teaches it counsel, to live
well, command, and govern. Our Counselor then instructed in the precepts of
Philosophy, shall not from thence forth be shut up, lurk unseen, be
solitary, walk unaccompanied, avoid the sight of men, nor cover his sloth
with keeping himself within doors: but shall converse with the multitude and
Citizens, and with his presence honor and aid the society of men. For no
virtue, wit, or wisdom, can The Counselor must not be solitary.
be famous, being shut up within the walls, but of force it must come forth and
show it self. And the wisdom of a solitary Citizen is no more profitable,
then the treasure of a covetous man buried in the ground, which ferueth him no
more, then if he possessed it not. What can be so great or noble, as that the
virtue of every particular man should be seen, and brought forth, to be heard
and seen of all men. For it is not easily known of what capacity, wisdom,
and judgment man is, unless proof be made thereof. As the strength of
wrastlers is known by the fall, and the swiftnes of the horse by his carrire:
so the virtue of a Senator, is by his actions tried. Thus have we (as I hope)
sufficiently spoken of that discipline, whereby a Counselor becomes happy,
and fit to govern the commonweal according to justice. And since only by the
virtue of nature, that happiness and knowledge cannot be attained, the same is
to be supplied by use. For we ought to learn, and so long to learn, as we are
ignorant, or (as Seneca says) so long as we live, and repent not that we have
profited. The most assured sign that we have profited in virtue, is, if we
find in ourselves, that the force of our reason and virtue has suppressed
unreasonable desires and affections, and if among men, we have lived justly,
wisely, and temperately. But let us now discourse of the manner of chosing our
Counselor, determining therein chiefly to observe comlines and equity. Among
other things which do preserve the commonweal The election of magistrates.
and happiness thereof, there is nothing better then to elect such men for
magistrates, as be endued with greatest wisdom, judgment and virtue: and
such as aspyre unto honor, not by power, not by force, not by ambition, not by
corruption; but by law, virtue, modesty and worthiness. Magistracy in all
commonweales is a thing of most reputation, because the magistrates are called
the best, wisest, and most honorable men Magistracy, is as it were an ornament
of virtue, bestowed on the best sort of men, for their virtue and well
deserving of the state. It is therefore the part of a good Citizen and good
man, entering into magistracy, to The duty of a good magistrate.
prefer the welfare and honor of the commonweal before his private
reputation and domestical commodity, not imitating Sylla, Cinna, Carbo,
Marius, Pompeius, Caesar and such other Senators, whose ambition, sedition and
factions, brought there commonweal well near to utter destruction. For they
would not live with equality, preferring the fruit of private glory, before
the profit and tranquillity of their country. As Lucanus writing of Pompeius
and Caesar says. Impatiensque loci fortuna secundi.
Nec quenquam iam far potest, Caesarue priorem:
Pompeiusque parem.


Ambitious men punishable.
In every well governed commonweal, this insatiable desire of honor must be
brideled, which the Romans did, so long as their state flourished: oppressing
practices, and punishing the ambition of such men as contrary to law and
honesty, either by force, corruption, or any other dishonest mean aspyred to
office. Some men distrusting their own virtue, do by bribes, advance
themselves unto the most sovereign dignities, which thing is more then any
other, foul, and pernicious to all estates. For such men in respect of riches,
do despise both virtue and honesty: and think that honor or virtue does not
Couetiousnes perilous to the commo^weale
become any man, but him that is rich: which is the cause, that they attend too
their private, not the public commodity; because they know all honors and
dignities, are given to rich, and not to virtuous men, whereof proceeds, that
in every such state reigns covetousness and immesurable desire of wealth: and
of them, grows voluptuousnes, deceit, fraud, enemitie, contempt of God, Law
and Magistrates. Insuch states, men embrace not that which is honest, but that
which is profitable: Magistracy ought be given to virtuous men, with out
respect of riches.
for finding no reward due unto virtue, every one holds the virtuous man
under, by fraud, deceit, and power: so as the poorer sort do live in the
commonweal oppressed with misery, and are forced to serve the rich, as more
worthy persons: not in respect of virtue, but of power, fraud, and subtlety.
For they do always prefer private utility, before honesty and virtue,
selling, coarsing, and rejecting all laws, liberty, rightes and justice it
self. Iugurtha, seeing great store of corruptible Senators in Rome (as it were
exclaming) said: That that City was salable, and would quickly perish, if
any buier could be found. The Lacedaemonians consulting of the continuance of
their state, were by Appollo answered. That Sparta should be destroyed by no
means, but only by avarice: and to avoid that fatal prediction, they
rejected the use of all gold, silver, and brass, making a coin of iron,
wherewith men should be less delighted, and in keeping thereof more combred.
Great care therefore must be taken in every commonweal, that the offices should
not be given rather to the rich then the virtuous men, and that those may be
punished, that seek with money to oppress virtue. For it is a most ready
mean to bring that state to ruin, where more regard is had to riches then
virtue, because the subjects will labor rather to attain wealth then virtue,
disposing themselves wholly to heap up coin, which makes them effeminate;
fraudulent, desirous of other men's goods, lascivious, and abounding in all
kinds of vices. Where virtue is not esteemed, the Priest contemns piety,
the soldier lays by his sword, the Senator seeks not wisdom, fidelity
and diligence, and the people make no account of civil discipline; which so
being, into their places enters, audaciousnes, violence, injustice,
lasciuiousnes, and barbarism, the sink of all vices. It is therefore
necessary, that good order and form be observed in the election of
magistrates, so as in the choice, chief respect may be had to the virtue of
good men. As touching the mean offices of state, by what order they should be
bestowed, it is not our intent to discourse. It shall suffice, that the laws
and common custom be therein observed. But for so much as among all sorts of
magistrates, the place of him whom we call a Counselor is of most reputation,
upon him (as it were a foundation) the whole weight of all other Counsels, and
welfare of the commonweal rests. It behooves therefore that the choice of
Evil magistrates the confusion of co^monweals
him be made with great care and circumspection. Every state having evil
Counselors, is most evil governed, and no sign of equity, justice or
religion, will therein appear: But fraud, deceit, injustice, and impiety
reigning in magistrates, shall easily, by imitation, corrupt others. For we see
by experience, that through the vices of governors commonweales be changed.
Monarchies become Tyrannies, Aristocraties are altered into Oligarchias,
Democraties converted into Ochlocraties: In the election of Counselors three
things to be considered.
Therefore in election of Counselors, these three things are chiefly to be
observed: of whom, to whom, and how they ought be chosen. To the first we
have (as I hope) already sufficiently spoken, when we said that in the number
of natural subjects the Counselor ought be elected, and thereof a little
before we discoursed: Now are we to tell to whom, and how Counselors are to
be chosen. Wherein we have thought good to resite the customs of other
commonweales, which being known, we may the more easily conceive what kind of
election fitteth with every state, and which of them ought be accounted best
and most profitable. In the election of all Magistrates, and chiefly
Counselors, all people in every state were wont to respect three things,
liberty, riches and virtue. For what does depend of those three, and every of
them, is to be considered. Those that desire the form of a popular state, do
chiefly respect liberty, for there is nothing that l^^deth them to like and
desire popular government so much, as the sweet Popular liberty.
desire of liberty. Because they think liberty consists principall^e in
commanding and obeying by turn, judging it reasonable, that all Citizens
should command, or at the least sometimes to command and sometimes to obey.
Therefore in all such commonweales, the Magistrates are chosen by lot, wherein
Chance and Luck do help more, then Reason or Wisdom. Which order was
invented for the preservation of liberty. For all men desiring to be thought
and accounted equals, do use therein the aid of fortune and chance, to the
end that the rich and poor, the eloquent and simple, the mighty and weak,
the wise and foolish, should be equal, and that no one by wealth, eloquence,
wisdom or friendship, should oppress an other, and consequently usurp the
state with the liberty thereof common to them all. Imagening moreover, that
the common good, profit, and liberty, may be preserved, better by many then
one, or diverse. In those states therefore the condition of all men is a like,
and it makes no matter whether they be rich or poor, learned or foolish, so
long as they be borne free men. In commonweales governed by a few, the order
is, that a small number of wise, discreet, or rich men should govern, but in
popular states it is contrary, for there the ignoble, poor men and
artifizers, have equal procaedence with the rich men. We read that the
popular state of Athens The Athenia^ co^monweale.
was governed in two sorts: the one, by few Magistrates, which were either
rich men or wise men, the other consisted of all the whole number of free
Citizens. The first was instituted by Theseus, who assembled the people into
Cities, living before dispersed sauagely in the field, persuading the most
potente personages, that the Democratie ought be preferred before the
Monarchy; to the end the sovereignty should rest in the people, and he
himself would be but as a Captain general in war, and defender of the law:
but in all other respects every of them should be his equals. Moreover he
instituted a convocation of the whole people, making this difference betwixt
the Noble men and Artificers and Housbandmen; that is to wit, that the noble
sort should have the ministry of the Church, the sovereign offices, and
judicial places: but otherwise to live in equal honor and dignity with the
rest. This first Prince (as Aristotle says) would not frame any kingdom, but
conforming himself to the disposition of people, contrived such a commonweal,
as in the judgment of all men was thought most allowable, most just and most
contentfull. In like manner he devised such a popular state, as should not be
governed by violence and fury of the multitude, but all things to be qualified
by judgment and reason, so as by honest living and obedience of law, the
commonweal might enjoy her happiness. This commonweal begone by Theseus, was
after governed by Draco, who gave thereunto certain bloody laws. Then Solon
through sedition and discord of the Citizens, reduced the government into the
hands of a few, somewhat altering the laws and magistrates. Last of all,
that Democratie came unto the hands of Clisthenes, Aristides and Pericles, and
after all them, to Demosthenes. These men being pleasers of people, reduced all
the Citizens to equality, increasing the tribes, entering servants and
strangers into the company of Citizens. Clisthenes invented the law called
Ostracismus, which was executed upon those of whom there was any opinion
conceived, that their wisdom or virtue might hinder the popular liberty.
Aristides judged it a thing reasonable, that banished men and the basest
multitude, should be capable of magistracy. Pericles diminished the authority
of the Senate, and weakened the dignity thereof. Demosthenes finding the state
fully in possession of the multitude, by a solemn oration allowed and
commended What kind of Democracy is just.
thereof. Aristotle and his Tutor Plato, with other political Philosophers, do
think that the popular form of commonweal is not unjust, being accompanied
with good laws, and a people willing to obey the same. For who is he that can
mislike that state, wherein each man has a law, to be as king and keeper of
his liberty, and of the law, himself is Prince and Lord. Surely I could
well allow of such a commonweal, where it not subject to great tumultes,
Democracy inconstant.
seditions and sudden mutations. First, who is he that knows not the nature
of common people is mutable, and will use liberty immoderately. For indeed,
the multitude either obeys slauishly, or does command cruelly: being also
entised or rather filled with the sweetness of liberty, so soon as it has
by some action aspired to greatness or glory, it becomes insolent, desiring
to be thought chief, and holding equality unjust, does use most intemperately
to bear hate, sedition, and ambition. So as, of such a commonweal grows an
insolent plebeyall domination. It also sometimes happens, that men blinded
with love of riches and wealth, do chose rich men only to be gouerners and
keepers of common liberty, supposing them to be most worthy and fit to bear
office in the state. Such a commonweal is called the authority of a few, or
an Oligarchia, for those Citizens do bear the soucraigne offices, who are
above the rest of most wealth and substance. The Senators and other Magistrates
in that state, are Who are chosen magistrates in an Oligarchia.
partly by election, partly by lot, and partly by general consent, and sometime
by a few created. And because the choice is made according to men's riches,
each man indeuoreth himself not to attain virtue but wealth, knowing the
offices are as it were thereunto due. In such commonweales, so great
veneration and worship is given to riches, as there is nothing so holy, so
godly or religious, that covetousness, (the fatal plague of all
gouermentes,) cannot violate and subuerte. They that in the election of
Magistrates do only respect virtue, and by it do measure the felicity of
the state, do What kind of magistrates are chosen in Monarchies and
Aristocraties.
inhabit kingdoms or Optimaties. For those that obey Kings, whether they be
by election or natural descent, the people believe them above all other men to
be most divine, most wise and most worthy. And they that desire to be governed
not by one alone but diverse, do in election of their governors observe the
like reason. Because among those men choice is made of the best, most just, and
sufficient persons to be Magistrates, without attributing any thing to lot or
fortune: for each man examineth his own judgment touching the virtue of them,
whom they desire to advance, which is a respect of singular commendation in
the bestowing of honors. For (as the Poet says) it is a great matter to be
poynted out with the finger, every one saying, this is he. Wheresoever chance
has more power then reason, there is little place left for virtue. Yet do I
not, in a free state mislike the suffrage of chance, that goes What kind of
lotting is best.
before or follows the judgment of good men, touching particular men's virtue.
For in that co^monweale where is most plenty of good men, there to admit chance
for judge of each man's worthiness, may be thought reasonable. By that means men
in office shall account themselves the most worthy Citizens, knowing they are
advanced as well by the judgment of good men, as the sentence of fortune. This
order of election is observed by the Venetians. The like institution Solon did
make in Athens for chosing the 500 Senators. For out of every Tribe was chosen
so many, as were thought fit to become Senators whose names they used to put
into one Pott, and into an other*Pott as many beans, the one half white, the
other half black, then so many as happened upon the white beans were
pronounced Senatos, and those that lighted upon the black beans as repulced,
returned home without office. Therefore Thucydides called that Counsel Senatum
a Faba.

Among the Romans (sometime Lords of the whole world) the Senators were
chosen diverse ways, according to the diversity of times. What considerations
the Romans had in the election of Senators.
For either they were chosen by the Kings, Consuls, Dictators, Tribunes of the
people, Censors or Chieftaines. In all which elections till the time of
Augustus no mention is made of lottings, but the virtue, fame, family, age,
order, office before borne, wealth, and profession were chiefly respected Now
for so much as there is nothing more excellent, nor more divine then virtue, we
think expedient, that in the choice of Counselors chief regard must be had
thereunto, because through it, Counselors be made just, valiant and wise. It
behooves all Magistrates, in every well governed commonweal to be endued with
virtues, and chiefly those that are aspired to the dignity of Cousellors. For
Counselors be reputed the defenders of laws, the moderators of liberty, and
conseruers of the whole commonweal. And as the commonweal is many times
infected and corrupeed, by the vices and wickedness of Magistrates: The evil
example of magistrates worse then their vices.
so is the same corrected and repaired by their virtues: Neither is the
mischief of their faults so great, as that many others will imitate those
evil examples. Such are the people of every state, as are the manners of those
that govern; and what mutation of manners the Prince uses, the same is by the
subjects followed. Plato most excellently and wisely says, that the estate of
commonweales is changed, like unto the alteration of musitions voices. But it
was better said of one other, that the change of a Princes life, and the
alteration of manners in great Magistrates, would also change the ma^ners,
customs, institutions, rights and the co^monweale it self. And truly I think
that evil Princes do deserve worst of the co^monweale, not in that they do
euill-themselues, but that thereby all others become infected* and therefore
the vices are noe so hurtful, as are their vicious exsamples. Such men
therefore as not only with their own actions, but their examples do
prejudice the state, are most severely to be punished. How is it possible, for
any man to persuade others to virtue and observation of law, himself living
otherwise? The Romans laughed Scylla to scorn, that being a man most
intemperate and delighting in licenciousnes, did notwithstanding use to exhort
and compel others to sobriety, temperance and frugalitie. Lysander.
Who would not also find fault with Lysander, though he did contrary to
Scylla, allow those vices in the Citizens from which Lycurgus.
himself refrained. But Lycurgus is in deed justly to be commended, because
he never commanded others to do any thing, which himself would not first do
and firmly observe. Therefore they, unto whom the commonweal has given
authority to choose Counselors and other Magistrates, ought to be of great
judgment, and high wisdom. For they should elect those whom they think
to excel all others in wit, wisdom, judgment, virtue and good action. I
do therefore greatly dislike the popular order of lotting, to find out men
fit for this purpose, because the people by help thereof, desiring to
preserve their equality and liberty, do incur such error, as they
commonly choose men most unworthy the name and virtue of a Senator. Wherefore
they ought in preferuing of liberty, to be most careful of that which might
chiefly profit the commonweal, not giving (in respect of commanding and
obeying by turn) the government to the slothful and foolish sort: for every
man lives with equality enough in the state, so long as the same be governed
What election of Magistratesis most perfect.
by the wisest, discretest and grauest Citizens. We therefore determine, that
election of Counselors is most perfect, which proceeds from men excelling in
wisdom and justice, because they being virtuous, Whether Senators ought be
chosen by one or diverse.
cannot permit any thing iniust, either in themselves or in the commonweal. In
this our estate being governed by a King, a Senate, and people, some man may
doubt whether the Senators ought be chosen by diverse or one alone? Where diverse
have authority to choose, either all subjects are included or part of them: as
in a popular state the one, and in an Optimatie the other is used. Which so
ever of them does claim right of electio* must of necessity disdain the
other; for the people do affect liberty, and the noblemen desire authority.
Wherefore, either they fall into sedition one against the other, (...) agree by
law, or consent that either of them shall enjoy the liberty of election. And
though it so do ^^^ne to pass, yet will if not be long, before they return
to their former discention. For every one knowing he has gotten a partial
judge of his virtue and wisd^^^, and believing himself to be disdained of the
contrary faction, practices ^a^red and conspitacy in the state, and rejecting
the ornaments of ver^ue (trusting to ^o^^ed friends) studieth ambitously by
followers and corruption to aspire unto authority, and what cannot be attained
unto by virtue he extorteth by force and violence. So as good subjects are by
evil oppressed, and in place of justice, virtue and wisdom, The multitude no
(...) judge (...).
deceit, fraud, vice, and injustice do govern all. Surely it is a thing most
perilous, that the magistrates of any state should be chosen by the multitude,
which is no reasonable of indifferent judge of menworthines. For many times,
either it enuieth or favors those unto whom they give their liberty, not
judging according to reason, but is often moved by favor, or drawn with
desire to honor those that ambitiously labor to aspyre. And to conclude,
whenever the multitude do make choice, the same is not performed according
to discretion, knowledge, and judgment, but fury and rashness. There is not (as
Tully says) any Counsel, Reason, Judgment, or diligence in the base people,
and wise men have ever thought good to suffer those things which the people
do, but not ever to commend their doings. The multitude have always had the
desire, but not the judgment to bestow the dignities, for their voices are
won by flattery, not gained by desert. This custom being by law or use
allowed in other commonweales, The election of Counselors appertains to one.
shall not be admitted in our state; forwe recommend the election of our
Counselor, to one alone, being of all men judged for virtue, wisdom and
knowledge most worthy: thinking, that one may more easily then many, eschew
those perils, which happen in chosing Counselors. But let him to whom this
authority belongs, receive the same as given him by law or consent of the
people, and not aspyre thereto by force, corruption or Tyranny. The custom of
free people, in the election of their Senators, unto whom they commit their
welfare, is to chose them among themselves, or else to give that authority of
election to an other* which we read the Romans sometimes to have done, who
did not themselves choose the Senate, as they did other magistrates, but
committed the doing thereof to one man alone, of most excellency, good life,
manners, authority, wisdom, and judgment. Romulus the first father of that
City, elected a hundred Senators, which custom was used by the other kings
succeeding. But when the kings (through the insolent government of Tarquintus)
were removed, this power of election (according to the quality of time) was
somewhat altered, yet not given to many. For till the state returned to a
Monarchy, the Senators were chosen either by the Consuls, the Censor, the
dictator, or cheiftaine. Our ancestors have most discretely brought that
custom of the Romans into this commonweal, giving unto the King power and
authority to make choice of Counselors, and be an only judge of each man's
virtue; electing those whom for age, wisdom, and nobility he thought
worthy. We therefore do determine the power and right of electing
Counselors, to appertain only unto the king, wherein, his greatest wisdom
and judgment ought be employed, not calling any to Counsel for skill in
domestical affairs, for riches gained by agriculture, nor for skill in
architecture: but for wisdom in government of the commonweal, for
preservation of Subjects, and knowledge in good and wholesome laws. If our
bodies be diseased with sickness, we consult with learned Physicians, or if we
want garments or howses, we seek for skillfull Artificers: why should we not
also (as a thing of most importance) look out and choose such men to govern
the people and commonweal, whose wisdom can conserve the same in peace and
tranquillity. It therefore behooves a Prince in the choice of such men, to use
the whole force of his capacity, wisdom What things are to be respected in
choice of Cou^sellors.
and diligence. For he is not only to see, that in the Counselor there be
those parts whereof we have spoken; to wit, that he be a natural subject,
well borne and bred, and endued with those arts and disciplines, which are
thought worthy a civil man destined to govern the state, but he must also
consider the quality of his manners, fame, famelie, age and virtue. It is
moreover to be known in what office or services the Counselor (before his
election) has been used, and with how much endeavor, fidelity, wisdom, and
diligence he has served: For from some other place of employment, the
Counselor ought be chosen: which the Romans used, electing their Senators
only out of that number, whom they called Patres, which was as it were, the
nourserie of Counselors. To be short, whosoever choseth Counselors, ought
above all, to lay before his eyes the profit of the commonweal, whereby he
shall easily conceive, what men and Counselors the state wants, and how much
or little every one can help, how great a burden each man can bear, and
what is to weighty for his force. Let us hereafter discourse wherein all these
things consist, what good the state receives by a Counselors wisdom, and
what duties he is bound unto. By that which has been already said, the
King may sufficiently conceive what things are considerable, to know a perfect
Counselor, and likewise a Counselor shall find what is to be observed and
used in governing. But lest the discourse of this institution should seem over
long, we think fit to speak of those qualities in one other book following,
for not werying the readers mind with many words, and thereby become over
tedious.

Finis Libri Primi.
The second Book.
WE have (as I hope) in the former Book sufficiently at large discoursed of
the first principles appertayning to the Counselors dignity, how many kinds
of commonweal there is, and which of them ought be accounted most perfect. We
have also laid the foundation of civil felicity, which is in the society of
men, a thing most notable and divine. Now our intent is in this book, to set
down those virtues which are required, not only in a new magistrate, but an
old and expert Counselor, so shall the science of government be complete
perfect and fully finished.

The knowledge of commonweales, necessary in a Counselor.
First, it behooves a Counselor to know the form of that commonweal wherein
he is to give counsel and be a minister, what people, what laws and liberties
are thereunto belonging: what manners are there used, and by what discipline,
use, and custom, the state is governed; he ought likewise to know, not only
those means whereby the state may be ornified, increased and preserved, but
also how the same may be weakened, hindered, or subverted. For as that Pilot is
not accounted perfect and skillful, who knows only how to sail and keep
course in quiet seas but he that by his Art understands the nature and force
of tempests, winds and storms, how to eschew perils, and by his art save the
ship tormented with fury of wind and water, leading her to ha^borow and haven
of safety: even so the wisdom of a Counselor, governing a quiet and
peaceable state deserves praise, yet much less then he, who finding the same
wrought with winds of sedition, and afflicted with storms of great
dissension, restores it unto good and desired pacification, making the people
contented, tractable, peaceable, and void of perturbation. Themistocles is
much commended, for reducing the Athenians (being then savage and simple) to
live in the City, and subject themselves to laws. But much more ought Solon
to be praised, who finding the City, disturbed with rebellion and civil
war, reduced it to union, reestablishing the law, and confirming the
Magistrates. Neither do I think that Camillus for having delivered Rome from
the Galli is less to be honored, then Romulus that first builded the City.
Or is not Cicero to be preferred before the Fabii? he having recovered Rome
from the wicked hand of Catiline, and they undertaking a domestical war
against the Veienti. Pompeius loved the commonweal, but Cicero preserved it,
so as Pompeius might say, that unless Cicero had preserved the state, he
should have wanted place where to triumph. Therefore Cicero would sometimes
gloriously say, that others had done things honorably, but the thanks for
conservation of the state was due unto himself. Who thinks the virtue of
Caesar or Pompeie, to be compared with the virtue of Scipio Africanus? yet did
they most notable acts for their country, but he finding the same broken,
weak, and as it were within one days space to become subject to the Arms of
Haniball, did not only rescue and recover it, but also increased and enlarged
it; which proves the saying true. Non minor est virtus, quam querere, parta
tueri.


Cyrus in conquering kingdoms was happy, but in holding them unhappy, he knew
the art to win, but was ignorant how to keep. And surely those days
wherein we are preserved, ought be to us more dear, then that wherein we were
borne. Likewise they do better deserve of mankind, whose wisdom has
devised the welfare of men, then they, from whom their generation or
conception proceeds. I do therefore wish the Counselor to be endued with
such knowledge, as consulteth not only upon things present, but also foreseeth
things to come, comprehending in mind the whole state, diligently considering
all the chances, perils, mutations and inclinations thereof, whereby he shall
with more facility conceive the mischieues which happen, and The knowledge of
sundry states very profitable.
either by foreseeing divert them, or being grown, extirpe them. Neither do I
think fit, that our Counselor should be igorant in the government of other
states, for by such examples he may conceive the laws wherewith they are
governed, the manners they have used, in what sort they have been altered,
amended, and preserved. Likewise with what authority each law is made, what
is the order of their public Counsels, with the duty belonging to every of
them, what liberty, dignity, authority and jurisdiction appertains to
every commonweal. In this our state, for so much as the Senate is a mean
betwixt the king and people, it behooves every Senator to know, what is the The
state of Polonia.
majesty of a king, his greathes and jurisdiction, and likewise what is the
right and liberty of subjects, because the king and people many times
contend one against the other, the one desiring immesurable liberty, the
other affecting oppression. The intemperate contention of those humors do
greatly afflict the commonweal. For if the one does prevail, he puts on
the person of a Tyrant, or if the other be victorious, thereof are engendered as
many thousand Tyrants as heads of men. The tyranny of many, is always more
cruel then of one. For the one takes end either by death, or by sacietie of
commanding, but the insolent and insatiable licentiousnes of the multitude,
does feed the vain of tyranny; the venom whereof, does long after infecte
their posterity. Therefore the Senate ought be exceeding diligent in
preserving the liberty due and common to every one, and from that mean
place, (as from a watching house or tower) to foresee the welfare of all, and
take order that through sedition or contention the commonweal be not
indemnyfied. For the Senate is a judge betwixt force and fear, liberty and
servitude, the The art of Tyrants.
king and people. Tyrants were wont to use certain sleightes, in arming
themselves against the liberty of people. First by removing all good and wise
men, with every other person having power in the state (because the virtue of
good men is to Tyrants suspected) and that one, compel the rest either by
fear or force to become servile, and they themselves to do all things
according to their own lust and pleasure. Such counsel Periander gave unto
Thrasibulus, persuading him to cut of the highest spikes of corn, meaning be
should put the most noble Athenians to death. The like subtlety was followed
by Sextus Tarquinius the son of Lucius. He being suborned by his father,
pretending to be banished, fled fraudulently unto the Gabii, where having so
much acquaintance and friendship as he thought suffized, sent secretly unto his
father to know what his pleasure was should be done, who leading the
messenger into the garden, there walked, and in his presence with his staff
struck of the heads of all the Dazles, which being reported to his son, he
put the chief noble men of Gabia to death, by force and injustice usurping the
commonweal and liberty. The Tyrants do also oftentimes inhibite the society
of Subjects, their meetings, their conferences, conuentions, feastings, and the
study of honest disciplines. Tyrants also many times, do sow discord among
the people, to the end, that filled with hate and private displeasure, they
may dispose themselves to war and sedition, and thereby be impouerished, and
being poor, and the war ended, the offenders are forced to pay for pardon,
so that every way fleesed of their riches and made needy, they do become base
minded and unfit to defend both liberty and well doing. These and many such
like things the Counselor ought endeavor himself to know, and by foresight
provide that the commonweal be not by those means afflicted. The office of
Kings.
Let him likewise understand, that the office of a king is not to care or study
so much for his own private profit, as the common commodity of his subjects,
to observe his laws; to preserve the rights and liberty of the people, and to
maintain the authority and reputation of his counsel. For kings were
instituted to aid good men against the wicked and ungodly, and to them was
given absolute power to revenge injuries, preserve liberty, and beiudges of
each man's virtues and vices. A good king ought therefore to have no less care
of those he governs, then has the shepherd of his flock, that is, to make
them blessed and happy. Homer calls king Agomemnon the shepherd of people,
whom Plato does imitate, calling him shepherd and keeper of mankind.
Moreover a king ought to govern his people: Not as masters do their
servants, but as the father rules his children. Wherefore, as it is the part
of good parents sometimes to rebuke their children, sometimes to admonish and
cherish them; and sometimes also to correct and punish them. So should a
Prince behave himself toward his subjects, as well for the peoples
preservation, as the safety of the commonweal, showing himself sometimes
severe, sometimes gentle and placable, defending and enlarging the common
profit with no less care, then a father provides for the sustentation of The
difference betwixt kings and Tyrants.
his children. Thus appears the difference betwixt kings and Tyrants, the
one does care for the common commodity, the other studieth only for private
profitte. The end of the Tyrants endeavor, is voluptuousnes, but the end of a
kings study is honor. To excel in riches is proper to Tyrants, but a kings
chief desire, is honor. A Tyrant desires the aid of strangers, but a king
is guarded with his own subjects. Alfonsus king of Arragon being asked which
of his subjects he held most dear? answered, I love them better that wish me
well, then those that fear me: which seems reasonable, because fear is
accompanied with hatered. A King therefore should be no more safe by defense of
Arms, then love, good will, and fidelity of subjects. He is also to be
honored as the minister of public Counsel, the defender of laws, and
conseruer of common right and liberty. For better performing of all which
offices, he shall do well to harken to the advice of his Counselors and (as
his parents) love and honor them. Traianus that great Emperor of the world,
used continually to call the Senate his father: For like as the father does
foretell his son of those things he thinks profitable: so does a Senate
Counsel the king how the state may be preserved, and by what laws and orders
it should be governed. Of these and other things appertayning to the office
of a king, or that have been received by law, use or custom, a Counselor
The popular sort inconstant.
ought to be fully informed. The popular sort of men, is for the most part
mutable, by reason of the diversity of their ages. For of them, some being
young, some old, and some of middle age, it must needs be, that great
dissentions should arise, every man having a will and opinion diverse from
others, and because they are all free men, each man frames his life and
manners according to his own fancy, supposing there is liberty, where all
men do that which they lust and like. The diversity of manners does breed
among them variety of minds, and thereof does follow sundry judgments
touching the state, law, and liberty, whereof hate, displeasure and seditions
do ensue, so as all men are not equally affected to the commonweal.

Who are good subjects.
Those that be honestly brought up, naturally good, and well trained in
learning, not surious, nor voluptuous, not womannish or licentiously given, are
most willing obseruers of laws, rights, concord, and civil society, not
sweruing (as men say) one inch from the rules of virtue, fidelity, and glory of
their ancestors, because they keep and retain all those things as inheritance
descended from their forefathers. That sort of men is in the commonweal to be
reputed good subjects: But they whose folly has been nourished by
domestical liberty, being borne at home and not trained up abroad, whereby
they have never seen, done, or Seditious subjects.
heard any thing notable, magnificent or noble, are to be thought persons
seditious, crastie and perilous subjects, yet would they be called and thought
good, honest, quiet and modest, notwithstanding the contempt they have to
imitate honestmen. And to the end they should not be thought blockheades and
fit for nothing, devise some new practice to gain themselves fame, glory and
commendation. And it comes many times to pass, that pretending the patronage
of liberty, by public persuasion and fury, they take matters in hand in
appearance godly, but in truth profane. And if any of them be by birth or
education apt for sedition, and excel the rest in wit and eloquence, they
offer themselves unto the ignorant sort to be captains and reformers of laws,
religion, and order, conspiring against the King, the Counsel and all good
subjects, as men that had taken in hand the renouation of the whole
commonweal: Such men were of the Romans called Plebicolae. who to save
themselves from some punishment which before they deserved, do take upon the^
the name of defending liberty, stirring new troubles and alterations in the
state; either else moved by some sudden fury of mind, doeperswade the people
to discord and sedition, or else having entangled or rather prodigally
consumed their inheritance and substance, (desirous to have fellows in
misery, and perish rather publicly then alone,) were always wont to attempt
rebellion. Of such disposition were the Romans called Gracchus, Clodius,
Catiline. And in Athens Calistines, with many others.

As the body of our commonweal consists in the conjunction of three
estates, whose universal consent and temperature does make it most perfect and
happy: so if the same body be divided or dismembered, that state becomes of
all others the mostlame, imperfect, and unfortunate. For all other commonweales
are subject to one only mutation, because they rest upon one only simple
government: But our state being mixed and made of three, must of force be
subject to as many conuersions and inclinations. If the king abuses his
office, the state has one Tyrant, if the Senate so do, there are diverse
Tyrants. But if the power of people does surpass the authority and force of
both the other, then the commonweal is afflicted with an infinite number of
most pernicious Tyrants. Wherefore if in such a State, the office, liberty,
dignity, authority and jurisdiction of every of them, be not confined and
bound by laws certain, so as both by fear and punishment they be compelled
to observe law and live honestly, all good men shall there in vain look for
quietness.

The office of Counselors.
The proper office of a Consellor (as Cicero says) is to imagine he bears
the person of the state: the reputation whereof, he is bound to maintain, to
observe the laws, set forth the proceedinges, and be mindful of things,
committed to his fidelity. Also it becomes him The duty of private persons.
as a private man, to live in equality with other subjects, neither debasing nor
extolling him self, and to desire only those things in the commonweal, which
be peaceable and honest: so shall every one perform the true duty of a good
and loyal subject. It also becomes subjects moderately to use their
liberty. For as Quintius said, temperate liberty is profitable to every
City, but overmuch liberty is evil, and makes men headdie or desperate. To
suppress the licentiousnes of evil subjects, severity of law is required:
Therefore it behooves the state to foresee, that through not punishing of evil
men's offenses, the good subjects be forced to suffer at their hands. For the
commonweal ought be accounted the possession of good and not of evil men.
Moreover, it cannot be, but in every commonweal, seditions and motions will
arise, and (Hannibal said) there was no great City that could live long in
quiet, unless it had some enemies abroad, because otherwise, domestical foes
would therein arise. And as mighty bodies Great states most subject to trouble.
seem assured from external harm, so are they ever bourdened with their own
weight. Besides that, since we are men, we must not (as the Comoedian says)
think our selves free from any misaduenture that may happen to mankind. For
although we be wise, provident and good, yet are we men, and by instinct of
nature less proan to virtue then vice, and in like sort there is no City that
wants wicked, vicious and disorderly people. Therefore whenever the floode
of troubles does In appeasing sedition, what order is to be taken.
happen to arise in the state, the office of a Counselor (as Cicero says) is
patiently to endure the peoples wilfulness, to win the hearts of those that
are vnasiured, keep them that are already won appease the offended, and
above all provide that the worst sort may not in any thing have the advantage:
It is not also amiss that sometimes he wink and seem not to see, so that
those faults whereat he winketh do proceed rather of error then
wilfulness. But to pardon such as voluntarily have offended or committed any
impious act against the commonweal, the honest orders of men, or the law, is
not only to be thought pernicious, but also wicked and detestable. Wherefore
in suppressing so great a fury and rashness of men's fancies, the Counselor
ought to employ great wisdom and diligence, and let him therein chiefly use
those two precepts which Cicero recites from Precepts of Plato.
the mouth of Plato, the one is, that always he look well unto the common
profit, referring thereunto all his actions, and forget every private respect:
the other is, to be careful for the whole body of the commonweal, least in
taking the protection of part, he does abandon the rest. For who so defends
one only sort of men, does induce hatred and sedition: which two plagues, do
debilitate and subvert the state. He ought therefore to be as careful of the
people as of the King, of the nobility as of the meaner sort, of the rich as
of the poor, of the wise, as the simple, and so consequently of all sorts and
estates of men. The omission of which rule, was that which afflicted the
Athenians, and filled Rome with sedition, tumults and civil wars. Let him
therefore in all things observe indifferency and equality, for thereby the
commonweal shall be assured, and the people in good will, love, Equality of
commonw. of great necessity.
and peace preserved. In that state where small respect is borne unto equality,
there quarrel, contention, and enmity do daily arise: which comes to
pass, for that men equal do aspyre to things unequal, or unequal men to
things equal. But men of one fortune do best consort together, and like will to
like as the proverb says. They therefore that excel others in riches or
birth, are not to be preferred, neither are they to be equally esteemed who are
equal in liberty, but those that excel Wherein equality consists.
others in virtue, are to be accounted both superiors and equals: that is, in
respect of law or number, (as the Arithmetricians call it) they are equal, but
in dignity, they are superior, because in the bestowing of honors, virtue is
chiefly respected. For who so is most virtuous dedeserueth most honor and
glory, and this equality because it is measured by reason and judgment, is
called Geometrical. I do therefore think fit that the Senator should observe
both equalities. In the distribution of justice and conservation of liberty,
he is to be toward all men indifferent. For whom the law has made equal,
ought to live in rule and liberty, neither giving nor taking from one more
then an other, as the line of law does direct him. The rule of which equality
Equality Arithmeticall.
is easily observed. For the condition thereof is in all commonweales
prescribed, which is, that each man should enjoy so much as by law, custom,
or conuention to him appertains, wherein heed must be taken, that neither
wealth, power or parentage be respected, but that as well the poor as rich, the
noble as ignoble may be equally judged. As touching equality, according to the
judgment of reason, whereby men Equality Geometrical.
would be preferred and honored more then others, is not so easelie discerned.
For to judge of each man's valewe, wisdom and virtue, with the honors to them
due, is rather proper to a divine, then human wit. The reason thereof is, we
are often deceived in our opinion of that which is accounted good, neither be
we ever upright Judges of other men's deserving. Herein therefore rests the
difficulty, for who so can truly judge of men's virtue, shall thereby show
himself rather a God then man. In conclusion, the commonweal is not preserved
by any virtue more, then that: who so then in governing is a just judge of each
man's value and virtue (for it rests in his censure,) and knows also, unto
whose hands to commit or not commit the state, whom to love and whom to hate
whom to reward and whom to punish, shall make the government most quiet: but
not knowing so to do, the same becomes of all other the most wicked*
corruptible and disordered. Therefore in popular commonweales where the
multitude is rude and ignorant of discourse and reason the people are rewarded
and punished by lot, for they pray God that each man may find fortune according
to his merit. Notwithstanding for so much as the temeritie of lotting, obeys
rather to fortune then reason, in the conservation of equality we allow of
wisdom and human pollecie to be Judge, rather then fortune. With which
virtues if the Counselor be endued, he shall easelie discern what ought in all
things to be done. And therein he shall imitate the duty of a good husband.
For he having within his house diverse honest persons, esteems one for his
age, an other for his virtue, and a third for his condition: So the Counselor
in the commonweal should have respect to each man's age, virtue, condition and
calling. He must also understand the Wherein law and populer liberty consists.
right and liberty of people, (which as they think) do consist chiefly in being
capable of the offices, to have power to make and correct laws, to speak
freely in matters that concern liberty, law or injury, not to be arrested or
imprisoned without order of law or authority, nor be unjustly judged, robbed
or forced to pay tribute. They desire moreover not to obey officers contrary
to law, not to be hurt of those that be more mighty, nor be oppressed by
force, to have liberty to desire and do allthinges that is not by law and
reason forbidden, to defend their law and liberty from Tyrants, to be
partakers of the Parliaments, to believe the King of highest authority, and the
Council of greatest understanding. For where the Senate is Lord of public
Councelles, and all things by it determined, are of other estates of men
obeyed, where liberty is in the people, authority in the King, the Council
in the Senate, there is the best temperature of liberty and equality,
chiefelie if the laws be always obeyed. The Counselor ought likewise to
foresee, that the commonweal be not molested with any sedition, for in times
of such troubles, the life of men is miserable and unhappy. There is nothing
Sedition the po^son of Commonw.
so divine, human, holy or religious that sedition does not contataminate,
disturb and subvert: That is the poison of all states, which makes the
greatest dominions, small and mortal. The causes of sedition in all
commonweales are more then the wit and reason of man can imagine. Wherefore
continual watch ought to be, lest the mischief begun, should more and more
increase. The minds of great men much honored in the state, must be
reconciled, for the discords of mighty personages do draw the whole
commonweal, and of small beginnings most miserable euentes do follow. In
appeasing sedition two things are chiefly to be observed, that is, in what
sort men are disposed What to be considered in appeasing sedition.
to rebellion and for what causes. It happens sometimes that men's minds are
moved with fury, desire, fear, anger or such like affections: either else
they are drawn with couetise, gain, contempt, injury, disdain, honor, and
sometimes with religion. Sedition does also follow, where one part of the
people does gain great reputation and authority over the rest, and by some
prosperous success being insolente, desire to be advanced above others, as
the Areopagi among the Athenians, and the noble men of the Argiui, who having
victory of the Lacedaemonians, sought to reject the popular government. Also
the multitude of Siracusa puffed up with pride of their prosperous war upon
the Athenians, changed their state from a Democratie to an Ochlocratie. In Rome
likewise the multitude not enduring the dignity of the Senate, made many
motions, and in the end created Tribunes, by whose fury and insolency, the
authority of the Senate was diminished, and by sedition and troubles brought
the state to utter destruction. Sedition does also sometimes happen in the
commonweal, by reason one man does exercise diverse offices, which thing is
perilous in every state, for that others do seem thereby defrauded, and
judged unworthy of honor. Let each man therefore content himself with one
office, so shall the state have many ministers with diligence to attend the
well doing thereof. Yet is it sometimes profitable, that in small commonweales,
one man should exercise diverse offices, but in great states the same uses to
In preventing of sedition what the Counselor ought do.
move sedition. A Counselor therefore ought foresee, chiefly in extirpation of
seditions, that nothing be done contrary to the ordinances, laws and customs,
preventing all disorders in due time: for mischief growing by little and
little is not easily perceived, but having gained force, it shows it self
and cannot be lightly suppressed. He ought also not to be over credulous of
persuasions craftily invented to abuse the people, which are many times devised
by popular men and flatterers, who loving innovation, dare enterprise any thing
to make them owners of their desire, and resting in that mind, they conspyre
against the prosperity of good men, cloaking their vice with the rashness and
fury of people* which flame and insolency not being quenched in time, does
commonly run so far, as with the fire thereof, the whole state is consumed.
The commonweal therefore requires the Counsel of some notable and divine
man, in whom it may reposethe care of her happiness and welldoing. By his
directions and government, all perils, seditions, discordes, mutations and
inclinations may In a perfect Counselor four virtues chiefly required.
he suppressed, and thereby enjoy a happy peace and tranquillity. Whosoever
endeuoreth himself to be such a one, it behooves him to be prudent, just,
valiant and temperate, for from those four virtues, all human things,
words, and works do proceed. Surely wisdom is a great and singular
virtue* and so great, as I know not any thing in this world that may be
thereunto compared. For without it, the other virtues can neither be exercised
nor comprehended, which is the cause that Socrates Prudence.
(though therein he d^^enteth from Aristotle) does call Prudence the only virtue:
meaning, as I think* that without Prudence no virtue can be, or continue. Bion
thought that Prudence excelled all other virtues, as far as the sight does
exceed all the other senses, affirming moreover, that virtue to be as proper to
old men, as strength or currage was to young men. Wherefore we will that our
Senator should be endued with this virtue, for he can neither say or do any
thing worthy his commendation and age, if the same be not, (as with a sawse)
seasoned with wisdom. But what this prudence is and wherein it consists, it
seems necessary we should What Prudence is.
here declare. The Latins have called this virtue Prudentia, of prouidendo,
because through it, the mind does foresee things to come, disposes of things
present, and remembers things passed. For he that thinks not of things past,
forgets his life, and he that foreseeth not things to come, is subject to
many perils, and unadvisedly falls into every misaduenture. Prudence (as
Cicero says,) is the knowledge of things good, evil, and indifferent,
consisting wholly in the chosing and knowing what is to be desired or eschewed,
and (as Aristotle thinks) it is an habit coupled with perfect reason, apt for
good action, and is exercised in those things which may happen to men, well or
evil. Therefore Theoricall wisdom. differs from Prudence.
Theoricall wisdom, does differ from Prudence: because that passes not the
bounds of contemplation, and this is wholly given to action and human
business. Moreover this kind of wisdom needs counsel and fortune, to
defend those things wherein it delights, because it is occupied in certain
and no variable sciences, which is the cause that Geometricians,
Mathematicians, (with all the crew of natural and solitary Philosophers) are
men learned, and skillful, but not Contemplative Philosophers, called rightly
Sapientes, but not Prudentes.
prudent. In like manner Diogenes, Zenocrates, Chrysippus, Carneades,
Democritus, Metrocles, Aristippus, Anaxagoras and Thales were men of great
knowledge, but not prudent; because their manner of wisdom or Philosophy was
different from true prudence, being ignorant in those things which were
profitable for themselves and others, delighting in matters secret, hidden, and
obscure; which sciences, although they be good and notable, yet unprofitable
and impertinent to human felicity. Because prudence consists in those
things whereof deliberation and counsel is to be taken, but if those
contemplative Philosophers, had not estranged themselves from the conversation
and actions of men, but been employed in the affairs of government as was
Pericles, Solon, Lycurgus, Plato, Demosthenes, Cato, Cicero and others, they
had (no doubt) The original of Prudence.
been men in wisdom most excellent. For true wisdom proceeds from perfect
reason, which if the Counselor attaineth, either by Philosophy, civil
discipline, or experience, he shall thereby know how to foresee things to come,
govern well and wisely things represent, and when trouble or doubtful
accidents happen, speedely resolve, and give present counsel; according to the
time and occasion. Plato said there were two things most notable in the life
of man: the first was, a wise man to know all things, the second to know
himself. Therefore with this most notable, great and divine virtue, let our
Counselor be fully furnished, for without it no reason, no virtue, no action
nor cogitation can be good or perfect. The chief property or force of this
wisdom (as wise men affirm) it to be wise for our selves: because the
prudent man does first settle his own affairs, for wanting wisdom to govern
well his own private estate, he may be rightly called foolish. Under Prudence
is contained the skill of well handling matters domestical; the knowledge of
making laws, civil wisdom, and the conning of consulting and judging.
Therefore Prudence in a man's own affairs, is Prudence of two kinds.
by Cicero called domestical wisdom; and the same used iu public matters,
is named civil wisdom. For the perfect conceiving of all these things, it
behooves him to understand what is true and just, because the knowing of
truth, is proper to Prudence. For if we abandon truth, all things said or
done, will be false iniust and evil. Wherefore who so wisely and with a sharp
conceit sees and knows what in all things is A wise man.
comely and true, performing the same speedily and wittely, is in my judgment
to be reputed a wise man. And to the end the wisdom of a Counselor may have
certain grounds, whereunto his imagination may resort for reasons to lead
him to the truth, let him keep in mind these two things: that is, honesty
and profit. Then whatsoever he speaks or does, either in private or public,
the same must be, (as at a mark) directed and leuelled by honesty and profit.
For all things which are conceived by reason or expressed by speech, within the
bounds of these two are included. We therefore require a sharp and sound
conceit in finding out what is honest and profitable, least the mind blinded
with affections and desires, does seduce the judgment of our Counselor and
lead him from the path of true reason. Many men there are, who finding
themselves to have a little abused reason by giving head to their affections
and lusts, do fall forth with into opinions, from wisdom diverse and contrary,
whereof follows, that they are not only deceived in their opinion of things
honest and profitable, but are also with the love of dishonesty and
improfitable desires blinded. For avoiding whereof these What is to be eschewed
in Prudence.
two errors must be eschewed. First not to take things unknown for known and
rashly assent unto them; next, not to yield unto that which is evil, and
contrary to virtue and honesty. A thing most easy it is for the Counselor,
to comprehend the ends of honesty and profit, if he lays before his eyes the
good and welfare of the state, which is the end and scope whereunto all
wisdom and prudence of every The end of Counselors wisdom.
Counselor ought be referred; because neither God, the people, his country, nor
wisdom it self, can at his hand require more, then that the commonweal may
be preserved in safety and happiness. And The felicity of commonweales.
every state is happy, which does abound with all good things, and if the people
therein be just, temperate, valiant, free, wise, and therewithal rich,
healthy, united and void of factions. The office of a Senator is also, not
only to take care of those things which tend to the felicity of the
commonweal, but he ought be much more careful to know by what means it may
be therein continued and preserved. For it oftimes happens, that by negligence
of magistrates, the subjects (as each man is by nature proane rather to evil
then good) by little and little do decline from virtue, infecting the state
with diverse mischiefs, wherein the commonweal must of necessity be drowned.
For preventing Law the conseruer of virtue.
whereof, it behooves, those evil accidents to be met with and removed by law.
For the nature of law in all commonweales is a bond to tie each man to his
duty, and defend them in virtue and fidelity. But it suffices not only to
make laws, whereby men are rewarded What is to be considered in making of laws.
or punished according to their merrits: but it behooves (as the Lacedaemonians
did) to prescribe examples, customs, and exercises of virtue, wherein the
people may take delight. Thereunto civil discipline is to be added: which both
in time of peace and war shall make men apt and obedient to all exercises of
virtue. I wish also above all things, that in making of every law, such
judgment should be used, that therein all occasion of offending may utterly be
removed. And as the Physician does heal the sick body by medicine, so ought
the Counselor by good laws to cure the mind. Yet can I not allow of those,
who finding an inconvenience begun and growing, does forthwith execute
punishment, without devising a reason how the same mischief Occasion of
offending to be removed by law.
may after be extirped. For I think it more expedient by Counsel and reason,
to provide how men may be made just and honest, rather then how they might be
put to death or punished. What man is so cruel, that would not take away
occasion of these, rather by making provision of corn for the poor, then
through want thereof enforce them to become thieves and put them to death? And
who is he that sees the commonweal inclined to vice, and the people spoiled
with licenciousnes, but would reform the same rather by pecuniall then
capital laws? Therefore Tullius said, if thou will take away covetousness,
thou must first remove her mother excess. A counselor ought to have ever
before his eyes, all the commodities and discommodities of the The commodities
and discommodities of common^*
common weal, which being to him unknown, it is impossible to cure the sores
and wounds wherewith it may be grieved. He ought therefore to be informed, what
life every notable subject leads, how he is affected to the state, whether
he obeys the laws or be inclined to faction, whether the magistrates be
faithful and diligent in the public affairs, whether they be covetous,
cruel and unmerciful, or whether they be just, gentle and pitiful. Also
whether the Judge be wise and learned in the civil ordinances, and whether
they determine according to law, or their own pleasure. Let him also so well
comprehend in mind the whole commonweal, as to know all rightes, liberties and
laws belonging to the people, and as (Cicero does counsel) what munition
Knowledges necessary in Counselors
the state has, what soldiers, what tresure, what confederats, what friends,
what stipendaries, and by what law, condition or compact every of them is
bound: he must also be perfect in the custom of judgments, and the presidents
of times past. All these things it behooves a Counselor to know, and
continually to think of them, for he is the man at whose hand the people and
country do look for their welfare: and he failing of his endeavor, or
refusing to work the weldoing thereof, does commit an error not only
reproueable, but also impious. The chief duty of our love and fidelity
(next unto God,) is due unto our country: which who so loves not, is perhaps
to be holden inferior to beasts: many of which kind, drawn only with love
to their natural soil (as captives to their country) do choose rather to
die then abandon the place wherein they had their birth and education. This
love to our country joined unto high wisdom, does make such an universal
agreement Love to our country.
among men, as nothing can be in counsel said or done offensiuely, unwisely or
unjustly, but every thing in the balance of perfect judgment equally and
indifferently examined. Thus we see the force of wisdom is great, since
through it (as by a gate,) we pass unto all the other virtues, and without it
no virtue can defend it self, because only by benefit of it, we become just,
temperate and valiant. Also by it, we are instructed where, when, and how to
use all other virtues.

Prudence has also under her certain other virtues, which are as it were
followers and companions, by which mean, her power becomes enlarged and
ornified, which if the Counselor does carefully remember and diligently
observe, he shall thereby in his actions and counsel gain great praise and
glory worthy the wisdom of so great Companions to Prudence.
a personage. Wherefore first it behooves him to be witty, docible, of good
memory, of sound understanding, circumspect, provident, wary, and wily: For
these virtues (as Plato and the Peripatetickes affirm) are the followers and
servants of Prudence.

Wit.
Wit is a certain natural force, by nature incident to reason, having power
to conceive things proceeding from reason, which although many times it be not
nourished by industry, art and memory, yet is it alone of force, and without
use or learning, does make many men very commendable. Lot the Counselor
therefore know his own wit, and become sharp in the excogitation of reasons,
eloquent in delating and ornifying his speech, and firm in memory. This
wisdom whereby we first conceive all things, does spring from the quicknes of
wit, and is increased by memory and aptnes to learning, of which two, men are
called ingenious, and is confirmed by learning and experience. That wit is
most laudable, which is constant, strong, sharp, immutable, noble, pleasant,
gallant and liberal.

The sharpnes of wit is much ornified by docilitie and memory: by the one, we
be taught to conceive those things which are laid before us, by the other we
retain in mind whatsoever is either by our selves invented, or by others
uttered. In the exercise of those things, it behooves a Counselor to be most
diligent: for not to conceive quickly and remember what has been spoken of
others, is the property of a dull and foolish wit, which was the cause that
Demostines, Alcibiades, Mithridates and diverse others most notable men, have
been (as we read) in those things much practiced. Furthermore we must know,
that as wit is the grace of every Counselor, so understanding Understanding
is the light of wit, by virtue whereof, thinking and understanding, we conceive
all things, or their Ideas, as well true as false. For by common understanding
we comprehend the knowledge of things, and through it judge, that every thing
honest ought be referred to virtue, and whatsoever is dishonest must be
included in vice; which understanding is not disioyned from the senses, who
are, as it were interpreters and reporters of knowledge, yet must we take heed
not to be deceived by sensual judgment: and therefore all feebleness, dullness,
and insensibilitie ought be eschewed. For it often happens that either by art
or subteltie, we become shamefully deceived, which error in all things (and
chiefly in the knowing and judging of good and true from bad and false) is to
be avoided.

Circumspection.
We will also that our Counselor should be ciscumspect, not only in those
things which do happen privately, but also in every other that may be hurtful
to the commonweal. For he must endeavor himself in the safety of subjects, to
foresee all storms that can happen unto the state, and provide for the
preservation of every member thereof. This virtue called circumspection, is a
careful consideration of things to be done, and both in war and peace of
much importance, because through wise circumspection, the force and fury of
fortune is diuerted, and we yield rather to reason and counsel, then trust to
the rashness and fiercenes of fortune. In this virtue Quintus Fabius did excel,
for he (as is reported) by delays and protracting time, saved the Romain
state: but contrariwise, Flaminius incircumspectilie trusting to his courage
and strength assalted Hanibal, to his own great disadvantage. I omit to tell
how Q. Scipio the Consul with diverse others was through want of
circumspection, by the Cimbri distressed. In time of peace it is also most
needful and profitable that the Counselor should use circumspection, and be
as an Argus or Lynceus in the commonweal, to spy out those things which
appertain to the concord, peace and welfare of the people. for not so being,
he cannot foresee what seditions, wars and unlooked for accidents, do daily
happen to the prejudice of the commonweal. Some there are so ignorant, so
unwise or blinded with abundance of pleasure, as scarsely they can discern
things before their faces: much less foresee them, which (by the event of
things and time, become perilous to the commonweal) are an occasion of many
misaduentures; which kind of men, (as more careful of their own private, then
the public commodity) might deservedly be removed from government. For
notwithstanding they see the threatenings of war* the people carried away
captive, the country spoiled, women and children sold for slaves, towns
burnt, fields wasted, and temples profaned, and moreover behold the
commonweal with most extremity affected by barbarous enemies; yet use they no
circumspection, counsel, nor medicine, wherewith so great a fury of misery
may be cured or cooled. For perhaps they more willingly behold the people
troubled and weakened with sedition, the meaner sort of the more mighty
oppressed, The circumspection of a Senator.
and the religion of God neglected. But the good Senator, with all his force
embracing the commonweal, studieth by what means the common saueftie and
welfare may be made happy and perpetual. He provides that the fury of
enemies, may by garrisons and fortresses be restrained: that castles and
bulwarks may be builded, the places of defense may be repaired, and that
passages may be stopped: all which things are commonly great obstacles and
impeachments to enemies. It is also requisite to have some subjects well
trained, reddie, and exercised, for by such preparation the co^monweale being
as it were fortified, disdaineth the force of foreign enemies, and diuerteth
their minds from offering violence. The Lacedaemonians were wont to call the
bodies of men, the walls of Sparta. The felicity of subjects is preserved By
what mean the felicity of subjects is preserved.
by giving to every man his right, uniting them by favor, by severity of laws
and justice: In all which things it behooves the Counselor to show himself
wise and circumspect; for to neglect those things which appertain to the
conservation of peace and repressing of rebellion, is not only foolish and
ignominious, but also impious and wicked. And who is he that may better prevent
these mischiefs then the Counselor? for he being placed amid'st the people,
sees not only the order of each man's life, his right, liberty, licentious
and seditious disposition, but is, (as it were purposely placed in a tower,)
diligently to behold both things present, and also foresee things afterward
to follow. And as the Physician finds the disease increasing, the Captain
conceiueth the subtlety of his enemies, and the shipmaster preuenteth the
tempest of the seas: So ought the wise Counselor to foresee the perils,
inclinations, chances and mutations of the commonweal. For his office is not
only to see things present, butalso foresee things to come, which virtue of
foreseeing, is called Prudence: Providence.
and they that are therewith endued, be named provident and prudent. Because
Providence (as Cicero writes) is that, whereby things to come are scene before
they happen: Yet true it is, that to foreknowe things, is rather proper to wits
divine then human, because God only knows things to come, and such
knowledge is the proper virtue and condition of minds divine. Notwithstanding,
for that we have in us a certain shadow or likeness of divinity, it happens
that we also do conjecture and forsee things to come, which may be by two
means: either by inspiration and will of God, or by our own proper instinct.
To the first kind, belong prophesying, divination, and such Providence divine.
like knowledges, which are in men by inspiration and revelation from God.
Secondly the soul being separated from the body, remembereth things past,
beholds things present, and foreseeth things to come. And of that providence
this our present speech entreats. For those things which are written touching
dreams, intrailes of beasts and fowls, lotts, monsters, stars, southsaiers,
Aaguri, Ar^oli, Astrologers, spirits, and infinite other means, whereby the
Achei judged of things to come, seem not to appertain to our purpose. But if
the mind of our Counselor be holy, pure, and undefiled with dregs or spot of
vices, and that his body be an habitation of that celestial spirit and divine
mind, absolute and perfect, by virtue thereof he may prognosticate and foresee
things to come, and may be called not only prudent, wise or provident, but
also holy, divine, godly and religious. Such men were the prophets in our law,
and the Sibille and southsaiers, with all those (whom they say) were instructed
by the Nymphs and Gods: as Tircsias, Mopsos, Amphiaraus, Calchantas. But how
this celestial providence is attained, our intent is not here to discourse.
This skill of prophecy being put into men, and by divine inspiration shut up in
our bodies, is most strong, when the soul divided from the body, is by divine
instinct moved. But let us return to human providence, the Human
providence.
exercise whe^of is also to be accounted divine. For when the mind of a wise
man, is endued with the knowledge of all human thoughts and actions, and
understands also the beginning, event, mutations and declinations of things
present and future, comprehending likewise in mind, the Idaea and form of
things to be done, which nature or reason does govern by a certain and
inuoluble course, being I say in all these things studied and informed, having
sharpened the edge of his wit, and conceived the state of men's actions and
affairs of the commonweales, he may by such means foresee and foreknow what
is Dem^nium Socratis.
in them good, what evil, what infirm, what durable, because in such men
there is somewhat divine, called a spirit, which Socrates had, and was
therewith always accompanied: which spirit is nothing else then the mind of a
wise man, chaste, undefiled and exercised in the judgment of things: for such a
one by every small conjecture may (at occasions) conceive what is hereafter to
come. A certain providence is also also learned by use and examples, which the
Counselor shall do well not to contemn. In which knowledge, he shall be
chiefly helped by reading Histories: because examples are of great force to
divert or remove in co^uenients, since every man flies that willingly, which
he has found most dangerous in others. Therefore a Counselor ought be wise in
foresight and conceiving evils long after to come, and omit none opportunity to
forewarne and consult what is fittest for the state: because, looked for
mishap^; are with more patience endured. Sudden mischiefs are for the most
part with difficulty or great danger eschewed, because in things sudden, our
minds are dismayed and void of counsel, but those things which are naturally
looked unto, are well avoided. We must therefore take heed in time, least our
wisdom be learned to late, and it were a shame to say in vain, had I wist.
If the Pilot before the tempest provide not that the ship may sail in safety;
when winds do rage, his providence proves to no purpose: So the Counselor
should think how the state may be preserved, before the same be hurt,
offended, or assaulted with enemies. For it is better to be wary by foresight
of perils past, then make proof of misaduentures present: because (men say)
errors by past, may be reprehended, but not amended.

Providence is always accompanied with caution, whereby we eschew Caution.
those present evils which may happen unto us: for nature has so framed us, as
naturally we desire good things and shun evil. Which shunning of evils (if
it proceeds from reason) is called Caution, and therewith only wise men are
endued. The profit of this virtue is chiefly seen in words and works, for to
utter thy conceit warely, and work that thou art to do advisedly, is the
part of a wise and well experienced man. Wherefore in all consultations it
behooves the Counselor, to be in speech not only grave and short, but also
wary and heedefull, as Horace does well warn him, saying. In verbis etiam
tenuis, cautusque serendis.


It happens also, that so often as any thing be spoken rashly we repent the
unadvised utterance of that speech, and many times our selves and the
commonweal also are brought to disaduantake, when foreign affairs be done
rashly, or any consultation of public causes be carelessly performed: because
in sudden speech we powreforth many things, which ought to be concealed.
Therefore the Comedi^n What is to be observed in speaking.
warns us well, saying, It is folly to discover that which ought to be
concealed. In speech a Counselor must always remember, to speak nothing in
anger, in fear, in mirth, in have, or vnpremeditated, which things observed,
he shall declare himself both grave and wise. Having also occasion to confer
or speak with the enemies, neighbors or ambassadors (the endeavor of whom is
to discover secrets) he must be most wary; for therein they use great cunning
to vent our thoughts by conjectures, and gather our meaning by signs. In those
actions therefore a Counselor must have a settled mind showing the constancy
thereof in iesture, countenance, words and moving of his eyes: For they are the
bewraiers of men's thoughts. He must be also nothing hasty in believing other
men's words, for there is nothing more profitable for a wise man then
incredulity: Yet let him so use the matter as not to seem hard of belief, or
be altogether incredulous, unless the reputation or troth does otherwise
require. For against apparent truth to maintain any thing, is very unseemly.
Neither would we have him so silent, as thereby to be thought dull or
effeminate, for the one is imputed to want of kuowledge, the other to a
certain maidenly bashfulnes which in men is always to be reproved. Therefore a
certain mean is to be used as well in silence as speech, yet so, as he be a
Silence.
greater hearer then speaker: which was the respect, that nature gave unto man
two ears and one tongue. Surely it is a singular wisdom to know in what sort
to be silent, and every man ought to consider well what, how, where, to whom,
and in what place to speak. Also in all negotiatio^s buisines and counsels
great cawtion is to be used, which may be done by such as search wisely what is
in every thing comely or uncomely, what profitable or unprofitable. Let his
counsel be sound, provident and prudent, and in vtteting thereof, he must use
great sagacitie and be wary. How necessary warines and cawtion is in war,
needs not here to be discoursed: for our intent is frame to a Counselor of
state in counsel, in court, in judgment, and in peace, gowned not in war
armed. Yet this I say, that wars have not been better governed, nor armies
more safely preserved, nor the subteltie enemies of more wisely discovered,
then by the virtue of caution, which if a chieftaine wants, he is ignorant in
all other virtues belonging to a Captain general.

We will also that our Counselor should be quick witted to conceive Sagacitie.
and search out the reason of matters propounded to consultation. For in deed
sagacitie is a sharp and present conceit: and as it is the property of a
wise man to consult well: So is it the property of a quick spirit, wittily to
understand, and soundly to judge of that which an other man speaks.

Moreover I wish him to be not only sharp in conceiving, but also Wilines.
crafty and subtle in searching what subjects do think, what they desire,
what they hope for, and what they aspect. By that means he shall retain the
multitude in obedience, and by knowing their counsels and cogitations, direct
those things which be in them evil. Some lewd subjects do use to conspire
the destruction of good men, either induced thereunto by hate, fury or
insolency, sometimes also they so do of will, having the government in their
hands, sometimes for that they find themselves inferiors to others in riches,
honor and authority: and sometimes, because they think themselves disdained
and lightly regarded in the state. So as for these causes they bear
displeasure to others, moving war, and sedition, practice their death (and if
their force does so suffice) they adventure to bring the state into apparent
hazard. The means to suppress sedition.
In suppressing of these motions and cogitations of evil men, the counselor
must show himself wary and subtle, not ever dealing openly, or by direct
opposition, but rather charging the force of such men, either behind, or on
the side, and by persuading, admonishing, desiring and courteously chastising,
reduce them to be better, more tractable, and more perswasible. He must also,
at occasions threaten them with authority, and by severity divert the^ from
such wicked and execrable enterprises: always considering and deeply po^dering
in mind, by what art and means, the quiet and tranquillity of subjects may be
preserved, and how sedition and discord, with their causes should be extirped.
For that is a thing which appertains chiefly to the conseruatio^ of
co^monweales. Consultation.
For bringing of which thing to pass, prudent consultatio^ and deliberation
must be used, because consultatio^ is the scholar of good counsel. It therefore
behooves a Cou^sellor in this and all other things to be careful that
whatsoever is determined, may before execution with great wisdom, and found
judgment be considered and examined. The force of all consultation consists
in those things which appertain Whereof to consult.
to the common life of men and conservation of a commonweal. He ought not
therefore to consult of things eternal or celestial, as of the world, or of
things which cannot happen, or of them that do happen by nature, chance, or
fortune, as of findings treasure and such like, neither shall he consider of
trifles, as of emptines, nor of things past: for what is done, cannot be again
to do* But all consultation should be of things to come, and that which may
happen or not happen after this or that sort, the reason whereof seems to
belong unto the profit of men. Of which things, Aristotle rekoneth five kinds:
Of getting money, of peace and war, of conservation of our country, of
commodities to be brought in or carried out, and making of laws* If
consultation be for leuying money, then must the reuennues, customs
Consultation touching money.
and imposts of state be seen and known, to the end they may be increased or
diminished. Yet unless great necessity so requires, the imposts would not be
enlarged. For all new impositions (although reasonable) are commonly offensive
to the subjects, and breed much occasion of trouble. Tiberius the Emperor
being persuaded to increase the tributes of his people, said it was the
property of a good shepeheard to shere his sheep, but not to fleae them. He
shall also persuade necessary charges of state to be continued and remove
superfluous expenses. For the better knowing whereof, let him as well imitate
the examples of other nations as his own country, wherein the knowledge of
histories will greatly help him. If consultation be of war Consultation of
war.
and peace, it is to be considered of what force the enemy is or may be, what
kind of war is to be made, and against whom. It is also good to know the
strength of neighbors, whether their force consists in footmen or horse,
whether it be equal or unequal to ours, in what respect they be stronger or
weaker, to the end that peace may be made with the stronger, and war with the
weaker, which thing must be performed with great judgment and sound
deliberation. Moreover he shall consider whether the cause of war be just,
and whether without arms our desire may be brought to pass. For a wise man
ought to prove all means before he takes arms, because honest peace is ever
to be preferred before cruel war. Touching the defense of our Consultation
of defense.
country, it behooves to know how much force is required, how it is guarded,
and what places of strength is thereto belonging. It is also Consultatio^ of
merchandise
necessary to remember the order of our war and service. But if we consult of
portage and reportage of commodities, above all heed is to be taken, that the
commonweal may not at any time want things necessary, and that whatsoever is
superfluous may be sold and carried away. Care must be likewise taken, that in
exchanging merchandise the prises of things may be considered, to the end that
the state be not ^^bbed of money, and in lue thereof, such needles merchandise
brought in, as do make the peoples minds vain and effeminate. In
Consultation of laws.
the ordaining of laws also, great wisdom is required: For in them rests
the well doing of the whole commonweal. Therein it helps much to understand
the course of the state, what laws have been received, and by which of them it
has been conserved, and by what new ordinances it may be assured. Whereof may
be inferred that the laws ought be framed for the commonweal, not the
commonweal for the laws: because one kind of laws are not fit for all
countries. Neither are these knowledges only profitable, but it is also
necessary to know all the confines of our country, the better to forsake those
foreign things which be evil and receive the good. In co^sultation of matters
of most importance, it is many times good to use the advice of others, for one
man foreseeth not all, which proves that saying of Homer to be true. Bini vbi
conueniunt, melius rem perspicit alter.


For of good and prudent consultation wise counsel does commonly proceed:
which is the chief foundation to perform things commendable. It therefore
behooves a Counselor to excel all others in Counsel. For Counsel is a
certain advised reason touching the Counsel.
doing or not doing of things propounded, which a Counselor must of necessity
at all occasions be ready to give, gravely, wisely and honestly. For since in
all matters three things are required, that is counsel, reason and success,
it is requisite, that good consultation should as well go before action, as good
success follow good consultation. And as a man fighting does devise how to
hurt his enemy: so must the Counselor in counselling accommodate his counsel
unto the time and persons. The things whereof we are to consult (as Cicero
teaches) are of three sorts, Matters consultable of three sorts.
either we consult of things honest, things profitable, are of those things
wherein profit and honesty do contend. These three being exactly known to a
Counselor, do fully inform him how to give Counsel in all matters
whatsoever. Yet is great wisdom required in knowing what is honest and what
is profitable, and it is a matter of no less virtue to understand of two
honest and profitable things, which is the most honest or most profitable. We
use sometimes to take counsel of the matter, the time and occasion, wherein
(as in all other things) we must never fly from honesty or profit, for we fly
that which offends, embrace that is profitable, and among many evils, choose
the least. Furthermore in every good Counsel we should resort to that which
of all other good things is the best, as well in the particular good of our
own life, as the public good whereon common felicity depends. Herein all
the original causes of our cogitations and Counsels ought to consent. For all
Counsels are vain, which tend The end of good counsel*
not unto this end of public felicity, as no wind is prosperous for him,
that knows not in what haven he desires to ariue. In taking counsel, great
wisdom, and in giving counsel, fidelity and religion is desired. For evil
counsel is worse in him that counsels, but wise and faithful advise, is
accounted most commendable. Let the Senator also take heed least in giving
counsel he attribute any thing to fortune or chance, for they do seldom or
never perfectly follow the truth: Even as the man is not valiant, who does
valiantly by chance or unadvisedly: So he that follows fortune or hap without
reason and judgment, is not wise. The Counsel of a senator must be wise, The
quality of counsel.
good, faithful, mature, deliberate, and free: not foolish, crafty, hasty or
pernicious. All crafty and audatious Counsels are in appearance pleasant, in
execution hard, and in event dangerous. Let him also know, that there is
nothing so great an enemy to good counsel as have, being always followed by
vile and shameful repentance: Hasty counsel dangerous
which is proved true not only in ordinary actions, but also in martial
enterprises. Nevertheless we persuade not our Counselor to trifle the time,
but execute speedely. For celeritie tempered with wise counsel, is always
profitable, many things there are also, wherein a wise Counselor should not
intermeddle, but if he happen so to do, they may not be abandoned. Therefore
we commonly say, that, advise should be slow, but execution speedy, for the
end and not the beginning of every Counsel must be considered, and all things
referred to necessity. Neither have commonweales appointed meetings and
assemblies of Counselors for other purpose, then that of aged and wise men,
all matters might be first pondered, and after maturelie performed. At which
deliberations and consultations of great matters, we will that these men should
be present. For it proves greatly expedient and profitable, that matters
propounded in Counsel, should be much and long considered, and it were folly
in one hour to determine matters of most importance.

After Counsel follows sentence, which is nothing else then the Sentence.
plain demonstration of a man's mind and counsel. For it behooves in words and
speech to express what we have thought, to the end we may know what lies hid
in the mind and reason of man. This secret, seems to proceed of nature,
that diverse men who are not wise, yet in uttering their sentence and concept,
do seem reddie witted, of good understanding, and subtle: all which gifts
they commonly attain unto by a certain habit of age, whereunto Prudence is an
handmaid and follower. Old men most apt to utter sentence.
Old men are therefore most perfect in uttering their conceits, notwithstanding
they be unlearned: for by use and experience they have (as it were) a third eye
wherewith they easily descerne the beginning and events of things. As every
man is by speech discovered, So a Counselor by uttering his opinion declares
how wise and prudent he ought be accounted. Socrates, upon a time, behoulding a
young man never before seen, said unto him, speak, that I may know thee, as
though a man should say unto a Counselor, by gravity of thy speech let me know
thee for a good Counselor. And we commonly say, speech The end of sentence.
is the touchstone of men's minds. Therefore a Counselor ought in uttering his
sentence, employ all the force and strength of mind, to speak things
profitable for the state, which is the end of sentence. Some men do use
certain cunning and plausible speeches set forth with painted words, which
seem more then true, yet trial shows, that in them there is no sincerity,
fidelity, or gravity. And indeed it is not ever necessary that the
Counselor should speak to the wiser sort eloquently, nor to the foolish
truly. Others there be swelling with privy grudge, anger and hate, so soon
as they have caught occasion to speak, do forthwith fall into blaming and
slaundering others, hoping by that means to win good will and reputation.
Which kind of men, do no ways profit the commonweal, but rather by hatred,
displeasure and discords hinder the state. For if they were good men, in causes
concerning their country, they either would not or should not be angry, hate
or grudge at others. Some also being scarce of counsel in pronouncing their
sentence do follow the footesteps of other Counselors, saying after them, and
therefore were among Romans called Pedar^j Senatores: Yet i^ they so do not
through ignorance, ought be allowed: for it is reasonable and profitable for
the state, to imitate and follow the opinion of wise and good Counselors. And
sometimes it happens, that all Counselors are of one mind and meaning,
which so being, it is better to affirm that which was spoken by others, then
with many words, as it were of one effect, consume the time. A Counselor must
also beware that in speaking his sentence, there appears in his speech not
self liking or ostentation. And albeit diversity of opinions, will sometimes
occasion contention in Counsel, yet therein all slander, offense and other
perturbation, (which may pervert or disturb the state) ought be eschewed. And
in reconciling of opinions, let the greater number prevail, for that which
seems good to most men, must be thought just and most agreeable to reason.
The order of speaking in Counsel, is The order of pronouncing sentence.
in diverse states diversely used: for in some the eldest men do speak first, in
other the younger Counselors, and in some also they that are of most experience
and wisdom, are preferred. In that matter the custom of every place is to
be observed, and that order to be reputed good, just, profitable, and
convenient, which reason and common use among men from time to time has
received. Yet does it seem best that the opinions of the most aged and
experienced men should be first hard, to the end the younger sort may have the
more time to deliberate of their speech. Besides that, the younger Counselors
opinion, being first pronouunced, do sometimes divide the elder; and draw
them into sundry conceits. Therefore the best is that every one should
speak, not when he would, but when he is asked. For by such means order shall
be observed, and all occasion of contention removed. In speaking, it is lawful
sometimes to speak doubtfully, because the difficulty of the matter may
excuse the speaker, also by the diversity of other men's opinions, the mind is
distracted, not knowing to which side to yield, where in the suspicion of
rashness must be eschewed, least of set purpose or affection more then of
judgment, we yield to the opinions of other men. For the censures of other men
are to be pondred not numbered, Sentences to be pondered by weight not by number.
and ^eede must be taken, that the greater part do not oppress the truer.

Aristotle does permit that a man in saying his sentence may twice speak
doubtfully: But if the third time he trip or fail, he shall not aster be
suffered to speak in that cause. We must also take heed least our speech be
over long, for therein a double fault is committed: by making our selves weary
with speaking and others with hearing. The (...) of the Counselors speech
Which error Caesar sometimes reproved in Cato. Let the Counselors speech
therefore be short, sincere and not obscured with enticing terms, not
unadvised, not doubtful, or deceiptfull, but grave, simple, holy, and true.
And it is fit each man should speak sworn, to the end God may be the witness
of his mind. It imports not much whether his sentence be written or
rehearsed in words, yet the reasons written are commonly set down with more
diligence, chiefly if the matter requires a long oration. His voice would be
manly, and The voice of a Counselor.
framed rather to gravity then effeminacie, clear and audible: not soft, nor
so low as cannot be well heard. In conclusion, the Counselor ought to observe
three things by Cicero prescribed; that is, to be Three things specially to be
observed by Counsels.
present in counsel, (for the ordinary meeting of Counselors does add
thereunto a gravity,) to speak in place unto that is asked: and in good sort
or use measure, which is, that this speech be not infinite. That the Counselor
which absenteth himself is blameable, wherefore being called he must obey.
Neither is it fit that any Counselor, should go into foreign nations,
unless he be publicly sent as Ambassador, Governor, or Commander in
war, least by such absence the commonweal be damnified. The chief substance
and ground of a Counselors wisdom, is, that in all his words and works he
perform the part of a good and just man, which chiefly consists in the
comeliness of his life. For it suffiseth not, that we be wise, unless we are
also good. For prudence without justice is mere subtlety, and holden rather a
vice then virtue. By the benefit of virtue we are made good, that is just,
courteous and honest, but by wisdom we become only wise. Besides that in
respect of virtue we are called good, but for wisdom alone we are not.
Therefore he is indeed (as Who is a good man.
Plato also affirms) to be named a good man that embraces the virtues,
living accordingly, and fears not to die for his country, whenever the
same is assaulted or oppressed, and be content to suffer all things, rather
then that the state should be changed: which is commonly brought to pass by
men of the worst condition. Wherefore the Senator must be careful to be no
less good and just, then prudent or wise. For wisdom without justice is
evil, since of justice men are called good: Some men in authority do prove
themselves eloquent Abuse of authority.
and wise, but therewith full of subtlety and dishonest slight. For they
having in hand the patronage of liberty and law, do in speech and appearance
seem careful thereof, but (their actions well examined) dee detect them for men
unjust, unworthy, and dissembling. And being endued with a false kind of
wisdom, having their tongues but not their minds instructed, do commonly
endeavor to alter and not amend the public policy. There is not in any
commonweal a worse mischief then the authority of such men. For they do
always advance persons licentious, subtle, deceiptfull unjust, and seditious,
and in practicing subtlety, do somewhat whereby to be thought good Justice.
men. But as a man come to his perfection is of all creatures the best: So if he
forsake justice and law, is of all other accounted the worst. For extirpation
of which sorts of subjects, we ought pray unto God, and every Counselor
careful that his life be well exercised and employed. But men being wise must
also be just, therefore what justice ought be in a Counselor, we are now to
discourse.

Whosoever will with an attentive mind behold and search the condition of
things divine and human, shall see that nature has given to every thing a
firm, stable, and constant course, which of it self cannot be changed, but by
a certain and determined way does pass and return. First we behold the
celestial orbs, the Elements, beasts* fowls, and creeping creatures have
their properties, not received by chance, but by such natural instinct, as
leave them they will not; or if they would, they cannot. What should I say of
men? do not we see a certain way to felicity, prepared of GOD for good men,
and likewise destruction made for evil men. Also the path which leads to
virtue is narrow, wrong, and hard to be disoerned, but the way unto vice on
the left hand to be large, plain, and open to many. But to speak of the
government of Cities and states, if their courses of life and administration,
be certain, perfect, and absolute of nature, that is to say, proceeded from
God or reason, they do never abandon them, but are of long continuance, but
otherwise become of no force, weak and decaying. I speak not of all. Let it
suffice that nature has made all things we see, to be good, certain, perfect,
and in all respects absolute: Natural (...)
which moved the Stoics to affirm, that to live according to nature, was the
chief felicity of man: for nature is in deed the Conductrix and Tutresse of
perfect life, whereby we follow and obey the Author thereof. This harmony of
nature, may righty be called Justice: For this is that virtue which defends
law and consent of nature: since whatsoever consents with nature is just, and
whatsoever dissenteth with it, is called unjust. Such men then as live
according to nature and in all things obey her, are of all others most just.
For it is a thing contrary to nature to do or think against God or man:
Whereupon Justice is thought to be of three kinds natural, divine, and
human. The first foundation of Justice Justice. of three sorts.
natural, proceeds from nature it self, which does inform us what to
embrace, and what to eschew. Natural equity commands us to abstain from
injuries, and therefore we ought to do nothing whereby an other may be
offended. By this virtue men are so fast bound one unto another, as every man
wishes well to all mankind. In that ancient age, which the Poets called
golden, through the benefit of Justice, no deceit, fraud, or injury was
known. Then were no seditions, no tumult, no hate, but benevolence, fidelity
and love. Then needed not they any lawmakers, any judge or pleader: For equity
and goodness determined all things, and every man thought his own things to
appertain as much to his friends as himself. By which instinct, we love our
parents, our children, our alliance and kindred. The Justice due unto our
Parents is called piety: with which virtue (we read) that above others the
daughter of Cymon was endued. For she by giving her own milk unto her father,
(in prison condemned to die) thereby saved his life, and won her self
immortal fame. This property also is with men common to other creatures, that
every kind do naturally conspire to defend themselves. Justice does also
require at our hand, that each man should nourish, defend and govern himself:
for he that by wilful hunger, negligence, or death, is distroyed, ought be
judged iniust and an enemy to nature. We are also bound by nature, to relieve
our friends with our goods, and by generation of children to continue a
posterity. In fine, those that obey nature, are reputed just, and those that
do thecontrarie, are judged unjust: for nature Justice natural.
abhors evil, and embraces that which is good. Socrates, and his scholars,
defined this natural Justice, saying it was the science of good and evil
according to nature: which if a man does exercise alone, (following nature as
guide) he ought be called a good man: and communicating it with others,
deserves the name of a good Citizen, because then he is not only profitable
for himself, but others also. To be just after this manner, in living
according to nature, does not only become a Counselor, but also every other
man. Moreover, they that by nature are endued with more singular gifts, ought
to be above others most just. And therefore since nature has advanced a
Counselor before other men, it behooves him to excel in Justice, for being
inferior herin, is reputed dishonorable and ignominious. These are those
things which in the conversation and manners of men ought tobe observed.

That Justice which belongs unto God, and whereby we are by Justice divine
nature bound to acknowledge, worship, reverence, love and honor him, is only
proper to men. And it has pleased nature, the mother of all things, that in
the mind of man only the knowledge of God should be impressed: leaving all
other creatures to eat, feed, and pamper their bodies. Man only is that
creature among enumerable others, to whom the honor, reverence, ad worship of
God is committed. No people therefore inhabiting the circle of the earth, but
honors some God: which they think a thing honest, just and necessary. The
society of God and men is by a certain natural necessity and benevolence
conjoined, and cannot be broken, as though men were borne of God, and therefore
him they worship and reverence as a father. It behooves that the honor given
to God, should be most pure, most holy and full of piety, that is, we should
honor him with a chaste, entire, and What teligion is.
incorrupt mind. All the substance and force of holiness and piety, consists
in religion: which is a virtue containing the knowledge how God should be
honored. By it we are also informed how to render unto him thanks with true
honor and holy mind. Hereof men are called religious and holy, because they
love, and (as it were) bind themselves to do divine honor. God favors
piety and faith, and in respect of them extolleth kingdoms. All things do
prosper with those that obey God, and every thing decays in the hands of
others, that honor him not. Moreover, religion is of such force, as through
it, men are endued with all virtues, and in retaining them, are made no less
constant then religious. In him that honors God, there grows a constant,
true and inuentable hermonie of virtues: For whosoever does honor him
religiously, is prudent, and temperate, which virtues are so tied unto
religion, as by no possible means they may be sundered. A constant religion
does work a firm continuance of laws, customs, virtues, and commonweal it
self. It behooves our Counselor therefore, to have no wavering or mutable,
but a stable and certain belief of God and religion, for that is the
foundation of his wisdom, virtue, and dignity. Neither should any Senator be
admitted to counsel, whose religion is inconstant or unsettled. For in counsel
nothing ought be done contrary to religion, or aagainst God: but every thing
performed with constancy* synceritie, holiness, and religious meaning.
Therefore a Senate is called sacred* because all things in it done, are reputed
holy: not only among men, but before God also. The place also wherein the
Senate does assemble, is accounted holy: since every Senator ought (with
reverence,) to lay a side all vnlawsull counsels and evil cogitations. The
Romans going to Counsel offered Frankensence, to that God in whose temple the
Senate was assembled. But the Christians ought observe other customs, for all
their prayers and supplications, should be to obtain grace and goodness from
the almighty God, because their prayers only are holy, and religious. Thus it
appears, that false or unsettled religion in Counselors, is not only
accounted evil and unworthy but also Civil Justice.
impious and wicked. But of divine Justice, let this we have said, suffice.

The knowledge of human justice, which is also called civil, is a thing
secret and hidden. For albeit has original from natural Justice, and
therefore the precepts and use of it seems easy and common: yet is it not
truly conceived or exercised but of such men, as are either endued with some
divine nature, or that have been employed in all kinds of virtue and good
studies. For that Justice requires a learned and wise man, who endeavors
himself therein, not casually, or against his will, but advisedly, reasonably,
constantly and willingly. Such a one we will our Counselors should be,
possessed with so noble and experienced a judgment.

All force and use of civil justice consists partly in the preservation of
society among men, and is partly exercised in court and place of judgment.
And there is no virtue more fit or profitable, to establish, conserve, or
amend the Senate, then this* All other virtues are referred to their
particular ends, and may be well without man exercised: but Justice rests in
the tuition of man's society, which is the cause we call it Reconciler and
conseruer of mankind. This virtue allows of no foul, cruel, barbarous, or
unseemly thing, but embraces things honest, quiet, and peaceable, caring for
nothing more, then that men should live together lovingly, free from injuries,
seditions, hate, and enmity* not desiring the goods of others, but giving to
every one that which to him appertains. With this virtue, we will that our
Counselor should be endued, for thereby he becomes the defender of common
profit, the protector of innocents, weak and humble persons, a repressor of
proud men, a lover of the good, an The office of a just Counselor.
obseruer of truth, an enemy to evil men, and so to vice. The foundation of
this virtue is fidelity, which (Cicero defines it) to be a constant and true
performing of more and promise. A just Counselor therefore does affirm things
true, not doubtful, observes his promises, stands to compactes, restores
what he boroweth, and to the performing his faith is not compelled by law, by
witness, or oath, but by his own willing consent* freewill and word, which he
accounts as a law. Moreover, being called from the private life to govern
in state, he labors by counselling, caring and providing that injustice be
kept under; and that by the stronger, the weaker sort be not oppressed* ever
eschewing the desire of riches. Whatsoever ought be given for virtue, or well
deserving, he bestows upon honest and well deserving subjects.

Furthermore, he judges valiant men worthy to be rewarded, and slothful
subjects to be punished. For by these two, pains and preferment, the welfare
of every common weal is preserved. In the bestowing of offices, he declares
himself upright* reputing those worthy of most honor, that are men of most
merit. And in every state I think it fit, that care should be had of the
distribution To whom honor ought be given.
of offices: because honor is the reward of virtue, and every good man
accounts it the fruit of his labor, and service. Neither ought that state
be commended, where offices and honors are given without respect, as well to
the evil, as the good, the fools as the wise men. It ought therefore be
provided by law, that the honors may be made due to those, whose virtue and
industry is recommended by good men. In the commonweales of ancient time,
Images of metal, arches tryumphall, public sepulture, open praise, and such
like honors were given to men of service and good deserving* In company and
conversation, regard must be had to each man's age, degree, and condition: and
diligent consideration, what is in every man of necessity, virtue, or use. We
account those most worthy honor, who are men well borne, virtuous, in
authority, and rich: because they are most profitable for other men and the
state also. We likewise use to honor and reverence our elders, by bowing our
bodies and giving them place. Moreover, for so much as the good in men, is of
three sorts, that is, goods of the mind, of the body, and of fortune, they
are all in the bestowing of honors to be justly respected. Therefore the goods
of mind must be preferred, next unto them the goods of body, and last the
goods of fortune ought be regarded. To every of these somewhat belongs,
according to the worthiness Equality to be observed in the bestowing of honor.
thereof and each man ought to have his right and honor due. All these things a
Counselor ought to know, and in bestowing offices, honors and gifts observe
equality; for that is the balance of justice wherewith each man's manners,
virtues, and actions, are waied and examined. In which, heed must be taken,
that by overmuch leaning toward one side, we seem unequal judges and
esteemers of other men's virtue. For he that gives overmuch to him that
deserves it not, does giueto little unto him that is of better desert, and
consequently no rightful or just judge. Whereupon, this justice is defined by
the Philosophers, to be an habit of the mind destined to common utility,
giving to every man the honor he deserves. Among the virtues which challenge
interest in the conversation of human society, equality is not the last,
beingthe handmaiden, servant, and follower of justice: because it does not (as
men say) remove one hai^e breadth from her. This equality in just pondering and
esteeming things and Equality of two sorts.
persons, uses a double manner of proceeding: the one ordinary and common,
judging by number, weight, and measure: the other more difficile and secret,
that is, waying every thing by reason and judgment. Which knowledge is only
understood of wise men, and those that are practiced in great affairs: and the
other chiefly known to such as are occupied in barrating buying and selling.
Let the Counselor therefore have the skill of that equality which proceeds
from reason and judgment, whereby he may conceive what is due to each man,
what honors should be given, what gifts bestowed, what offices dstributed,
what is just, indifferent, good and wise, in all things, in all persons, and in
all places. This equality is assuredly a notable thing, and for the service of
every state, exceeding necessary. And in deed we see many therein dull and
incapable, whereby matters are handled at all adventures and contentiously,
greatly disturbing not only the society of men, but the commonweales also.
Thus much we hope shall suffice, to have been said of Justice* which
consists in use, society, and conversation of men; not intermedling with
courts of Judicial seats.

Fortaine Justice.
An other kind of Justice there is, not far unlike to this, and that
concerns judgment: the foundation whereof is law and the judgment of wise
and just men. Before such time (as is beforesaid) that the skill of written
laws was invented, each man prescribed a law unto himself, and sought not
the same in the books of lawmakers or Doctors. For in those most ancient times,
that chaste and pure virgin (Justice I mean) had her habitation within the
minds of men, giving them laws and precepts how to live justly, and
uprightly: for she being present, suffered not among men any thing to be done,
unjustly, deceitfully, or wickedly. But so soon as men grew weary of
justice, beginning by little and little to covet other men's goods, offer
injuries, and take overmuch to themselves, not restoring that they borrowed:
forthwith arose hate, dissimulations, enemities and war: and thereupon
martial instruments were devised, having in them so great fury as might force
not only justice, but Jupiter himself to give place. Justice with fear of
these terrors driven away) left the earth to be governed by human
licentiousnes, and fled to heaven, making her house of habitation there betwixt
Leo and Libra the celestial signs. Ever since which time those that desired
to govern justly, were forced to look Justice to be sought in heaven.
for wisdom from heaven, because the precepts of true justice, defiled with
our vices, cannot without the special grace of God be conceived. Homer not
without cause, was wont to call kings and others inspired with the wisdom of
governing, Sons of Jupiter. Therefore this gift of divine justice must be
desired of God, that through the precepts and laws thereof, men may be reduced
to their ancient and golden perfection, and such effect be wrought in the
tuition of man's society and in government of commonweales, as in old time
that celestial and incorrupt virgin (during her presence on earth) was wont to
perform. Whereby we may suppose to have called her from heaven to dwell with us
again upon the earth. And since reason cannot prevail in us so much, as
thereby to live justly, godly, and holily, by Justice it must be obtained, since
she by her laws forewarneth, exhorts, and corrects us, preparing rewards
of virtue for the good, and What is Justice.
punishment for the evil. This justice, (as Vlpianus teaches) is a constant
and perpetual desire to give unto every man, that which to him belongs. The
ordaining of laws is proper to Counselors, because they are of all other men,
accounted the wisest, and so the Lacedaemonians, Romans, and other people have
ever thought them. Also in the making of laws, these things (as Plato
teaches) ought be observed, that is, the lawmakers should write them with a
certain fatherly love, and no Lordly intent or tyrannical meaning, framing
them to the terror of others, and with threatenings cause them be proclaimed to
the people, themselves neither obeying, nor regarding any order or law at all,
but practice the common speech. Sic volo, sic ^ubeo, sit pro ratione voluntas.
The lawmakers ought also be careful that the laws contain not more
prescription The end of laws.
of commandments, then discipline of manners. The intent of every lawmakers
is, that by the laws men may be made good and happy, and that offenders
should be punished rather for necessity, than set purpose. For which cause the
Emperor Justinian divided the commandments of law into three. To live
honestly, Law commands three things.
to hurt no man, and give to every one that which was his own. And since laws
do proceed from true reason, it must needs be, that they do only respect
virtue, and from it dissent nothing* because they are (as it were) rules of
honesty, reason, nature, and good life. Who so therefore does abandon laws,
is wicked: and to contemn them is no less evil, then to despise nature, God,
virtue and reason. Heraclitus the Ephesian was wont to say, that free men ought
as manfully to defend the laws, as the walls of their City, for without
walls a City might be preserved, but without laws it cannot. In all
commonweales therefore the laws ought be observed, and from them the rules of
life, good customs, and of all things to be done or not none, must be taken.
Licurgus and So^o^ are commended for making such laws as prescribed not only
what was presently to be done; but also what was after to be eschewed. Which
our Counselor must consider, and do to the end he may know by whatmeanes and
exercises men be made good, and what is the end of perfect life in every
commonweal. By this mean each man will apply his mind to such studies, as be
agreeable to his own nature, thinking it praisable to excel, and for
excellent men the rewards of virtue be prepared. And in truth there is
nothing so hard which men leave unattempted if great gifts and rewards be
thereunto due. Which only thing does remove and drive away all sloth and
idle life, the mother of every vice. For by idleness we see the minds of men to
grow wanton and perish, and as Cato said truly, by nothing doing, the people
did learn how to do evil. Diodorus writes of a certain law among the
Egyptians, The Egyptian law against idleness.
whereby every subject was compelled to give his name to the magistrates,
therewith declaring, what kind of life he liked, how he lived, and what art he
exercised.

The law of Draco and Solo^
And if any did tell untruly or not perform his duty sufficiently was put
to death. Draco seeing the Citizens wastfull, provided by law, that who so was
found idle* should be put to death, which law (as to extreme) Solon did
qu^llifie, punishing that offense Imperial laws.
with infamy only. By the imperial laws, it is provided, that some idle,
slothful, and vn^hriftie subjects should be deprived, and either be whipped
to death, or employed in public slavery. In every state, there are certain
exercises as well for Discipline of war and peace in every commonweal.
peace as war. The one education, does breed Priests, Counselors, and
Judges: The other Chieftaines, Captains and Soldiers. By which means, the
commonweal shall be furnished with subjects, as well for war as peace, and by
their virtue, services both divine and human may be performed, the country
from invasion defended, Change of laws dangerous.
and the bonds thereof enlarged. Great care must also be taken that the laws
may notby any means be altered, for such mutation is always accompanied with
change of men's manners, and disposition. And as the nature of people is always
apt to innovation, so soon as one law is altered, forthwith they desire the
alteration and subuertion of all the rest. Which thing breeds not only
contempt of laws, but also sedition, and mutation of the state. The ancient
laws therefore ought be observed, and sometimes wisely corrected, and reformed.
For every mutation in the commonweal, (be The ordinance of the Locrensi
against the change of laws.
it never so small) is a thing most perilous. Among the Locreuses it was
provided, that if any man did invent a new law, he should first propound the
same to the people, wearing a halter about his neck, to the end that if it
were thought pernicious or unprofitable, as an author of evil, he might
forthwith be hanged. Periander was wont to say, that old laws ought be
observed, and they being grown The princes life a law to the people.
from use, new might be received. It does also greatly profit the state, that
princes and others having authority to ordain laws should as well observe
them in their own persons as compel them to be obeyed by others. For there is
nothing which subjects so much behold as their Prince, whose life is looked
upon and followed as a law. Seleucus made a law, that whosoever were token in
adultrie should loose both his eyes. Afterward his own son being found in
that fault, was desired by all his subjects to pardon him: but that suite
prevailed not otherwise then that first he caused one of his sons, an other
of his own eyes, to be taken out, to the end the severity and reputation of
law might be observed, and that the force thereof might be Laws are made for
two ends.
more regarded then the authority of men. The ends why laws be ordained in
every state are two, the one that Justice may be entered into men, the other to
continue it in them. The first appertains to the lawmaker, who frames the
people fit for virtue, the second belongs to the Judge, for he represseth the
desires of offenders, and conserueth all the right appertaining to the
commonweal. The Judge (as Aristotle thinks) ought from the lawmakers to
receive the laws whereupon he should give judgment. First for that it is
intended one lawmakers is of more wisdom, then many judges. And next because
he foreseeing things to come, does determine without perturbation. Which the
Judge does not, being subject to affection, in that he deals with things
present and judges of persons certain. Even as to make good laws and observe
them, is profitable for the state, so to determine and end contentions by law,
is thought a thing commendable. Among men sometimes contention of doubtful
matters does arise, whereof it behooves the judge to determine. The Judge
therefore is no less necessary to compound controversies in the commonweal
and administer justice, then is the soul in a living body. For being
indifferent to both parties, he reduces that to equality which he thinks
unequal* not unlike unto a line cut into unequal parts, that part which is
to long is cut shorter and added to the other: So does the Judge being the
living law, and as it were an Oracle in the commonweal. The Judge ought also
to account himself an interpreter to lawmakers, a minister of justice and his
chief virtue must be to know what is just and true. He ought therefore not to
swerue from law and the meaning thereof, but give judgment as the laws,
equity, and justice does command: For which respect it behooves him to be
sworn, to the end God may be present to witness his intent and conscience,
which of all other things God has made in man most divine. Let the Judge
likewise be free from ire and all suspicion of hope, love, and hatred, not
corruptible Qualities required in a Judge.
with gifts, not fearful of threats, nor by flattery abused or seduced. For
where judges are subject to these passions, Justice is far removed both from
the judicial seat, and the Judge himself: and there is nothing that
infecteth the commonweal more with seditions, hate, and injuries, then the
corruption and injustice of judges. By good and equal judgments, the love
universal of men is preserved, quarrels, enimitie, war, and sedition are
thereby appeased: because they are in every state of so great force, as by
good judgments the whole commonweal does seem maintained, and by evil
judges subverted. This justice which concerns judgment, has greatest power
to extirpate vices in all states: for if offenders be punished, there will be
no place left for violence, fraud, and audaciousnesse, presumption or injury.

The person of justice was by the ancient Pholosophers painted like unto a
fair virgin, having a severe and fearful aspect* peircing eyes, chaste and
modest countenance, inclined to grau^tie* which Image seems to represent,
that Judges ought be incorrupt and chaste, severe, sharp witted, good
conceiuers of all things, grave, constant, and inexorable. Cambises king of
Persia, caused the skin of one unjust judge Cambises correction of Judges.
to be fleade from his body, and hanged up in the place of judgment, to the
end that thereby all other judges might be warned to be just and upright. In
like manner ought our Counselor, to take heed that his justice (which
extends to all sorts of people) may be most duetifull, and that both in
making and executing of laws, he may declare himself a man of singular
justice, for it were shame to him not to observe laws, who is the executor and
maker of the^: he commands others, and the law commands him: not that
law only which is written in books and tables of brass, but the living law
of reason which remains in our minds. Solon being asked how the commonweal
might be preserved, answered, if the people obey the magistrates, and the
magistrates obey the law. Bias also said, that commonweal might be best
assured, where all men feared the laws, no less then a Tyrant. It were a
thing most inconvenient in all states, that the laws should be reputed like
the spiders web, to take hold of the weak or simple, and suffer the strong
and mighty to pass. Of which error our Counselor shall be heedfull,
indeuouring himself to love, observe and continually be careful how the
laws may in violablely be preserved.

The office of a Counselor.
For it is the true office of a Counselor to know the laws, and honor
justice: yetdo we remember him, in the execution of law, to avoid over much
severity and cruelty. Because extreme justice is accounted extreme injury,
he must therefore so behave himself, as the subjects may more fear his
severity, then detest his bitterness and cruelty. Conformable severity (as
Cicero says) does overcome the vain hope of clemency. Cruelty is proper to
tyrants and barbarous people, neither is there any vice in the commonweal more
vile, cruel, and destable. Let the Counselor be neither extreme, nor over
pitiful, so as in punishing, the punishment shall not be greater then the
offense. We read that in In Rome viii. sorts of punishments.
Rome, there were eight sorts of punishments, that is, damage, imprisonment,
stripes, recompense, ignominy, exile, bondage, and death. In punishing he
ought to resemble laws, which are not disturbed or moved, but executes
revenge upon all offenses, moderately What is to* be observed in punishing.
and peaceably, as hating the fault, not the men. He shall also remember, that
the more authority a man has, the more moderately he ought to use it. Albeit
that Justice in ayding the society of men does employ the service of all other
virtues, and is therefore called their Queen: Yet has she her peculiar
companions, handmaidens, and followers, which are not so common to all other
virtues. The Companions of Justice.
chief of them is petie, goodness, innocence, courtesy, gentleness, clemency,
friendship, and concord. With these whatsoever Senator is endued, furnished and
ornified, is in all respects an absolute and complete professor of Justice.
Piety.


Through piety we gain the good will not only of God but men also, by it we
are counseled to imagine no vain, foolish, or deceiptfull thing, thereby our
words and actions do purchase credit, because the godly man is accounted in
the favor of God, and by his counsel to be governed* Numa Pompilius to gain
himself credit in the religion which he devised for the Romans (dissembling
piety) brought them in belief, that he with his wife Aegeria used to meet
the* Gods in a certane place sacrificed to Camena, and there received the laws
and religion, which the Romans were to live in. They therefore who neither by
persuasion nor force could be reduced to religion, by color of piety were
drawn to be most religious. That religion (though fained) was profitable for
the Romans: but how much more profitable shall the same be in our Counselor
whose religion is true, holy and sincere? What rights what ceremonies, and what
works of piety ought be in a Senator, is not in this place to be discoursed.
It suffices (I think) that each man is instructed in the rules of true
religion, whereof we have said somewhat in our treaty of divine justice. In
the observation of piety, two things are chiefly What to be eschewed in
Piety.
to be eschewed, that is, heresy, and superstition: which vices do many times
in weak minds pervert true piety. We owe also a certain piety to our
parents which is performed by love and reverence. For to them we are bound to
to do all honor, service, and duty: and being aged, (if need so requires)
we ought with our own hands to help them, and defend them from all
misaduentures, Goodness requires we should be good, which is to perform the
actions of virtue. Our Senator Goodness.
therefore shall be a just and goodman, and attain to such perfection of mind,
as he will not only refrain evil doing, but also though he would do evil,
yet he could not: so as, the proverb of country people which Cicero speaks
of, may be in him verified. Where it behooves that in all his actions he do
follow virtue as a Captain, which doing, he shall rightly perform all things
belonging to the duty Innocence.
of an honest just man. For nothing, reco^mendeth a Counsellormore then
innocence of life, seeing thereby he shall be evil willed of no man, fear no
man, norbe enemy to no man, but live happy, without suspicion, fear, force,
and subtlety; sincere, perfect, true and without reproach. Of the innocence
required in a Counselor this is the foundation: to do good to all he is able,
and to hurt no man. This virtue Ioueth simplicity, conjoined with prudence,
allowing of nothing that is cloked, dissembled, feigned or shadowed: therefore
sycophants, dissembles, liars, talebearers, and slaunderers must be excluded
from the number of Senators. It behooves him in all his actions to deal
liberally: For dissimulation is a servile thing. As he is not rightly called
innocent that hurts a little, but he that offends not at all: so is he to
be accounted no dissembler, that in deed is void of all dissimulation. And
like as no man entered the temple of Ceres Elucina unless he were innocent:
being written upon the door: Let no man enter, but he that knows his own
innocence; so into the holy counsel, which is temple of Justice and truth, I
wish that only Counselors innocent, and men of integrity should come. Let
the Counselors mind be open and sincere, not hidden, obscure, or deceiptfull,
saying one thing and meaning another: but his tongue must be a true interpreter
of his mind, and his face, countenance and eyes free from disguising, and full
of natural sincerity: for such customs be common to light persons, and
barbarous people, who know not how to be good men, but abuse both the office
and name of men, and therefore to them either little or no credit ought to be
given. Our Senator therefore shall not only disalow these vices, but also
contemn all those that allow them, rejecting them from his presence and
company, not having to do either privately or publicly with any light, vain
or babbling companion. Our Counselor shall be also courteous to the good; for
courtesy, and affable Courtesy.
speech do greatly win the good will of all men. Let him the^ be willing to
answer, and contented to hear, avoiding all sowernes, and insole^cy in words,
gesture and motion. Let him also contemn squirrilitie, and irreuerent mirth,
moderately, or seldom using vain sports and youthful pastimes. For speech
not merry but grave, not subtle but true, not ridiculous but constant,
becomes a Counselor. Unto courtesy, grauetie beseeming a Counselor, ought
be joined, yet such as contains no pride, disdain, or insolency, but that
which is modest, mild, and gentle. Also for that kindness or benignity is
necessary to lead an honest life, Benignity;
the example of god does show, that through his benignity we are just and
happy. For as God is to us kind, so ought we be gentle and courteous to
others: because man should be (as is commonly said) a God unto man. Gentleness,
privately contains in it humility, temperatenes, mildnes, and a certain
sweetness of manners and speech: and publicly it has clemency and moderation.
Wherefore it shall become the counselor in conversation to be gentle,
courteous and sweet: not sour, austeare and (as Timon was) a hater of men. Let
him therefore dispose himself, to love others, profit, and help them. For as
we owe unto God religion and piety, so is love and benevolence due unto men.
Clemency belongs only to magistrates and men in authority, for Clemency.
by force thereof their displeasure toward offenders becomes qualified. The
opposite to this virtue, is cruelty and bitter extreamitie in punishing, a thing
proper to Tyrants, and men void of all humanity. Draco was so cruel, as by
his laws he ordained the punishment of death to be due as well for idle life,
as murder: And being asked for what cause he made the penalty of the least
offenses, to be equal with the greatest: answered, that he thought so great a
pain due unto the least faults, and for the greatest he could not devise any
great enough. But with much more clemency Scipio was wont to say, he had
rather save the life of one Citizen, then slay a thousand enemies. There is no
virtue that makes men so much loved as clemency, and chiefly those that have
authority: For that virtue is most noted, which is accompanied with authority,
and it is a thing against nature for great men to hurt others. It is therefore
no less reproachful in magistrates to be common punishers, then for physicians
to to bury many patients. Also the governors clemency, does breed in men a
bashfulnes and fear to offend. Yet do I think that clemency and mildnes are
so to be used that severity (at occasion) be not neglected. For without it no
commonweal can be well governed. To overmuch clemency there belongs a
certain superfluous pity conceived of the adversity of others: which the
Stoics would every wise man should want, saying it is the imperfection of a
base mind yielding to the nature of other men's offenses: and therefore such
may be resembled to foolish women that would have thieves delivered, because
they see them shed tears in prison. Moreover the Stoics affirm, that mercy
ought to respect the cause, and not the fortune wherein clemency is used, for
that proceeds of reason, the other should be eschewed. But omitting their
opinions, we will that our Senator shall be endued with clemency and mercy,
employing them in all things that are honest and just.

(...).
Furthermore as the society of men is preserved by those good gifts which
proceed from a just, sincere, and merciful mind, so ought it also be assisted
with external furniture of fortune, as riches, possessions; In what sort
things ought to be common.
and money, since thereby as well our own, as other men's lives by giving and taking
are maintained. Also whatsoever nature has made for the commodity of man, It
wills that the same should be common for all men, yet not so, that each man
should have therein property, but that by imparting, giving, and lending, it
should (so much as reason requires) be made common: Of which conjunction of
minds, necessities, amities, and inward good will should grow. This virtue
whereby we are persuaded to give and supply the necessities of other men, is
called liberality, because it is a thing worthy a free man, and requires a
free mind. But for that there are diverse degrees of men's society, whereof
some ought be preserved before others, the offices of liberality In what sort
to be liberal.
shall be observed, if we become most liberal, and beneficial to those that are
to us nearest and most dear: wherein the order of nature is to be followed,
preferring our parents, children, and kindred What to eschew in liberality.
before others, and our friends, before men unknown. And likewise our
countrymen before strangers. In liberality heed must be taken, that we give
not more then our power suffers, nor less then the office of dignity and
humanity requires. For those that have no stay in giving, are prodigal; and
they that give nothing, be called nigardly and miserable, which vices, who so
desires to eschew (for all vices are indeed to be eschewed) let him look to
whom he gives, when, how, what, in what place and time. For to give unto him
that has enough, (unless ye believe he needs more then he has, or do it
to show magnificence) by so doing, liberality is abused. We must therefore
know, what is fit to be given to each man, for it were unfit to give a targat
unto a priest, a book to a soldier, a gown to a ploughman. We ought therefore
to give, first things necessary, then things profitable, and lastly things
pleasant and durable. For necessity and profit are the causes of giving. In
giving chief respect must be had to honesty, to the end we abuse not the
office of liberality, by giving evil things, or to evil persons: For
benefits evil bestowed, are (as Ennius thinks) reputed evil deeds: since (as
men commonly say) he that gives to a person worthy, receives a benefit. Some
men become liberal moved thereto by a certain fury of mind: whose gifts do
merit no praise, because they are not given as they ought be, deliberatly, and
with judgment: Such gifts are commonly bestowed by vain and unadvised
persons. These customs are therefore to be eschewed in liberality, and the
other to be observed. There is no virtue that wins the good will of men more
then this: For through it we relieve others, and make proof of our own
liberal, just and well disposed mind. To be liberal, what is it else, then
to imitate God? For as he is liberal toward us, so we should be liberal to
others. We must moreover be wary least our liberal deeds be not performed
with the spoil of other men, for that liberality Whereof to be liberal.
which is done to harm other is greatly unjust. We must therefore give of such
goods which are justly gotten by our own or others industry: and chiefly to
those, that by our giving shall be the better, either in study of liberal
sciences or in the discipline of war, which are things most profitable to
commonweal. Among many errors which men commit, those are most perilous,
whereby we are so blinded, as we neither know how to give, no of whom to
receive a benefit.

Therefore difference of men is to be made, also the manners and disposition of
each man toward us with his worthiness ought to be wayed: for nothing is done
liberally, but that which is done justly. Neither is the office of liberality
exercised only by money: for some are helped with the presence of friends;
others with credit, others with favor, others with counsel, others with
authority, others with labor, and such like: which kind of benefits are most
honorable, and fit for a cou^sellor: for the one, comes from the cofers of
the liberal man, and the other from his virtue, which cannot be exhausted or
diminished. Among many other virtues in Scipio Africanus, this is not the
least: that he never returned home, but before his return, he made some one or
other man beholding unto him. The Son of Titus Vespatianus was wont to say,
that the day wherein Laws of liberality.
he bestowed no benefit, was time utterly lost. It is also the office of a
liberal man to acquit a benefit with more abundance then it was received. In
giving, these two precepts must be observed: to forget the benefit we give, and
remember well that we have received: for the commemoration of a good turn
received, is a kind of exprobation, and a mind unthankful is odious both to
God and men. We must also in giving not be miserable, as though we were both
unwilling orsory to give, but do it willingly and with a frank mind, for be
it money or other thing, whatsoever is given, the same is not to be called the
benefit, but the sign of the benefactors mind: Neither shall thou observe
what, but how willingly it is given, for liberality is measured chiefly by
the will of the giver: and therefore a certain man receiving a benefit of an
other that gave it unwillingly, called that gift a loaf made of Magnificence
stones. Next liberality, Magnificence follows, which virtue consists in
great expenses and gifts, differing from liberality in this only, that the
one is employed in small and mean gifts and the other in great. Magnificent
men were wont to show their virtue in building Churches, erecting cities,
towns, villages, and doing all things whereby either God might be honored, or
their own good same increased. In which actions, comelines must be observed,
and respect must also be had to the person, place, time, and matter, wherein
the magnificent charge is bestowed. For it were folly for him to seem What to
be eschewed in magnificence.
magnificent, that wants both power and judgment to perform great matters.
Let him also beware of that which is commonly said, that each man's coat must be
cut according to the quantity of his cloth. And albeit that parcimonie is
reputed a great reuenew, yet ought we not be so sparing as to seem void of
liberality, covetous, miserable, and careless, both of others and ourselves,
also* we must not only be fillers of bags, or hoorders of coin, as men that
study more to enrich a lascivious heir, then profit the commonweal, friends
or kinsfolks. Surely covetousness is a sickness incurable, which (as Salustius
How money ought be used.
says) does effeminate both body and mind And it takes delight in two things,
that is, to give nothing, and receive much. Money therefore is to be used
liberally, moderately, and in good and honest uses: always reserving somewhat,
not only for friends, physicians, and foes, but also for our country the
necessity whereof is to be preferred before all other. They that are delighted
in feasting, glotenie, and play, therein consuming their substance, the memory
whereof lasts but one only day: are deuourers not only of private but also
of public riches: they are also holden men of light mind and prodigal not
only of money, but also of their fame, reputation and honor. Truly it
behooves the state to provide, that no Excess i^ commonw ought be restrained
by law.
man should abuse his own riches: and therefore I think it good, that such men
were compelled by law, to spare their money from vain expenses and matters of
no moment. In Rome it was provided by law, that no Senator should be indebted
above a certain sum prescribed. Which order was taken to remove excess and
superfluous charges. P. R^finus was deposed from the Senate by the Censores,
for having ten pounds weight of silver. Also Aemelius Lepidus having built a
house which cost six thousand pound was for that cause deprived from the
Senate. A Counselor ought therefore to live so, as he may be magnificent and
liberal, What Magnificence is in a senator.
not only of money, but also of reputation, counsel and good will: which
virtues do conioyne the peoples minds, breeding friendship and concord,
wherewith all Cities and common places be united. Furthermore nature has so
ordained, as without friendship no man has ever lived, notwithstanding he were
so abundantly furnished with riches, as he wanted nothing to lead a desired
life. For seeing man is Friendship.
a civil creature and lover of society, he cannot in any wise want the use of
other men's couersation. From this fountain all natural amities, as marriages,
consanguinities and affinities do proceed. Nature is a lover of men,
conioyning them not only in conversation and good will, but also binding them
with obligation of blood. We see that all lawmakers have studied for nothing
more, then that by the benefit of laws men might live in love and friendship,
because wheresoever the rights, of amity are esteemed, their injury,
sedition, and hatred cannot have force: since in all such places, peace,
tranquillity, love, and affection do rain, by which means the inhabitants
are made happy and blessed. Who so takes away friendship from the commonweal,
does (as it were) remove the Sun from the world.

Therefore commonweales receive great good by frie^dship, for where it is, no
civil dissension can arise, and all men with one assent (as it were one
particular man loving his wife) will (as Pythagoras says) join in love* and
become as it were one man: for so much is the force of friendship, as of many
it makes one only mind. Which friendship is, What friendship is,
by Leliu^ defined, to be a perfect consent of things di^^ne and human, in all
love, cha^itie, and affection. Diverse kinds of amity there are, whereby men
are drawn to love one another some do love in respect of confanguimitie* some
for alliance, some for a^f^it^. Civil friendship. (...)
But of civil amity (whereof virtue is the foundation, and grows among men
unacquainted) the observation is not easy: for the diversity of delights does
cause that good men do seldom concur in friendship, since thereunto time and
conversation is required: because the manners of men are often altered through
adversity or prosperity, age profit, loss, and honor. Each man at the first
meeting is not to be received into friendship, for (as the proverb says) men
must ear many bushels of salt together, before they become true and perfect
friends. The honest manners of men are to be diligently considered, and what
sidelitie and love we find in our selves must be bestowed upon The best kind
of friendship.
our friends. The Philosophers think that amity is most assured which is bred
by likeness of conditions: for where men's delights be one, there desires cannot
be diverse. Such friends were Theteus and Pericheu^, Achilles and Patroclus,
Orestes and Pilades, Damon and Pythias. Of which two, the love was so great, as
Diontsi^s desired he might join therein, and become a third. In choosing
friends chief respect is to be had unto virtue, for the nature of virtue is
such as virtuous men do not only refuse the friendship of evil men, but also
deem them unworthy to be looked on. Few friends are better then many: for
perfect friendship cannot remain in the mind of great numbers. They that are
delighted with familiarity of many, are not accounted friends, but men
compinable and fair conditioned: for it is one thing to be conuersable and
gentle in the entertainment of all men, and an other thing to be a friend to
one whom we make a perpetual fellow and continual companion of our
cogitations and life. Epaminondas was wont to say, a man ought not go from
court, till such time as he had won some new friend to be joined unto the
number of his old. Which rule seems to serve better to gain the common
goodwill of men, then perfect friendship. Those things which for the love of
friends ought be done, should be just, Friendship requires three tgings.
not having more respect to love, then honesty. True friendship requires three
things: first virtue, from which we may never be removed then pleasure* which
consists in familiarity and s^^ce^e coni^er sation of life: and lastly
profit, whereby one friend helps an other with things necessary. Peri^^^
being desired by a friend to and him with false witness, answered he would
friend him as high as the heavens, (...) that men should aid their friends so
farse as Justice, equi^ie, land the laws of God do permit. Also it is more
(...) friends from evils things, then therein to incou^rage them. So^^ime also
concentions do happen between friends, because the one c^^tente (...) the
other, and each of them does ^o (...) for more respect at the others hand, then
reason requires: which things do vitterly (...) How to employ friends.
amity. Wherefore in friendship let ^his be sp^ci^^ly (...) that we require of
our friend, not that which would (...) that which he may lawfully do for (...)
Which obsegua^i^^ is* ^^^^ned in the honor due to God and parents: unto whom,
we (...) means able to render honor and tha^^s equal to (...) deserts* yet
he that does honor them to his power, is commonly called (...) and godly.
Moreover the friendship of fools is (...) to be desired, for the familiarity
of such men breeds contemp^. The ^^seruations as Counselor ought hau^ in the
chois^ (...) friends, whereunto himself shall add diners other, as
comprehended rather b^ (...) and custom, then by precepts: always remembering
never to (...) from justice. He must also provide, that by the friendship (...)
the quiet of other subjects may be preserved: for there is nothingmore noble,
then that the governors of state, should show themselves friends, companions,
fellows, and well willets. For what concord or consent of subjects can be in
that commonweal, were the governors and magistrates do disagree? Aristides
and Themistocles Friendship of senators.
were enemies, yet when soever they joined in public ^^bassage or commission
of war, being come to the confines of the ^thenians land, they laid down
all contention and st^ile, though after their return home, many times old
displeasure was pursued. It is the property of a noble and great mind to
forget ini^ries and cont^^^e the^: which whosoever does for love to the
co^monweale, ought be called a good and just man: and not so to do for the
safety of friends, is a part of inhumanity, barbarousnes, and rusticitie:
because friendship should be immortal, and enimitie mortal. To friendship
hospitality is a companion, for it receives and courteously intertaineth not
only Hospitality.
men known, but also persons unknown, and strangers. This virtue gains us
not ^^ely great praise and glory, but also reputation and honor. The
privileges belonging to hospitality are so great, as the (...) observed the
rights thereof to their enemies, and would never sight till such time as the
prisoners to whom they were indebted for meat, were set at liberty. The
Counselor therefore shall not only make estimation of friendship in himself,
but also exhort others to do the same. The use of frienship in every
commonweal is great, and much greater then of justice, if therein all men
constantly would per^euer. Plato finding he could not bring the commonweal to
happiness by any virtue, reduced all laws and customs to friendship, devising
that all things should be made common, for by mean thereof men should be
retained in continual society, affirming that two only words that is is to
say, m^ne and thine, we^^ the things which disturbed the society of men.

Concord.
Of amity grows concord, being nothing else then civil amity: and is as it
were a conspira^ie of all degrees of men, to maintain liberty, law, justice,
sidelitie, religion, and quietness in the commonweal. The chief hope to
continue quietness in the commonweal, is when all men consent in all times
and all things to the preservation thereof, and do in counsel consult with
unity and concord. Wherefore let our Counselor be a defendour and champion of
concord: For discord is the poison of all commonweales. Seeing there was never
any Emperor, Tyrant or governor that prevailed against consent. Therefore the
Senate of Rome did most commonly inhabit the house of concord, to show thereby
that in counsel, nothing should be done seditiously or contentiously, but all
things performed courteously and peaceably. Agesilaus king of Lacedemonia,
keing asked why Sparta was not environed with walls, informed the asker, that
the Citizens lived united and armed, and showing him the men said, Lo, here
are the walls of Sparta. Scilurus having fowrescore sons before his death
offered them a bondle of arrows to be broken at once: they answering it were a
thing impossible: he took the arrows one by one, and brake them all, thereby
warning his sons, to live in concord, saying that by force thereof they should
be invincible and happy. In like manner Mycypsa king Numedy being ready to
die, assembled his children, and admonished them in any wise to be lovers of
concord, alleging the saying which never ought be forgotten, which is: that by
concord small things increase, Discord of Couns: dangerous.
but by discord the greatest are consumed. The discord of Senators ought above
all to be eschewed, lest by such example the other subjects be infected. It
were dishonorable for them to spend time in chiding, and not in counselling,
for there is nothing so agreeable to their calling, as love, peace, concord,
and good will: and that state is in apparent peril, where the Senate is
divided. For how should those that contend one against the other consult of
peace, concord, or quietness in the commonweal? Wherefore, either the
contendors minds must be reconciled, or without respect to say their minds:
for those ought be removed from Counsel and punished, that prefer private
hate, before public peace and tranquillity. In Counsel nothing should be
done contentiously, unwillingly, or seditiously. Of concord and Justice let
this we have said sustice. Now, for so much as the condition of life is subject
to sundry perils and misaduentures, so as it behooves us either to suffer, or
mansully reu^nge, it therefore seems necessary to Fortitude.
discourse of Fortitude, with whose weapons all assaults of the mind and
fortune are vanquished. That kind of life which is quiet, peaceable, and
assured from all perils and discommodities, is most commonly of men desired:
esteeming that as singular virtue which works such an effect as the
professors thereof may be delivered and made free from continual molestation,
cares, ttoubles, and discontentations. Notwithstanding, all men (in my opinion)
be greatly deceived, that think the life of man may be pleasantly passed
without the mixture of perils and perturbatio^s. Fornature has so provided
that our lives should be subject to many mischances, and that as our bodies are
disquieted with labor and toil, so the mind should be traveled with
disco^tented imaginations. Neither can there be any taste of virtue or
happiness, if without mishaps we always did live. For sorrows being passed
(like rest after labor) do make the fruit of felicity much more pleasing.
Virtue is not a Lady of solatarie or idle life, but loves labor, rejoices,
and triumphs in times of peril which was the cause that Hercules contemned
the way to pleasure, because it was large and wide, and made choice to seek
virtue, whereunto the passage is hard, and full of difficulty. Who so desire^h
to enjoy the possession of perfect virtue and happy life, must of force
despise pleasures, disdain worldly things fly idlenesnd be persuaded that to
fear and be irresolute, is a thing, most reproachful. Also it becomes us not
only to overcome all toils and dangers in aspyring to virtue: but being
thereof possessed, we ought with much more courage and greatness of mind,
endure all calamities, sorrows and dangers whatsoever, wherein by virtue it
self we are much aided, since through it we are made constant, courageous,
strong, and mighty: and there is nothing so hard or difficult, which the force
of virtue does not withstand, and with her power bring under. This excellency
of mind is called Fortitude; an affection obeying virtue by constant suffering
and enduring: which is an ornament to all (...) an (...) to (...) virtues*
other virtues. For the substance and nature of Prudence, Justice, and
Temperance, is of it self without fortitude soft, and effeminate: For the
property of them is to think and do only; but the quality of this virtue
is, to think and execute constantly, manfully, and valiantly. This virtue is
assuredly most requirable in a Counselor, for without it he shall never
imagine nor perform any thing noble or worthy memory. What to eschew in
fortitude.
Yet therein we must take heed neither to be foolish, hardy, proud, rash,
timersome, slothful, or cowardly. Who so would be valiant, it behooves him
to be so affected, as to do all things for love to virtue, and in attempting
perils be lead by reason, and not by hazard, chance, or desperation. All
commendation due to Fortitude consists partly in Domestical, and partly in
Public, and military Domestical Fortitude.
actions. Domestical Fortitude does ornefie the happiness of life: and the
quality thereof is to remove all perturbation of mind, desire, fear, sorrow,
voluptuousnes, anger, and every other affection: possessing our minds with
tranquillity, constancy, and comeliness Fortitude military.
of life. Fortitude military consists in suffering all labor and peril, and
chiefly in disdaining death for cause of honesty, and the quarrel of our
country. It is therefore the office of a valiant Counselor not to be dismayed
in time of danger, enduring and suffering all things which to be done* are
thought honorable, and not doing The properties of Fortitude.
them, seems vile, and reproachful. The chief properties of a great and
valiant mind, are, to fear nothing, to contemn all worldly things, and be
persuaded to suffer whatsoever befalls.

Moreover it behooves a Counselor to be so courageously affected and disposed,
that all his gifts of wit and mind, together with his virtues be (as with a
certain sauce) tempered with Fortitude: For as our meats without salt, so all
virtues wanting fortitude, are judged unsavory. This is that, which defends
both body and mind from all furies of misfortune. This is that, which makes
us in Prudence quiet, in Temperance constant, and in Justice stout, valiant,
and invincible. We ought therefore be always valiant in mind, in enterprises
resolute, in disdain magnanimious, and in suffering never dismayed. This virtue
called fortitude, wants not a flock of mean virtues companions, and
followers: As, magnanimity, constancy, patience, confidence, Followers of
fortitude.
and security. It is the property of men nobly minded, to do and aspyre to
those things which in every virtue are thought greatest and most honorable.
This virtue is chiefly known by aspyring to honors* for it disdaineth those
whom she thinks inferiors in virtue. The noble minded man ascends to
honor by the stayrs of virtue, and as it were imitating the course of
Marcellus, who of the Siracusan spoils builded a temple consecrated to honor,
making the passage thereunto in such sort, that no man could enter it unless
he first pass through the house of virtue to it adjoining: being persuaded
there was no way open to honor but by virtue, which the noble Senator in
aspiring and seeking his honor ought assuredly to believe. Moreover, let him
contemn small imaginations: for to men of so notable virtue, no blot or touch
of infamy can be imputed. He must as well in adversity as prosperous fortune
bear one self same mind, declaring the nobility of his valiant, and
honorable heart in great The properties of a magnanimious Counselor.
and extreme dangers, and not in any wise to faint though death should thereof
follow: for to such men, honest death is the beginning of life, whereunto a
valiant Counselor must give himself willingly for honor and immortal
glories sake. The fame of Codrus shall live for ever, because he, to save his
army and country, sacrificed himself. Also the names of Curtius and Sceuola,
the one casting himself hedlong into a devouring pit to deliver Rome from
plague, the other burned of his own hand, to make the enemies know that the
Romans were resolute in the defense of their liberty. The memory of valiant
men is hallowed with immortal honor, and by record of all Chronacles are
preserved alive for ever. It is also the part of a noble Senator to judge
truly and constantly of all things* not following the opinion of common
people, who determine by chance, or as present occasion requires. He shall
likewise willingly take upon him the defense of truth, and therein not
dissemble, protesting himself an open enemy to all evil men, unless he
sometimes think good to disguise (as wise men do) being thereto forced by
necessity, respect of persons and time. Let him willingly and freely bestow
his benefits, and unwillingly, bashfully and discretly receive of others
following the advice of Hesiodus, who willed, that a good turn received should
be reacquited with increase: for he that receaueth is Taxilis.
therein inferior to him that gives. Taxilis one of the Indian kings, meeting
with Alexander the great (as Plutarchus reports) said unto him* I challenge
thee, not to war nor combat, but unto an other kind of contention: if thou
be our inferior receive a benefit, or if thou be our superior, bestow a good
turn upon us, to whom (it is written) Alexander answered: thus it becomes us
to contend, not who should receive, but who can excel and overcome an other in
well deserving, and with those words embraced him, and suffered him to enjoy
his kingdom with increase. The Counselor must also be liberal of his
authority and indifferent to all men, but chiefly to those that be of mean
fortune. Among great personages, he shall be magnanimious and high minded: for in
that presence to extol himself, and discretly speak in his own glory is the
quality of a generous mind: but in company of inferiors to do so, would be
accounted a light part, for of the one glory, and of the other How to take
quarrel.
hatred, grows. In taking quarrel or offense, he shall attend just cause, and
honest occasion: therein showing himself neither secret nor crafty, but plain
and open. For it is the property of a great mind to hate apparently, and
without disguising or dissembling countenance to cloak displeasure. The
magnaminious Counselor shall rather repulse, then offer injury, disdaining
those wrongs that be done him, for it is the quality of great spirits to set
light and contemn small injuries, and a womannish thing it is to fear with
anger, since some beasts are so silly and of so small force, as neither Elephant
nor Lion will vouchsafe to offend them. Let our Counselor also be an earnest
delighter in things honest, and a moderate seeker for profit. His life must be
governed rather to his own content, then the fancy of others, and trust rather
to The Counselor no follower of each man's fancy.
the counsel of friends, then the examples of other men. Let him be no evil
conceiuour or speaker, nor willingly hear any man evil spoken of. Neither
should he be without just cause angry or offended, for anger is a servile
thing, as the Poet says. Quo quisque est mayor, magis est placabilis irae:
Et faciles motus, men's generoso capit.


Some men through a haughty and proud arrogancy have obscured the brightness
of their magnanimious minds: which are chiefly those, that do not rightly
examine the duty of their own virtue or honor, arrogating to themselves
more then becomes good and wise men: which vice our Counselor shall in any
wise eschew: following that precept of Tullie, which says, that the higher we
are in authority, the more lowly we ought behave us. For indeed arrogance is
both odious and offensive to all men. In like manner, lightness, viletie, and
cowardice must be avoided, for he that puts up injuries, and for fear or
want of knowledge does bear them, does seem a slave or bondsman. Some there
are, who being good and wisemen, yet through faint heart and cowardice do
think themselves unfit to perform great enterprices, and stand in fear to
take in hand the defense of their country and friends. Therefore are to be
reputed fools and slothful.

Constancy.
It also becomes a valiant Counselor in all speeches, actions, and
adversities (if any happen) to be constant: for a moveable and unconstant mind
more mutable then Proteus, is in such a man no less unseemly then fraud or
deceit. True it is, that things are praisable, which be taken in hand with
judgment and reason: notwithstanding, if thereunto perseverance be not joined,
they be accounted discommendable. The constancy of Aristides meriteth high
commendation: for when Dionisius desired his daughter in marriage, he answered
that he had rather see her dead, then the wife of a Tyrant: and having slain
her, was again asked whether he continued in that mind said: he was sorry for
the fact, but glad that he had so spoken. Who would not also admyre the
constancy of Cato? In whom (notwithstanding the affliction of his country)
was never seen any alteration, but had always one cheer, one countenance,
as well being repulsed and accused, as when he was Praetor: continuing the same
constancy in country, in counsel, in war, in time of his death, and in
that terrible fear, when the state was vanquished, Caesar armed and as
victorious usurped the commonweal. Xantippe was wont to say, that Socrates her
husband returned always home with the same countenance he went forth: for
indeed such was the mind of that Philosopher, as neither with adversity or
prosperity it could be disturbed. It behooves us therefore in suffering sorrow
and grief to be firm and stable, repressing all perils of body and cares of
mind, like unto Regulus who rather then the prisoners should be restored,
delivered himself to the Carthagenienses. It is reported that when Anaxarchus
was beaten by Nicorontus Tyrant of Cyprus, he said unto him, thou may for thy
pleasure persecute and torment this body, but my constancy of mind cannot
What to be eschewed in Constancy.
not be harmed. Notwithstanding, the Counselor shall above all things take
heed not to be over constant in matters unjust, for constancy should only
accompany virtue. Moreover to defend any conceit obstinately against reason
and the opinion of good and wise men, or to persevere in trouble, for an unjust
cause, is the qualetie not of a constant but a self willed stubborn, foolish,
and perverse mind. Constancy is also required in the choice of man's life, for
who so perseuereth not in that course and trade he has chosen and embraced, is
thought in all other things worthy to want the praise of constancy. Constancy
is the conseruer of all good counsels and actions: for vain were our wise
consultations, if the same should ebb and flow like the river of Eurippus. Also
great constancy ought be, to keep secret matters of counsel, for many things
there spoken, are neither to be told to strangers nor domestical friends. It
is the property of a light and unconstant head, to blab out mysteries done or
spoken in counsel: which was the respect, that the Romans consulting of
great matters, would not admit the Pedarij Senators, nor any of the Clerks to
be present, but they themselves performed that office. At the beginning, the
Senate house was open to all young men that were descended of the number of
Patritii, til after that noble and memorable part, of Papirius they were
forbidden, least through inconstancy of youth, the secrets of state should be
discovered, Papyrius.
and thereby the commonweal damnified. Papirius being one day asked by his
mother, of what matter so long disputation was held in Counsel, (dissembling
the truth,) answered, merely: whether it were more profitable for the state
that one man should have two wives, or one wife have two husbands. Moreover, in
fortitude, patience and a certain Patience.
suffering is looked for, which Tullie defines, saying; patience is a
voluntary and continual enduring of adversity for honor or commodities
sake, the use thereof is in war greatest. For they that be soldiers, do
often adventure their lives, and patiently suffer all dangers for the love they
bear to honor and profit. This virtue is also at some times necessary for
the Counselor, when he is wearied with domestical and public business: for
many troubles and cares do happen in the commonweal, which of force must be
borne with patience. Surely if Coriolanus in his repulse, aspiring to the
consulship, had used patience, he had thereby done more wisely, and his life
should not have been followed with so many misaduentures. The old saying is
assuredly true: that patience is a remedy against all griefs: for things past
and not recouerable may be endured, but not amended. Our Senator endued with
this suffering shall easily find a mean to digest and contemn both private
and public sorrows: he that cannot endure grief, is soft and effeminate,
but who so can, is rightly called patient, yet in the use of patience VVhatto
be eschewed in Patience.
we must take order, least through the multitude and greatness of injuries we
become distraught: for patience often offended and moved, provoke fury.
Therefore grief must be qualified with moderation of mind, and whatsoever
necessarily must be borne, becomes every man to endure since all sorrows are
overcome by patience. There is also a certain assurance of mind, orco^ceipt of
good success, which many times does make us valiant. That virtue is called
Confidence encouraging us to hope well Confidence*
in great and honorable enterprices. Which conceit proceeds of wisdom,
counsel, and perfect hope: For whenever we have gotten the knowledge and
opinion of something, not hastily assenting to reason: that imagination does
draw us on, as that which we think honest, and without fear resolutely we
perform it: because he that is confident, fears not. It is reported, that
Julius Caesar seeing Caius Crastinus prepared with good hope, to fight in the
Pharsalike war, asked of him what (as he thought) would be event of that
battle? whereto Crastinus holding up his hand armed, said, Caesar thou shall be
victorious, and have cause either to commend me alive or dead: which indeed
came to pass, for fighting most valiantly in that exployte he was slain: and
Caesar assembling all his army, made an oration in his praise. Aristotle says
that men accustomed to victory do thereby conceive a confident hope of happy
proceeding. The like hope we have by fortunate success in other actions.
Plutarke writes that Antonius was always accompanied with an Aegyptia^
Philosopher who only by men's aspect knew the nature, felicity, and desteny of
each man: he used to commend much the fortune of Antonius, but much more the
happiness of Octauius: saying, that the spirit which followed Octauius was of
more power, then that which accompanied Antonius, for besides other
conjectures, he so conceived, because in gaming or fight Genius vitator.
of Cocks and quails, Octauius had the better hap and was more luckie. It is
supposed that nature has given unto every King, Prince, and great personage a
certain Angel to be defendor of his life, and forewarner of that he is to
take in hand: which spirit Homer and Plato does call Genium, other do name it
Laris, Demon, Lemuris, and we have termed it Angelus. Which Angel does assist
valiant men in battle; and many times does inform them what is to be done. Of
them, there are two sorts, the one good the other evil. We read that
Vladislaus Iagelonus king of Polonia in the war of Prussia against the
Germans did see an Angel armed assisting him in fight, whom he religiously
called Diuum Stanislaum. By reason of this sight he fought cofidently, was
victorous, and in dispite of the Tyrants delivered Prussia. Plutarcke writes
of an evil Angel which accompanied Brutus, for he upon a time reasoning of
the war, there appeared a man of exceeding greatness: and Brutus asking what
he was, answered his evil spirit whom he should see in the Philippian war:
which seemed true, for thereby he foretold both the unfortunate success of
that war, and his death also. The Romans were wont to have confidence in
the predictions of their spirits: as is appears by the inscriptions of the
ancient Romoine coin, Genio Augusti, Genio Senatus, Genio populi Romani, and
thereupon Ovid says. Et vigilant nostra, semper in vrbe lares.


Moreover, there is nothing better in confidence, then to trust unto wisdom
and counsel, with which confidence let our Senator be endued, to make him in
every action valient, and courageous, for all other helps and hopes do
sometimes fail, because they are not in our What to eschew in confidence.
power. Therefore as it is most noble, so is it also most sure to have a
confident hope in virtue. In confidence we are to eschew temeritie, foolish
hardines, and desperation: which vices do sometimes fill our Security.
minds with a false hope of fortitude, casting us unadvisedly into dangers. As
security is the end of good life, so is it also the end of a valient life:
since thereof comes repose of cares and tranquillity of mind. The man endued
with security, is (as Cicero says) in the same condition wherein he was
before his birth. Security is the want of sorrow and sickness wherein some
Philosophers did think the happy life consisted. For love thereof, Democritus
and Homer traveled Egypt, Babylon and Persia, hoping to attain knowledge,
whereby their minds instructed with diverse sciences might become secure,
perfect, and contented Public secu^ritie*
with there own fortune. The profit of security appears in the commonweal,
when therein all things are peaceable, quiet, and free from perils, fears,
quarrels, and troubles: which every man calls common happiness. Yet are we to
take heed, not to build our society upon light, uncertain, or fallible
things: neither shall we hold our selves secure by being slothful, careless,
or negligent. Pompeius having a What to be eschewed in security.
great army and coming to fight with Caesar, seemed secure: yet those
Captains who feared the diligence of Caesar warned him to be vigilant; to whom
he answered, that all was sure, and willed them to sleep on both sides. But
this security deceived him, for he was vanquished by Caesar and forced to
fly. This error happens to many commonweales: for being used to long peace,
they deem themselves in security, which may more rightly be called sloth,
cowardice, dulnes, or negligence. In such states we see all things neglected,
which appertain unto good government: either to withstand public dangers, or
make the subjects valiant or just. The Empire of Rome was not enlarged, so much
by any means as by the virtue military* In so much as, not only the Roman
arms, but also their laws extended far. That City from the time of Romulus
till the reign of Octauius Augustus, was never disarmed. But Octauius finding
the whole world in peace, caused the temple of Ianus (which only in time of
universal peace stood open) to be shut: as though thereby the state should be
ever secure from martial tumults Rome being by this mean made secure, no
Emperor succeding opend the the temple of Ianus so as from thence forth the
people embraced rather an idle industrious life: whereof followed, that with
time, all kingdoms, countries, and cities, cast of the Roman yoke, and wan
unto themselves liberty and Rome it self being utterly disarmed, became
subject to the Gotij. We therefore advise our Counselor to allow only of such
security, What moves men to be valiant.
as^a^teth not care and provision whereby peril and misfortune may be avoided.
For happy is that co^monweale which in time of peace prepares for war. We may
not now forget to discourse what reasons do persuade me^ to be valiant, and
willingly employ their persons in actions military. There are many that only
lead with love to honesty and virtue, do rather choose to hazard their bodies
and lives in fight, then in time of danger to abandon their Country, Prince,
or friends. Which commendation our country men may challenge, because they are
willing to serve in war, only for honor and virtues sake. We read that the
Romans, Germans, and French Captains, at such times as they brought their
soldiers to fight, did always animate them with persuasions of their own
great forces, the excellency of their General, the virtue of their ancestors,
and the spoils of the enemies: but our chieftaines do use none other eloquence
to encourage their army, then this, Let each man now remember his own virtue
and reputation: which only persuasion sufficed the Polonians, whose property
is either to be victorious, or die in the field. Who so therefore is so
affected, as for love to honesty and virtue will refuse none adventure (the
same being performed according to judgment) ought justly to be called valiant:
as he that The rewards due to soldiers
for desire of glory and praise does attempt all things valiantly. Which kind
of men for their noteble acts, ought be honored with rewards and badges of
dignity. And albeit soldiers do more commonly endeavor themselves to
understand how enemies should be vanquished, then how subjects may be
governed, yet being wise men, they ought be advanced to the dignity of
Counselors. For it is reasonable, that after much labor in service of their
country, they should be clad in long robes, and enjoy the benefit of civil
ttanquilitie. In Rome, all such soldiers were adopted Senators, as brought home
any spoil that appertained to the person of the enemy, or that did wear a
garland, for saving a Citizen by fight. Those that had borne office in the
field by the space of ten years, were admitted to civil magistracy. Regulus
being removed from the dignity of a Senator, received that disgrace in so great
disdain, as he tare his clothes open, and showed the wounds of his body:
thereby claiming a place in Senate, and recounted what martial services he had
done for thewelfare of his country. Which persuasion prevailed, and he again
became remitted to his former dignity.

Some there are, who lothing their own lives and lead with a certain What to
be eschewed in fortitude.
desperation, do rashly adventure themseues to dangers, imagining that therein
they imitate the actions of valiant me^, alleging this poetical speech. Vna
salus victis, nullam sperare s^lutem.


The people of Numantia, did choose rather to slay themselves, then yield to
the hands of merciful enemies. The Saguntin^ were of like resolution, as
Liuius writes. But we ought never to do any thing despe^ately. For who soever
dispaireth, does flee from Fortitude, and it is the sin of an abject mind
through fear and cowardice, to seek death. But a valiant man does contemn
life with judgment, and fights valiantly, not as void of all hope, but
because he thinks so doing is honest and necessary which is the reason, he
makes choice rather to die, then dishonor his life with reproach, preferring
honest death before a shameful life. The Paripatetians affirm anger to be
Anger.
the wherstone of Fortitude, and men being therewith lightly moved, do attempt
all enterprices with more earnestnes of mind. Nevertheless in use thereof, all
fury and outrage must be avoided, least we seem rather mad then valiant:
which may be done, by making Ire a companion and no Captain to Fortitude.
There is nothing more unseemly in men, (and chiefly in Counselors) then doing
all things angerly: for who so is lead with that passion, seems to imitate
the condition of bruit beasts whose property is to revenge in fury. In
enterprising all courageous attempts, let honesty and reason march before, and
anger be ready to assist them. Plato calls anger the senowes of the mind,
because through it the mind is stretched up, and by mildnes let down. Who so
begins a war in heat and anger, is called colloricke but not valiant,
because he makes his enterprise, moved by perturbation and not by honor or
reason. Therefore the Epicure says well, that immoderate Ire does engender
madness: and must be eschewed, not so much for love of moderation, as healths
sake. Some there are, that attribute so much to Fortune, as armed only with
that conceit, do p^oclame triumph Fortune.
before victory; not fearing any enterprice whatsoever, which error is greatly
to be reproved. For albeit the force of Fortune be great, and greatest of all
in war (because it claims most power in things where reason prevails least)
yet ought we not yield so much to fortune, as trusting only to her, reject all
advise and counsel: since good Captains being governed by reason, have small
need of Fortune. Hannibal desiring peace of Hanniball.
Scipio, used these words: I have bin taught sometimes by evil and sometimes by
good success, that it is better to trust unto reason the^ fortune. Fortune
does for the most part suffer me^ to fall, that put their whole co^fide^^e in hit
not mixing therewith the aid of good counsel. For nothing is more uncertain,
nothing more unconstant nor of less force: and it blinds the judgment of
those that do not bridle her headstrong fury. Therefore let our Counselor be
(as men say) faber ^u^ fortunae, doing all things according to high reason and
counsel: whereunto fortune will give favor, for she follows reason as a
shadow. Xenophon says that in war evil fortune follows evil men, and
good fortune follows good men. Alexander, Scipio, and Hanniball were
fortunate, yet not so much through fortune, as the benefit of virtue, wisdom
and good counsel. It is the part of a wise and valiant man, to take fortune
when she offers her self, and employ her according to counsel. Some men
void of experience, finding things proceed to their own liking, do ascribe
the same to fortune: and surely not without cause: for as of beasts, so of
fools, fortune has domination: yet no wise nor Temperance.
good man would ever make her the guide or directer of his life. Nature has so
determined, that betwixt the minds and bodies of men, there should be a
certain fight and contention, suspending and diuerting their dispositions from
the true offices of virtue. For the alluring and pleasing lusts of the body
do labor to oppress the mind, and hold the same under: and the mind being
armed and aided with reason, does resist and repugne, all it is able. That
virtue of mind which resists the affections and brings them under her
rule, is called Temperance, commanding us both in desiring and eschewing to
follow reason. Temperance is employed in contemning of pleasuresand chiefly,
those that take end by taste and touching. Yet does it not generally abhor
all pleasures, but only such as be contrary to virtue and reason. There are
some pleasures by nature honest, and some others dishonest, and either of them
as incident to the mind, as the body. The comprehension How perfection of man,
is attained.
of all these pleasures consists in the senses, which are (as it were) their
servants and champions. Certainly it behooves man to be not only sound of
body, but also perfect of mind: which perfection must of force be attained by
the exercise of virtue. That use of virtue which pertains to the body is
called Temperance, working such effect that it yields to reason, leading a
life honest and worthy a good man. The pleasures of body, be borne and from
our birth bread up with us, which is the respect they are with great
difficulty reftained: chiefly for those men that take more delight in the
exercises of body then of mind; which among men, is of all other things most
beastly and ungracious. Therefore it stands us upon that the body be bound to
the obedience of the mind, and from it be never separate nor removed: for such
conjunction does make men perfect. All virtues do also make the commonweal
happy, blessed, and peaceable: but Temperance alone is the keeper and preseuer
of felicity: for it forseeth that the Temperance the preserved of civil
felicity.
state be not infected with excess and unreasonable pleasures, whereby many
great and most notable Cities have been subverted. Every commweale furnished
with good laws and customs, ought to take heed, least riott, and excess
should poison the subjects, for thereof grows couetuousnes the mother of all
vices. We read that in Rome laws were devised against excess in expenses and
apparel, whereby an order of good and honest life was prescribed. The
Lacedaemonians also did keep their feasts in public places, to the end that
no man should dare to be wastfull in the sight of other Citizens. In old time
the magistrates of Gallia Belgica, permitted not any custom that might make
the people effeminate. At this day in some Cities of Italy, the liberty of
immoderate expenses is by law inhibited. The lust of men is insatiable, and
cannot be stayed but only by the bridle of law: for it allureth the minds of
all subjects, and consequently moves them to subvert their own country. The
conspiratours with Cateline are thereof an example, who being thriftles and
licentious people, attempted to make war against the commonweal. Therefore
the life of every subject ought be trained to temperance, providing that the
state do not abound with excess: for by that mean the common quiet, the
happiness of subjects, their welfare, health, and substances shall be preserved,
and they at all occasions be ready to take arms for their country, not fearing
either want of wealth, nor excess of pleasure: which two, do many times bring
Cities into servitude. It also stands the state upon, to forsee that the life
of subjects be neither in private or public, intemperate, nor that any man
should abuse wealth and substance. A temperate and moderate life in private men,
is an ornament of common foelicitie. Insolency of life is therefore to be
suppressed, for from thence as the head, all conductes of mischief do take
their beginning. And the Counselor himself ought to be no less free from
intemperancy, then he would have others. Wherein let him imitate the severity of
the Censors, who in old time were the masters of civil te^perance and modesty.
He shall therefore as well by private The followers of Te^perance
admonition as public correction, reduce them from intemperancie, for the
punishment due thereto ought be grievous. By the benefit of Temperancie we
become modest, bashful, honest, and continent: Through which virtue, the
happy life of man is beautified, increased, and enlarged. Modesty (as the
Stoics affirm) is a virtue that contains the knowledge of all things to be
done or spoken. For in every Modesty.
speech and action a measure ought be observed, least we do speak more, then
necessity requires, forgetting the Counsel of Solon, ne quid nimis. But
therein time is to be observed, and a fit opportunity awaited: for actions not
well used, are often times the cause of many inconuenients. Let comelines
therefore be kept in all actions and speeches, framing our countenance, eyes,
gesture, motion, (and in brief) the whole body to modesty: so that thereby we
may seem to have an honest, plain, Bashfulnesse.
and stable intent. We are sometimes also reco^mended by Bashfulnes, which is
that virtue that conserueth honest life: because in all actions it shunneth
reproach and villainy. And as Justice commands that no man should be spoiled,
so bashfulnes bids that no man should be offended: for a good man refraineth
from injury, not only wilingly, but is also terrefied with bashfulnes. Yet do
I not require in our Counselor that bashfulnes which is peculier to young men,
or offenders. Because such persons are most Two sorts of bashfulnes.
commonly against their will bashful, and ashamed. That perturbation of mind
does misbecome a grave and temperate man. But the bashfulnes we seek for, does
imitate virtue: and thereby a certain habit and exercise of eschewing evil; so
as, if at any time through ignorance error be committed, we are thereof ashamed,
which is very commendable. Julius Caesar fighting with the younger Pompeius at
Corduba, and seeing his soldiers ready to run away, passed forth before the
foremost rank, and there most valiantly fought in person: which the soldiers
seeing, could not for shame but turn face to the enemy, provoked partly with
the the valor of the general, and partly with their own shame fastnes

Honesty.
There is in the capacities of men a certain instinct of honesty wherewith
they are compelled to perform things honest and fly from their contraries.
Also all the means to attain unto knowledge of honesty proceeds from
virtue, and therein her excellency and dignity rests, which may sometimes
proceed of common fame, glory, and opinion. Moreover who so through diligence
and observation, knows what is measure, order, and grauetie, performing in
words and works, that beauty, sweetness, and rule, taking heed not to do or
think any thing unseemly, effeminately, or licentiously, is thereby made
honest. And the force of honesty is so great, as it alone suffices to divert
men from all shameful life and evil actions.

Continency and abstinency
Among the praises due to Counselors for their good conversation, continency
and abstinencie do challenge no mean place. For they command not only to
contemn the inticements of desires, but also stay our minds, our eyes, and
our hands from following unreasonable affections. There is no spectacle of
life more noble, then to see men contented with their own and not covet things
appertaining unto others. Paulus Aemilius is commended, for that of all the
treasure which was brought from Macedon and Spain, he converted no part to his
private use, but delivered all into the public Threasurie, choosing rather to
abstain and continue poor, then become rich by deceauing. For after death,
his goods being sold under the Lance (as the custom was) there wanted whereof
his wife might be sustained. The example of Scipio Affricanus his continency is
most admirable: he being but twenty years of age at the taking of Carthage,
found there (among many other captives) one maiden of most excellent beauty;
yet would he not touch her virginity, but delivered her unto an husband whom
she was before betrothed unto: and gave her in marriage all that gold which her
friends offered, to redeem her. I omit to speak of Alexander the great, and
many others, who gained no less glory by continency, then martial triumphs.
We will therefore that our counselor should be continent, following the
counsel which Pericles used to his companion Sophocles and praetor in Rome
beholding and commending the beauty of a y oung woman whom they met in their
way toward the Senate house: saying. It becomes a Praetor to have not only
hands free from corruption, but also continent eyes void of unchaste looks. It
was therefore thought to be wisely done of Cato the Sensor, to remove L.
Quintus Flaminius from the Senate for his incotinency: Because he being Consul
in France was entreated by a harlot, that without offense, she might strike a
prisoner condemned to die. Manlius was also deposed from that dignity, because
he kissed his own wife in the presence of her daughter. Likewise Salustius for
adultery and light conditions, was deprived the Senate. Surely there is nothing
that does more dishonor the dignity of a Counselor then incontinency and
lewd life: because it procures private reproach and blemisheth the majesty of
commanding. Sardanapalus consumed whole days in the nurserie among women,
sparing no time from incontinent exercises: As appears by the Epitaph, which
living he commanded to be written on his tomb. Ede, Bibe, Lude.



Aristotle chancing to find the Epitaph, stayed, and read the first part
thereof, and smiling said: A man would think, this writing fitter to be fixed
to the grave of an ox, then written upon the tomb of a Prince? And having
perused the three last verses: said further, that Sardanapulus enjoyed that,
being dead, which living he never had but so long as he was in feeding his
paunch. All pleasures not being reduced to necessity and honesty, are
reproachful: and above the rest, those two which are taken by touching and
tasting, do draw men most to offend in vice, and uncleanness. A counselor
therefore ought to be careful, that the life of subjects be not tombled into
this mire of voluptuousnes and soul delights, but that all things may be done
with shamefastnes and honesty. All dishonest and unlawful delights should be
extirped, and likewise all occasions and opportunities whereby the people are
trained to live dishonestly, shamelesly, wickedly, and imtemperately ought be
removed. The Lacedaemonians were wont to show their dronken servants unto their
children, to the end that they (lothing their vile gestures and beastialitie)
might avoid the vice of much drinking. But would God we were as willing to
follow, as remember those ancient customs. Great was the moderation and
temperance which our ancestors used in their diet: for they lived not to eat,
but did eat to live. In these days, the plague of intemperance is grown so
great, as more men perish by incontinencie and gluttony, then by force or fury
of war. Also in some nations men take no delight but only in drinking. Who
would not then commend M. Curious the Roman Senator, that was content the
ambassadors sent by the Samnits should find him homely set at supper by his
fire, drinking in a cup of wood: and there refused the gold which they did
present him: saying, I had hather command rich men, then be a rich man my
self. I speak not of Fabricius, Tubero, Fabius, Cato, and Scipio, whose
temperate and sober life has been by immortal fame preserved. Hortentius was
much reproved for that he, at a supper (prepared for the Auguri) set before
his gests a boiled peacocke: likewise Cassius was deemed intemperate, because
publicly he drank water, and could not endure thirst for a short time.
Duronius was also removed from the Senate, for that he being Tribune, he cassed
the law concerning the restrainte of feasting. Surely the Roman state was
happy in having such Senators as were not only princes of Counsel, but also
masters of good manners and virtues. Whereof may be coniectured how temperate
the people of Rome were in those days. It is reported that when the presents
which Pirrus king of Epirus (after his overthrow) were brought unto Rome, and
showed about the streats: hoping thereby to win good will of the people,
there was nor one man seen to put out his hand toward them: fo as that king
found himself no less vanquished with continency then force of arms. But
when excess, after the victory of Asia, had entered Rome, and that through
plenty and idleness, the peoples minds began to grow wanton, suddenly that
civil discipline of temperancie, parcimonie, and society, were extinguished:
and in liew thereof, couetuonsnes accompanied with all mischiefs possessed the
City* which (as Salust says) way the very cause that destroyed the Romain
empire. The Counselor therefore must foresee that in the commonweal excess
may not long endure: because it peruerteth public peace, and makes the
subjects soft, effeminate, miserable and needy. Diogenes hearing that the house
of a certain prodigal man was offered to sale; said, I knew well that house
was so full of meat and wine, as (or long) it would vomit out the master. The
Counselor shall also eschew nothing more in his own person, then immoderate
eating and drinking: because it consumes the force both of body and mind.
Notable is that law of Solon, which judges a drunken prince worthy of death.
Philip king of Macedon being disguised with drink, gave judgment against a
woman: she furthwith appealed, and being asked to whom? answered to king Philip
when he is sober. Certainly the force of wine takes away all judgment in man;
in so much as thereby kings are made servants, old men become children, wise
folks are turned to fools, and fools changed to mad men. The Counselor
therefore shall observe measure, and drink for necessity, not for sacietie:
following the counsel of Anacharsis, who said that the first draught was of
necessity, the second of superfluity, and the third of madness. It were most
unseemly in a Senator to have a countenance full of fury, eyes full of anger,
and speech full of pride, all which do accompany dronkennes: and as evil it
will become him being ouercharged with meat and wine to consume the whole
night in sleaping. But how much good diet helps to preserve health, and
prepare the body to action, we may learn by experience. For by moderate diet
we find not only the mind, but the body also more obedient, but sacietie,
and fulness of belly, is no other, then a sepulture to a living mind. It
therefore beseems a Senator not only privately, but also publicly to
observe parcimonie and frugalitie. Yet heed must be taken, least he seem
ouersparing, hard, or straight in expense: for it is the property of a bace
and abject mind to abuse comlines and honor in his living. Therefore private
excess shall be banished, and public magnificence Order and rule of man's life.
retained: needless delicacy, but (much more) misery and nigardlines must be
avoided. For as immoderate expenses be hurtful, so necessary and convenient
fare is honest and wholesome. Respect is also to be had to the place, the time,
and persons: waying therewithal, what belongs to private and public
honesty, dignity, and profit, not neglecting the change of exercises and
honest pleasures. L. Tubero making a public feast, covered all his beds with
the skins of kids, and for so doing was thought indiscrete, and ignorant in
things belonging to public honor and reputation: also for the same was
deposed from the office of Praetor. But of Temperancy let this suffice which we
have hitherto spoken: Let us now (since the time and order of our matter so
requires) entreat of the goods of body and fortune, wherewith the felicity
of a Counselor is not only ornified but also made perfect. For so much as the
body of man, is, (as it were) a dwelling place, and tabernacle of his mind, it
behooves us and our lives to be furnished no less with the perfections of
mind, then of body. For as the actions of virtue cannot be exercised by a
weak body, so the body wants power to perform his duty, being governed
by an imperfect mind. These two are so coopled and conjoined together, that as
the Master without a servant, so the mind may not execute his duty without
obedience of the body. Therefore the philosophers writing of policy, do
conioyne the exercises of body and mind, as though men imperfect either in
body or mind were improfitable in the society of men. Even as civil
discipline and good laws do work the How perfection of mind and body is
attained.
perfection of mind: so nature (chiefly joined with exercise) does make the
soundnes of body: which is conserved by physic. Therefore in commonweales
well governed certain laws and ages for marriage ought be prescribed and
likewise education ordained for children, to theende they may be informed in
civil discipline. So as by nature and art, the people may become both of mind
and body most perfect. But since heretofore we have discoursed of the qualities
of mind, and the perfections thereof: it rests now to speak of those
qualities of body which ought to be in a Counselor. For it behooves him much
to be as perfect in body as of mind. True it is, and that truth by learned
men confirmed, that the felicity of man, cannot be defended with the virtues
of mind only, but needs also unto the perfection thereof, external
commodities. Which albeit are not by themselves laudable, yet because virtue is
known in their use and moderation, they ought greatly to be desired. The goods
of the body do seem to consist partly in the whole body, and partly in
particular members: Perfection of body.
for health, beauty, strength and soundness, are required in the whole body:
but perfect sense, and nimblenes of legs and hands, are wished for only in
some parts. As there is a society and consent of body and mind, so is there a
certain liking and correspondence betwixt the virtues of body and mind.
Health resembles Justice: because it reduces the diverse constitution of
body to an equal temperance: so beauty is likened to Temperance: and they
both conspire in the perfections of body and mind. Strength is compared to
fortitude, because in the enduring of labor and danger, the one of the^ does
aid the other. Soundnes of body is likened to Prudence: For as Prudence does
reconcile all opinions and judgments, even so in a sound body, all parts do
join and make one perfect body. How much health avails to lead a good and
happy life, experience teaches. For there is nothing that we can do or
think, but therein good Health.
health does help us, and the want thereof does hinder us. We will therefore
that our Counselor should be healthie, for thereby he may the better attend
public affairs, use the exercises of body, and lead a quiet and contented
life, free from grief and all sorts of sorrow. The first cause of health, is
God, the maker of all bodies: the second good diet and exercise. For great
regard must be had, least health be taken away by negligence or intemperancie.
Health (as Cicero says) is maintained by knowing a man's own body, and
observing of those things, which agree, or disagree with nature: also by being
continent, in diet, apparel, and contempt of pleasures: whatsoever else
appertains to this matter, must be learned of Galen and Hippocrates. Diogenes
was wont to laugh those to scorn that by sacrifice sought for health of the
gods, and notwithstanding lead an intemperate life. A good constitution of
body is also commendable in a Counselor. Let him therefore either be (as the
physicians do term it) sanguine, What temperature of body, is best.
or colloricke: for those humors do make men apt for virtue: and such persons
are commonly witty, docible, healthie, and of good memories. Aristotle calls
melancholy men witty, for being inclined to anger they are disposed to have in
them certain divine thoughts and deep cogitations. Notwithstanding we utterly
exclude them from counsel, as men unmeet for affairs of state, because their
lives are, for the most part, governed by malancholy and not by wisdom. The
humor most abounding in that complexion, is cold and d^ie; which makes their
cogitations to be solitary, inclined to envy, sowernesse, sadness, and
sorrow. Cicero reading that place of Aristotle which calls melancholy men
ingenious, smiling said, that he rejoiced much that nature had made him dull
witted and not melancholy. Caesar being warned to beware of a certain fat,
merry, and liberal speaker, answered that such men were not to be feared, but
those rather that were sad of swarfie complexion and lean; pointing to Brutus
and Cassius. We also mislike that any flegmaticke person should be so much as
the Romans called him Pedarius Senator: least his humor be offensive to all
the rest: For as the motion of flegmatike bodies, is slow, and heavy, so
likewise is their disposition of mind. Also good proportion or comelines does
recommend, not only the body, but also the mind, so as, it seems, the Poet
said well. Gratior est pulchro veniens ^ corpore virtus.


We wish therefore that our Counselor should be a seemly personage. Comlines of
person required in a coun.
I call comlines, a manly and not effeminate body. This virtue is perceived in
the features of body, face, and countenance. Let him therefore be neither huge
nor small of stature, but of the mean sise. In long bodies (as Aristotle
says) there is no great virtue, and in short personages, as little. Moreover,
his body should not be exceeding gross, nor exceeding lean and dry, for the
one is apt for travel, the other ouerweake to endure pain. We also commonly
take heed of those whom nature has marked by defect of any member, as they
that are lame of one leg, squint eyde, or deformed in person: for such men
are accounted crafty and subtle. Nevertheless, if any such personage be
known for good, and by the excellency of virtue has overcome the imperfection
of nature; then shall he deseruingly be admitted to the dignity of
Counselors. The proportion of face or visage, is much beautified by good
color or complexion, which oftimes bewraieth the secret conceits of mind. Our
inward disposition is also sometimes known by the outward color of skin.
Philopaemen a notable Captain Philopemen.
of the Achaeans, was an evil favored man, and being taken prisoner, was forced
to cut wood. Afterward he became known, and said; that he suffered the
punishment due to his deformity. We therefore commend a grave and pleasant face
in our Counselor: and allow most of such eyes as are sweet and not cruel; for
that countenance is fittest for men of such quality. Yet is not the conjecture
we have by the features of body so certain, as thereby we may exactly judge
the virtue of mind: for many there are, whose persons be not beautiful, yet in
mind are virtuous men, that is to say, just, prudent, and temperate. The mind
is not blemished by deformity of body, but by beauty of mind the body is
beautified. Virtue is not bound either to a beautiful or deformed body, but is
of it self comely, and does grace all bodies with beauty thereof. And therefore
it behooves us in knowing of men, to use not only eyes, but also judgment:
even so not only the person countenance and eyes of a Counselor, but also the
whole face of a Counselors mind ought be considered and preferred before all
beauty and good proportion of body. All these things may be wished for the
perfection of men, but are not commonly looked for. A Counselor ought also to
be comely apparrelled How a Counselor should be apparrelled.
according to the dignity of his office: for seemly garments do add a
reverence to his person, increasing, and ornifying the worthiness both of mind
and body. It is therefore requisite, that by his apparel he should be known to
differ from other men, which custom is in all well governed Latus clauus.
co^monweals observed. The Senators of Rome used a garment set full of studs or
tufts of gold, and on their hose they wear like unto a moon, which were the
cognisants or badges of most honor. That kind of ornament, the Romans seem
to have received from other nations. Call ceilunats.
For Esaias the prophet foretold the noble women of Iudaea, that God would take
away those moons and ornaments of hose. Plutarch alleges sower causes, why
the Romans ware such hose: which to delight the reader, I will recyte. The
first was, because they thought that the souls of great men should by light of
the moon be guided the next way unto heaven. The second reason that moved
them, was that the sign of the moon, did show they were descended from the
Archadians, who came into Italy with Euander, for the Archadians did imagine
themselves more ancient then the moon. The third cause why they ware the moon
was, to the end, that in prosperity they should remember the inconstancy and
mutabilitie of Fortune: For as the moon most commonly is in part lightened
and in part darkened, so no honor or felicity of men, can be so perpetual,
but is sometimes obscured or extinguished. The fourth cause was, for that the
sign of the moon, does stir up men's minds to modesty and obedience:
moving them to pray unto God for wisdom, whereby both to command and obey:
even as the moon does take her brightness from the sun, being a more noble
and excellent light, so ought men to seek for wisdom from heaven. Others do
fable and affirm, that the Senators of Rome ware not the image of the moon,
but the proportion of the letter C, as though the hundereth whom Romulus did
choose to be, (as he called them) Patres should thereof take The degrees of men
ought be known by their apparel.
their title. In good commonweales the use has ever been, that a difference of
estates and degrees of men, should both by law and use be known by the
peoples garments: and that custom is assuredly of much moment to make them
constant in their professions, and in the couersation of common tranquillity.
Which was also the reason, that among the Romans no man might wear purple,
but only Senators, Magistrates, Priests, and young men of noble families. I
omit to speak of rings, chains, and bracelets which were given to men of
virtue, advanced to dignity. How these customs are in these days observed,
it sufficiently appears: for we may behold a great alteration not only of
virtues and manners, but of times also: since the garments of soldiers,
magistrates, and senators, do not differ from the habit of servants,
marchantes, artisans, and plowemen. True it is, that the virtue and condition
of men is not bound to any badge or ornament: yet is he thereby put in mind,
with more diligence to maintain and exercise the office belonging to his
dignity. For Septers, Crowns, Cheynes, Rings, Gowns, Robes, and Saddles, are
no dignities, but the badges of dignity, wherewith men are stirred up to
perform and do honor to the office and place whereunto that badge Badges of
honor.
belongs. Romulus (as Liuie writes) intending to govern a new people,
apparrelled himself with an habit of majesty, and called twelve Littori with
mases, to attend upon his person, thereby to appear with more reputation, and
reverence. It shall therefore become our Counselor to be apparrelled according
to his grauetie* honor, and dignity: taking heed that his garments do not
promise any variety, lightness, or inconstancy. He must ever observe therein a
certain comely neatnes, such as beseems men and not women; not exquisite or
curious, but comely and manly, yet void of rusticity. Let him also in all
motions, gestures, standings, goings, sittings and lyings, frame a good grace
and grauetie beseeming a Counselor. It is also very necessary, that he be
strong of body, well knit, and manly proportioned. Strength of body.
Which things because they proceed from nature, he shall be more careful in
using and conseruing them, then diligent in attaining unto them. Strength is
commonly in those men that be sound, nimble, and firm fleshed: which things
with age do naturally increase and decrease: for young men are strong and
mighty, but old men be broken and feeble. And for so much as, the force of
mind is more requisite in a Senator then the strength of body: therefore we
desire not in him the force of a giant, but convenient and reasonable strength.
Milo being grown old, beholding cettaine wrastlers contending in strength,
looked upon his own loins weping. and called them dead: because (as I think)
his whole virtue and honor rested in the strength of his body, We are now to
discourse, what The age of a Counselor.
age is most fit for the perfection both of body and mind, and of what years
a Counselor ought be. They that have desired the length of man's life, do
confine the same within a certain proportion of time. Plato assigns eighty
one years, Solon eighty, and others affirm the life of man to be determined
within seauentie years: because they refer all to the number of seven, since
every seventh year some mutation of body appears. The first seven years
the teeth of children do fall: the next seven years, their hear does grow,
the third, their body is at the longest: the fourth, their breadth* the fifth,
they are strongest: the sixth, desirous of pleasure, the seventh wise, the
eight aged, the ninth feeble, and the tenth prepared for death. Others affirm
that the change in man's life is every nine years: and some ascribes
alteration thereof at every unequal number till twenty and one. Pythagoras
called the eighty year of man's life, fatal dividing the same into four
times twenty: so as childhood should last till twenty, youth other twenty,
man's estate other twenty, and old age does determine all, after the fourth
twenty: comparing it to the four seasons of the year: the spring time was
likened to children, summer to young men. Autumn to ripe age, and winter to old
folk. V^rro makes five degrees of man's age, including every of them into
fiueteene: as though childhood lasted till the end of fiueteene years, for so
long children are tender and without hare: youth till thirty, because till
that time man increases in length and breadth. Ripe age induced till forty
five, for so long the strength of body abides, and men are able for arms and
all other public actions: old age begins at threescore, for then the
body wastes and grows ripe. With this opinion we think good to concur:
but the distinction of ages by number, Critici vel iuditiarii dies.
does chiefly appertain to physicians, for they in their fomentations and
mede^ines, do observe certain particular and special days. But our opinion
is that the forty five year of man's age is most meet for counsel, because
about that time, man is of most force both in body and mind. Besides, that
age is the midst of man's life, then in the ripenes both of body and mind.
At that time (being the midst of man's life) the mind is not drawn with
desires, not transported with youthful fu^ie, not subject to affections: but
perfect of judgment, counsel, and experience of all things. When Rome
flourished, the Senators were chosen of that age: because those years were
accounted apt for counsel, in respect the heat of youth was cooled, and the
mind attained to perfection: for as the perfection of body comes by age, so
is the mind thereby made ripe in wisdom and experience. Yet deny I not that
many men are old at thirty years, that is to say, they be then both prudent
and wise, for they desiring to be old long, begin soon to be grave. We read
that in Rome diverse were made Senators before the thirty year of their life,
which we also allow: For men may be reputed old, as well in respect of virtue,
as age. Yet care must be taken, The common weal chiefly to be governed by
old men.
That the state be chiefly governed by old men, for Plutarch says, that
commonweal proves happy, wherein is plenty of young men's Lances, and old
men's Counsels. The saying of Euripides is also notable. Dictum est vetustum,
facta iuuenum, ceterum
magis valent consilia senum.


In Athens no man was created a Counselor before fifty years of age, and in
Rome it was lawful for any man of sixty years to come into the Senate,
although he had never been elected a Senator, and after that year he had
liberty to come or not at his pleasure. In that point therefore the custom of
each commonweal must be observed, and every Counselor (though he were in age
even with Nestor) ought to endeavor himself at all times and in all places to
employ his power for the Commonweal. Plato says; that men should learn, till
they be so aged, as one foot is entered the grave: but why does it not become
them as well to counsel and serve their country? Notwithstanding we forbid men
much aged, decrepit, and decayed as well in The quality of decrepit age.
mind as body, to give counsel. Because their counsels be commonly doubtful,
and their judgments are rather conjectures then affirmations, always using
these words, perchance and perhaps. The cause thereof is, that they have
proved sundry perrils, and are afraid to Goods of Fortune requisite for a
Counselor.
feel them again. Now for so much as the felicity of man without external
goods cannot be absolute: therefore they are for a Senator of much necessity,
as well to ornefie his estate and dignity, as the more commodiously to perform
the actions of virtue. Upon this point, the philosophers do grealty contend:
for some of them do exclude the goods of Fortune: and others affirm the
possession of Fortunes gifts to be of necessity in man's felicity. Both which
opinions are true, if we consider the condition and end of each man's life. For
they that affect private felicity, have none or very little need of Fortune:
but others that do exercise virtue publicly, living in the society of men
and govern the commonweal, cannot without the goods of Fortune perform any
great, notable, or liberal action. Therefore riches, lands, and possessions
are of necessity for a civil man and magistrate: as well to exercise the
offices of virtue, as to relieve the people, and repulse injuries: so as it is
apparent, that without external goods every state is* miserable and unhappy.
Me thinks therefore, the philosophers had done more wisely, if they had disputed
of the use of riches, and not of riches it self, dividing felicity according
to the condition of persons. For it is not felicity, but the life of man,
which needs things requirable to the sustentation of life. Whereof the
condition being diverse, it behooves each man above all things, to know the
state of his life and felicity, possessing so much substance as is thought
necessary to live well and happily. For which respect, the felicity of
Diogenes was far other, then the felicity The felicity of Alexand. and
Diogenes diverse.
of great Alexander: the one was poor, the other rich: the whole world could
not suffice the one, the other was contented with a silly cabin. Their orders
of life were diverse, so was also their felicity: yet were they both
philosophers, but the one delighted in private felicity, and the other
affected public happiness: this ought be commended, the other not dispraised.
That course of life is to be followed embraced and retained, whereunto God,
nature, election or will has called us: and the same should be ornified, as
virtue, reason, God, and nature it self requires. Which is the cause, that
some had rather be poor then rich, learned them wealthy, private then
public, soldiers then priests: for for each man esteems the life he best
likes. But for so much as the life and felicity of a Counselor is laid open
to the face and sight of the commonweal: it behooves him in any wise to be
furnished with the goods of Fortune, as, good parentage, honor, glory, fame,
friends kinsfolk, children, riches, and money. I wish the parentage of Good
parentage required in a Counselor.
a Counselor should be good, for that many times of honest parents good
children be gotten. Let him therefore be borne a gentleman, and descended from a
stock or house of nobility or gentry: for that honor left from his
ancestors, was given by the commonweal, to the end that at occasions he
should with the more fidelity fight for his country. There was a law in
Rome, whereby Senators were forbidden to marry women that had been slaves.
Neither was it lawful for any gentlewoman to take a husband of base parentage,
or that was descended New nobility.
from such parents as exercised any mystery or gainful traffic. Yet do I not
dislike of those that take the badges of honor from themselves, and make the
foundation of their nobility upon their own virtue. For virtue entreats
both new and ancient men after one fashion, for she refuses none that
resorteth unto her for honor. It is reported that Cato being in contention
with Scipio Affricanus, said merely, that Rome would become glorious, if great
noble men, did not yield the chief part of virtue unto their inferiors: and
contrariwise, if the multitude (whereof he was one) did contend in virtue with
those that were noble in parentage. Moreover touching the beginning and
original gentry is to be considered, who is in deed aspired to honor by the
right degrees of virtue, for the new gentleman ought not be accounted inferior
to the old, if he be advanced for no light or fained virtue, but How new
nobility is Commendable.
is made noble in reward of his great, laboursome, and honest industry. In
consideration whereof, the virtue military and the virtue of wisdom and
dou^sell, be preferred before all conte^platiue virtues, wealth and riches. In
every commonweal two rewards are prepared for virtue: the one Honor and
glory rewards of virtue.
is honor, the other glory: which who so has, cannot be called unfortunate.
Honor consists partly in having authority and office, and partly in the
reputation which is given by great and notable men for the excellent virtue
they think to be in him who is honored. Tullius says, that is true honor,
which is given to noble men, not in hope to have benefit from them, but for
their excellent deserts. Who so therefore desires honor, must not only
attain thereunto by showing old painted arms or images engraued in brass,
but by his own virtue; whereunto the true and everlasting rewards are
belonging. Cato seeing Rome filled with the portratures of noble men, refused
to have any made of him, saying, he had rather men should ask why he had none,
then why he stood there. For the honor due to virtue, ought be perpetual and
everlasting: not fading or subject to ruin. Of three hundredth portractures set
up for king Demetrius, not one was by time decayed, nor by negligence defaced;
but in his own life they Glory.
were all turned vpside down. Yet a counselor ought to desire glory, as the
most notable reward of virtue. And he is in glory most excellent, that passes
all others in virtue. Thesius asked of the Gods three things, that is, good
fortune, want of inward sorrow, and such glory as was neither false,
counterfeite, nor fained. Who so seeks glory for virtue, and noble acts,
does not commit any thing dishonorable, either toward himself or others:
because he measures his fame and dignity by virtue and judgment. It is the
property of men well borne Fame.
and liberally brought up, to desire the good report of his country, strangers,
friends, and leave good fame to his posterity by consent of all honest people.
All men therefore (but chiefly Counselors) must take heed, least they make
any evil impression to deface their good name or fame, for seldom either in
time present, or age to come, by virtue of posterity it can be cancelled. For
time speaks, and fame is never silent, also liberty of tongue remains to
think and pronounce the sayings and actions of other men. Moreover we only
do not reap the fruit of good fame, but our neighbors, friends, and
children are thereof partakers: in so much as all people and their posterity
do commend us, admyring our lives, and extolling the time wherein we lived,
the commonweal where we governed, and the laws by us ordained. In our own
life time it behooves us to do the like, least virtue, faith and religion do
seem in us altered and extinguished, or that our posterity should imagine
that we did degenerate from the virtue of our ancestors, or willingly rejected
their precepts. Fame is the ground of perpetual commendation: therefore let
each man eschew vice with the danger of disestimation: for the loss of Fame
and fidelity, are greater disaduentures then can be imagined. It was provided
by law, that no wan of corrupt fame should be chosen a Senator The loss of
Fame of all others greatest.
of Rome. And he was holden of corrupt fame, that had been condemned for a
diser, a deceiuer of others, a these, an unjust man, a false performer of
testaments, a liar, an heretic, a banished man, or known guilty of any
other enormitie whereby good fame was bleamished. In Athens there was an order,
that the life of every Senator before his creation should be examined. Also
Solon provided by law, that no man misliked of honest men, or noted of
dishonestie, should be admitted a Senator. Which kind of men we also disalowe,
judging them not only unfit for the place of Counselors, but also unworthy
the name of men. Therefore the whole life of our Counselor must be referred to
virtue and honesty: for of them all true glory, fame, praise renown and
dignity grows.

Friends.
Moreover the use of friends and neighbous, does greatly beautify the honor
of Counselors: since they do not only make man's life happy, but also
comfortable. For it is a singular pleasure to communicate our affairs with
friends, using their fidelity, and both in private, and public buisines, to
be helped with their aid and assistance. Alexander being asked where he would
have his treasure preserved: answered, among his friends, because he thought,
good will to be the owner both of his, and other men's riches. Also to such a
Counselor as is desirous of Children.
posterity, a number of good and honest children are an enlargement of
felicity. For men have no treceiued from God any benefit so great, as is
offspring and descent of children, whereby we enjoy immortal and eternal
increase of life. Bercilidas a chieftaine or governor in Sparta, sitting at
meat, did forbid that the younger sort should do him reverence: reproving
himself of barrenness, because he had not begotten any children to do them
the like honor when they were old. In Rome the custom was, that they who had
furnished the commonweal with children should be after exempted from the
payment of taxes, and in token thereof, those men were called Proletarij. But
let us now speak of riches, the possession whereof is for a Counselor of
singular necessity: for money is not only needed in Riches.
private, but also in public affairs, and without it he cannot perform any
notable or virtuous action. Majesty without force is slenderly assured, and
wisdom without authority, must yield to folly. The opinion of Plato is, that
the governors of Cities, should be neither over rich, nor over poor: for the
one does make them cowardly, slothful, subject to pleasures, and desirous of
novelties the other makes them silly, weak, and rusticall. Therefore the
wealth fit for a Counselor, should be sufficient for his degree, and gotten
without reproach. Aristotle produces two means of gaining riches: whereof the
one is according to nature, and honesty, the other against nature, and
dishonest. The natural means of getting, is by agriculture hunting, fishing,
fowling, and such like, which contain not in them any deceiptfull permutation.
Agriculture (as Cicero affirms) is of all other things the best, the most
profitable, most pleasing, and most worthy a free man. Cato being asked by
what means a man might soon become rich, answered, by feeding of cattle: and
being asked the second time, said: by well and fat feeding. Whereby he seemed
to think, that riches gotten by tillage, and nourishing beasts, was of all
other the most honest. When the Romans would commend any man, they used to
call him a good man, and a good husband, in so much as the Senators themselves
lived in the country, and at occasions, were by pursuiuants called to the
City. Lutius Quintius Cincinnatus and diverse other notable men were called
from the country, to be made Dictators. But it is to be thought, that their
dwelling the villages was rather for solace, and recreation, then for aany
necessity wherein they lived. Gains against nature, are all kind of crafts
for lucre, merchandise, and usury: because men do thereby seek dishonest
profit, and be therein only occupied. Cato being asked what he thought of
usury, answered. What is it to kill a man? A Senator therefore must in no wise
meddle with any dishonest gain, he must also avoid all base and foul
trauelingetting his riches: for by such exercises the honor of a Counselor is
defiled. It was therefore provided in Rome, that no Senator should be owner of
any ship containing 300. Amphore, because immoderate gains was not in the
noble men allowed. Also it must needs be, that those that bind themselves
prentice to bace and soul gains, will not think upon honest matters and be
careful of the commonweal: therefore such Senators were deposed from the
Roman Senate. All honest riches do seem to consist in money, land, houses,
household stuff, sheep, slaves, and such like things which are employed in
honest and liberal Valewation of wealth.
labors. There was a custom in many commonweales (and chiefly populer states)
to create the Senators according to their wealth, and for that purpose a
valewation was made of each man's substance. Solon divided his valewation or
cesments into four. The first was of ^00. Medimn^, the second of 300: the
third of 200. and in the fourth were the poor men artificers, and mercinarie
people. Those that were rated at the second valewation, were called Equites.
They that were rated in the third valewation, were termed Zeugitae, as men that
deserved one horse, and in the first valewation, all Senators, Magistrates, and
great noble men were included. Among the Lacedaemonians, no man was admitted a
magistrate, that had not of wealth sufficient to contribute to the public
feast called Phidicia. Plato likewise divided his commonweal into four
valewations, so as the whole number of Citizens were included in the first,
second, third, and fourth valewation. In like manner the Roman state had a
certain diverse valewation, for in the one the Senators and in the other the
Citizens Valewation necessary.
were valewed. It seems therefore necessary in all commonweales, (for thereby
order of state is observed) that customs and taxations be continued, the
famelies numbered, the peoples manners reformed, all excess extyrped, and men
made diligent in defending their country. The Censors or valewers of Rome,
were the tutors for good manners, and conseruers of civil and honest
discipline, as were the Nomophilaces among the Graecians. Notwithstanding, it
seems not good to me (be it spoken without offense) the Counselors Riches
without virtue nor worthy honor
should be chosen only in respect of their riches. For to give the government
into the hands of the most wealthy sort, does seem as though the charge of a
ship, were delivered, not to the best saylor, but the richest passenger:
whereof perils and shipwreck will ensue: Plinius finding fault with the
Roman magistrates, their errors and evil manners, does attribute the cause
of all their iniquity, to the respect they bare toward the wealth of men:
saying thus: after Senators were created for their riches, Judges promoted for
substance, magistrates advanced for money: and chieftaines elected because they
were rich, the price of man's life was trodden under foot. True it is, that
riches without virtue it little worth, but being joined to virtue, does
increase a happy life. Therefore Counselors ought be both rich and virtuous:
and if any tich and good man being of sufficiency to govern in the
commonweal do refuse the dignity of a Counselor, he ought by the law of
Sensures to be thereunto compelled, for it is a shameful thing not to serve
that state which begot him, and that country which gave him life, honor
substance, and education. But here heed must be taken, that witless rich men,
fit for nothing, should not in any sort be made magistrates: for honor given
to such persons, does transform them from fools to mad men. It is very
reasonable that rich men of good desert should have some preferment in the
state, because they have most substance, chiefly, if they be just, prudent and
learned. Otherwise, to advance men for riches only is against Justice: for they
are apt to injury the poor, and proane to sedition and innovation. We are now
to Reward due to Counselors.
declare what rewards are due to Counselors, what fruit belongs to their
labor, and what recompense the commonweal ought give to their excellent
wisdom and worthiness. For we are all allured and drawn by hope of reward to
exercise the actions of virtue. The opinion of Solon was, that commonweales
were preserved by two things* that is to say, by reward and punishment: which
not being bestowed according to the virtue and vices of men, the state might be
accounted unhappy and miserable. It is therefore fit that Counselors should
Rewards of virtue diverse*
receive rewards, not only of virtue, but also of honor, and authority. The
reward bestowed by co^monweales (as Cicero thinks) do consist, either in
favors, in profit, or in honor. These are therefore to be looked for, either
at the hand of the commonweal, or of God. But the most noble reward is glory,
for virtue desires none other recompense of her labor, but the glory and
praise thereunto due. All honest travel of Senators ought be rewarded with
honor glory, and renown. There is no pleasure among men (as Xenophon says)
which approaches so near the nature of God, as to enjoy honor and glory. The
graces which God has bestowed on men are so great, as neither in word or
thought can be expressed; Yet do we give unto him, honor, praise, and glory,
as that which is thought greatest, and most notable. As therefore in all other
things, so therein let the Counselor imitate God, esteeming that reward for
his virtue, dignity, and labor, to be greatest, which consists in
commendation, glory, and exaltation of his name. And every good man sets
his chief glory Wherein the glory of a Counselor consists.
in virtue; As the soldier in fight, and the captain in victory: So the whole
glory and honor of a Counselor is discerned by preserving the people, well
governing the state, and doing things worthy commendation. He must also account
the office of a Senator to be the greatest reward of his virtue: For as
dignity in a person unworthy is indignity, so the same in a man worthy is a
sign of greatest honor and glory. For indeed to great men great honors
are due. Our Senator therefore shall repute himself to be best honored and
rewarded for his virtue: When he is applauded of the people, of all men highly
esteemed and by public consent pronounced to be a father, preseruour, and
defendour of his country. The badges due to such honor are not vain or
mortal, but immortal and eternal: for they remain for ever impressed in the
Poeples mind, extant in the memory of posterity, and in mouths and the ears
of the whole commonweal. Of that praise and honor, our children, our
neighbors, and friends do participate: supposing it their duty to imitate
such actions, to be equal unto such ancestors, and (if it be posble) surpass
them in glory: so as, all good men by this desire of praise and glory, do
deserve well of their commonweal, and country. The houses of Senators must be
as it were nurseries of virtue, where Counselors ought be honored.
the commonweal may (as a field replenished with virtue,) reap good fruit. The
Senators ought therefore to be highly honored and reverenced of other
subjects, not only in respect of their age (which is due to all aged men) but
for their authority, dignity, wisdom, fidelity and diligence in governing
the commonweal. Who so therefore shall dishonestly or irreuerentely abuse
them, is Injury of (...) counselors to be punished.
with great severity to be punished. In Rome, the respect and reverence to
magistrates was so great, that to offer them injury, was accounted a crime
capital. For by law, it was enacted, that his head that did injury to a
Tribune, an Edile, a Judge, or a Decemuirat should be sacrificed to Jupiter,
his family to Ceres, and his children sold. Seruiliu^ Isaur^cus after he had
been Consul chanced to walk in the streat, and in a straight place was met
by a horseman, who did not alight to do him reverence* for which act the said
horseman was bound to appear before the Judges, who with great indignation did
condemn him. Because they thought, that he who did not honor unto authority
and the magistrates, was ready to adventure every mischief. By the law
(called Lex honoria) it was provided that no man should do injury to any
Senator, for he that so did, should be reputed a traitor, and offender:
Ornaments and rewards of the Senators of Rome.
not only against the governors, but also the Senators, being reputed as
members of the law. Therefore it was not lawful to offer them any indignity,
by deed, word, or writing. The ornaments or rewards of honor due unto the
Senators of Rome, were (as Cicero writes) the place, authority, domestical
splendour, fame, and favor in foreign countries, robes of honor, sadels of
state, arms, bondels of rods, commandments in the armies, in war, and
provinces. I omit to speak of images made of stone and brass, chariots, and
diverse other things to long to be recited: which are at large described in a
book entitled desenatu Roman lately written by Ioannes Samoseius, a man not
only skillful in the Roman antiquities, but also in every other more
commendable learning. Counselors are therefore to be honored in the
commonweal, not only by having precedence of place, going and sitting, How
much the Emperors esteemed their Senators
but with all other marks and badges of praise and reverence. So often as
Augustus Caesar came into the Senate, he used to salute every Senator by name:
also going from thence he left them sitting in their place, and so without more
ceremony said farewell. Adrianus the Emperor, seeing a man of his (whom he
greatly favored) to walk cheek by cheek Adrianus.
in the midst of two Senators; commanded an other of his servants to strike
him on the face, because he used not the reverence due unto Senators. In Athens
a crown was the reward due (...)


