CHRIST'S PASSION. A TRAGEDY. WITH ANNOTATIONS.

LONDON, Printed by John Legatt. M. D. C. XL.

TO THE KINGS MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY.
SIR,
I Am bold to present you with this Piece of the PASSION, the Original
designed by the curious Pensill of Grotius: whose former afflictions seem to
have taught him pliable passions, and art to rule the affections of others:
clothing the saddest of Subjects in the suitable attire of Tragedy; not without
the Example of two ancient Fathers of the Primitive Church, Apollinarius and
Nazianzen. The Argument is of both the Testaments a patheticall Abstract. Those
formidable Wonders, effected by God in his own Commonwealth; those
stupendous Miracles, for truth a Pattern to all History, for strangeness to
all Fables; here meet together to attend on CHRIST'S PASSION. The effects of
his Power here sweetly end in those of his Mercy: and that terrible Lord of
Hosts, is now this meek God of Peace; reconciling all to one another, and
Mankind to Himself. Sr. in this change of Language I am no punctual
Interpreter: a way as servill as ungracefull. Quintilian censures a Painter,
that he more affected Similitude then Beauty; who would have shown greater
Skill, if less of Resemblance: the same in Poetry is condemned by Horace; of
that Art the great Lawgiver. Thus in the Shadow of your Absence, dismissed from
Arms by an Act of Time, have I, in what I was able, continued to serve you.

The humblest of your Majesty's Servants, GEORGE SANDYS.

THE PERSONS.
JESUS. CHORUS OF JEWISH WOMEN. PETER. PONTIUS PILATE. CAIAPHAS. JUDAS. THE
JEWS. FIRST NUNCIUS. SECOND NUNCIUS. CHORUS OF ROMAN SOLDIERS. JOSEPH OF
ARIMATHEA. NICODEMUS. JOHN. MARY THE MOTHER OF JESUS.
Imprimatur:

Tho: Wykes.
September 17. 1639.
THE FIRST ACT.
JESUS. O Thou who govern'st what thou did create
With equal sway, great Arbiter of Fate,
The Worlds Almighty Father; I, thy Son,
Though born in Time, before his Course begun;
Thus far my Deeds have answered thy Commands:
If more remain, my Zeal prepared stands
To execute thy Charge: all that I fear,
All that I hate, I shall with patience bear;
No misery refuse, no toil, nor shame:
I know for this into the world I came.
And yet how long shall these extremes endure!
What Day or Night have known my life secure!
My burden, by enduring, heavier grows;
And present ills a way to worse disclose.
My Kingdom, Heaven, I left, to visit Earth;
And suffered banishment before my Birth.
An unknown Infant, in a stable born,
Lodged in a manger: little, poor, forlorn,
And miserable: though so vile a Thing,
Yet worthy of the envy of a King.
Two years scarce yet complete, too old was thought
By Herod's fears: while I alone was sought,
The bloody Sword Ephratian Dames deprives
Of their dear Babes; through wounds they exhaled their lives.
Secured by flying to a foreign Clime,
The Tyrant through his Error lost his Crime.
A Thousand Miracles have made me known
Through all the World, and my extraction shown.
Envy against me raves: yet Virtue has
More storms of Mischief raised, then Herod's wrath.
It is decreed by thy unchanging Will,
I should be acknowledged, and rejected still?
Th'inspired Magi from the Orient came,
Preferred my Star before their Mithra's flame,
And at my infant feet devoutly fell:
But Abraham's Seed, the House of Israel,
To thee sequestered from Eternity,
Degenerate and ingrate! their God deny.
Behold the contumacious Pharisees,
Armed with dissembled Zeal, against me rise:
The bloody Priests to their stern Party draw
The Doctors of their unobserved law:
And impious Sadduces, to perpetrate
My intended Overthrow incense the State.
What rests to quicken Faith? Even at my Nod
Nature submits, acknowledging her God.
The Galilean Youth drink the pure blood
Of generous Grapes, drawn from the Neighbor flood:
I others famine cured, subdued my own;
Life-strengthning food for forty days unknown.
Twixt the Dispensers hands th'admired Bread
Increased, great multitudes of People fed,
Yet more then all remained. The Winds assuage
Their storms; and threatening Billows calm their rage.
The hardened Waves unsinking feet endure:
And pale Diseases, which despise their cure,
My Voice subdues. Long Darkness chased away,
To me the Blind by Birth now owes his Day.
He hears who never yet was heard; now speaks,
And in my Praises first his silence breaks.
Those damned Spirits of infernal Night,
Rebels to God, and to the Sons of Light
Inveterate foes; my Voice but heard, forsake
The long possessed, and struck with terror quake.
Nor was it enough for Christ, such wonders done,
To profit those alone who see the Sun:
To vanquish Death my powerful hand invades
His silent Regions and inferior Shades.
The Stars, the Earth, the Seas, my triumphs know:
What rests to conquer but the Deeps below?
Through opening Sepulchers, Nights gloomy Caves,
The violated privilege of Graves,
I sent my dread Commands: A heat new born
Reanimates the Dead, from funerals torn;
And Deaths-numb Cold expulst, enforced a way
For Souls departed to review the Day.
The Ashes from their ransackt Tombs receive
A second life, and by my bounty breathe.
But Death, his late free Empire thus restrained,
Not used to restore his Spoils, complained
That I should thus unweave the web of Fate,
Decrease his Subjects, and subvert his State:
I, for so many ransomed from Death,
Must to his anger sacrifice my breath.
And now that horrid Hour is almost come,
When sinful Mortals shall their Maker doom:
When I, the worlds great Lord, who life on all
Mankind bestowed, must by their fury fall.
That Tragic Time to my last Period hasts;
And Night, who now on all her Shadows casts,
While with the motion of the Heavens she flies,
This short delay of my sad life envies.
Fate, be less stern in thy intended Course;
Nor drag him who will follow without force!
After so many miseries endured;
Cold, Heat, Thirst, Famine, eyes to tears inured;
The end, yet worst of ills, draws near: their breath,
For whom I suffer, must procure my death.
The Innocent, made guilty by the foul
Defects of others, must his weary Soul
Sigh into air; and though of heavenly birth,
With his chaste blood distain th'ungratefull Earth.
They traffic for my Soul: my death, long sought,
Is by the mitred Merchants faction bought;
And Treason finds reward. My travels draw
Near their last end. These practices I saw;
See what this Nights confederate Shadows hide:
My Mind before my Body crucified.
Horror shakes all my Powers: my entrails beat,
And all my Body flows with purple sweat.
O whither is my ancient Courage fled,
And God-like Strength! by Anguish captive led.
O Death, how far more cruel in thy kind!
Th'anxiety and torment of the Mind!
Then must I be of all at once bereft?
Or is there any hope of safety left?
O might I to my heavenly Father pray,
So supple to my tears, to take away
Part of these ills! But his eternal Doom
Forbids, and ordered Course of things to come.
His purpose, fixed when yet the world was young,
And Oracles, so often by Prophets sung,
Now rushing on their destinated end,
No Orisons, nor Sacrifice can bend.
Why stay I with triumphant feet to tread
Upon the infernal Serpents poysnous Head,
And break the old Dragons jaws? The sin of our
First Parents must be cleansed with a shower
Of blood, rained from my wounds: my death appease,
And cure the venom of that dire Disease.
All you who live, rejoice; all you who die:
You sacred ashes of the just which lie
In peaceful Vrnes, rejoice in this my fall:
I for the living lived, but die for all.
My sufferings are not lost. To Earth I owe
These promised ills: bonds, whips, and thorns to grow
About out bleeding brows; the Cross the scorn
Of a proud People, to destruction born.
O let my Fathers wrath through singed air
On me in thunder dart, so mine it spare!
Lest the World should, I perish^; and must bear
The punishments of all that ever were.
You who inhabit, where the Sun displaies
His early light, or near his setting Rays;
Who suffer by his perpendicular
Aspect, or frieze beneath the Northern star;
Affect this ready Sacrifice, who am
A greater offering then the Paschall Lamb.
My precious blood alone the virtue has
To purge your sins, and quench my Fathers wrath.
Now the full Moon succeeds that Vernal light,
Which equally divides the Day and Night;
Sacred to Feasts. The next Sun shall survay
One brighter then himself, and lose his Day.
False Traitor, through thy guilt so timorous grown,
Although thou lead'st an army against One,
Shrouded in Night; I am not taken by
Thy guile, but know thy'fraud, and have to die.
But you my chosen friends, who yet preserve
Your faith entire, nor from your duty swerve;
Your Festival, our washings past, rehearse
Your Makers excellence insacred Verse;
While I to those frequented Shades repair
Where the trees answer to the sighing Air.
Learn, as we walk along, unto what place
I shortly shall return; what heavenly Grace
Is to descend upon you from above;
What are the laws of Charity and Love.
While my last prayers solicit Heaven, to Sleep
Give no access: this Night my Vigil keep.

CHORUS OF JEWISH WOMEN. THe rapid Motion of the Spheres
Old Night from our Horizon bears;
And now declining shades give way
To the return of cheerful Day.
But Phosphorus, who leads the Stars,
And Day's illustriou's Path prepares,
Who last of all the Host retires,
Not yet with-draws those radiant Fires:
Nor have our Trumpets summoned
The Morning from her dewy Bed:
As yet her Roses are unblown,
Nor by her purple Mantle known.
All night we in the Temple keep,
Not yielding to the charms of Sleep;
That so we might with zealous prayer
Our thoughts and cleansed hearts prepare
To celebrate th'insuing Light,
When Phoebe shall her horns unite.
This annual Feast to Memory
Is sacred, nor with us must die:
Thus by that dreadful Exul taught,
When God his plagues on Egypt brought.
Those Cities these our Rites bereave
Of Citizens, and widows leave,
Where Jordan from two bubling Heads
His oft-returning waters leads;
Till they their narrow bounds forsake,
And grow a Sea-resembling Lake.
Those Woods of Palm, producing Dates;
Of fragrant Balsamum, which hates
The touch of Steel; where once the sound
Of trumpets levelled with the ground
Vnbatter'd Walls; that Mount which shrouds
His aerie head in hanging Clouds,
Where Death closed our lost Prophets eyes;
Admire to see their Colonies
Ascend the hills of Solyma
In celebration of this Day.
Cephaeans, whose strong Walls with-stood
The ruins of the General Flood,
To solemnize this Day forsake
Adored Dercetis, and her Lake.
Hither the Palestines from strong
Azotus, both the Jamnes throng.
Not Lydda could her Own restrain;
Nor Caparorsa's walls contain
Her Edomites; Damascus could
Not hers, though she ten Nations ruld:
Nor yet Sabaste, long the Nurse
Of impious Sons, sprung from our Surse.
Phoenicians, who did first produce
To Mortals letters, with their use;
Where Tyrus full of Luxury
With Mother Sidon, front the Sky,
Hither with hasty zeal repair:
Among the Syrians, those who dare
Feed on forbidden fish; nor more
The Deity of a Dove adore.
From Belus, whose slow waters pass
On glittering sands, which turn to glass:
From Arnons banks; those Borderars
The subject of our ancient wars:
Whose sulphurous Bitumen take
From salt Asphaltis deadly lake.
No Tempest on that Sea provailes;
No ship upon her bosom sails;
Vnmov'd with oars: what over-flies,
Struck by her breath, falls down and dies:
Hates all that lives; in her Profound
None are received, but flore undrownd:
No Seas, by slymie fhores imbras't,
So pestilent a vapor cast:
This blasts the corn before it bears,
And poisons the declining Ears:
Sad Autumns fruits to cinders turn,
And all the fields in ashes mourn:
Lest time should waste the memory
Of those revengefull flames, the sky
On Earth in melting sulphur showered,
Which that accursed Race devoured:
When she who did commiserate
With impious grief her Cities fate,
Grew, in the moment of her fault,
A Statue of congealed Salt.
Hither devout Esseans fly,
Who without issue multiply,
And Virtue only propagate:
All sensual loves, all lucre hate,
And equal Poverty embrace:
Thrice happy, of a noble Race,
Who slight your own particular,
Transported with a public care.
He flies a pitch above our woes,
Or crimes, who gladly undergoes
Their toil and want; nor would possess
What others miscall Happiness.
What numbers from the Suns up-rise,
From where he leaves the mourning Skies,
Of our dispersed Abrahamites,
This Vesper to their Homes invites!
Yet we, in yearly triumph, still
A Lamb for our deliverance kill.
Since Liberty our Confines fled,
Given with the first unleavened Bread,
She never would return; though bought
With wounds, and in destruction sought.
Some stray to Lybia's scorched Sands,
Where horned Hammons Temple stands:
To Nilus some, where Philips Son,
Who all the rifled Orient won,
Built his proud City: others gone
To their old Prison, Babylon:
A part to freezing Taurus fled;
And Tiber, now the Oceans Head.
Our Ruins all the world have filled:
But you, by use in sufferings skilled,
Forgetting in remoter Climes
Our vanished Glory; nor those Times,
Those happy Times, compare with these,
Your burdens may support with ease.
More justly we of Fate complain,
Who Servitude at home sustain:
We, to perpetual woes designed,
In our own Country Egypt find.

THE SECOND ACT.
PETER. YOu Offspring of bloodthirsty Romulus,
Foes to sweet Peace, to our great God, and us,
And you prophaner Sacrificers, who
With subtle mischief guiltless blood pursue;
Since you would not refuse to bind the hands
Of Innocence, on me impose your bands:
Seize on the guilty; he who has refused
His Lord and Master, by himself accused.
The ills yet suffered, I deserve to bear
For looking on; what follows, for my fear.
You need no torches to subdue the Night's
Dark Shades to find me; no stern Satellites
Drawn from the Temple, nor with Romans join
To act one Sin; nor spend your sacred Coin
In salary to such a Guide as may
With a perfidious kiss his Lord betray.
This Head I give you freely; hither have:
No sudden hurl-windes shall your bodies cast
On trembling Earth. Behold; I with my hands
Behind me bound, implore your dire Commands;
And run to meet your stripes. Are you now prone
To melting pity? will you punish none
But with injustice? is your fury slow,
Unless to those who no offenses know?
We both alike have impiously transgrest:
You in not punishing a fault confessed;
And I who have the living Lord denied.
Just Jugdes of a life so sanctified
To whom suborned Witnesses have sold
Their damned perjuries, a Wretch behold,
And hear his Crime: My Country Galile,
To follow Christ I left both Land and Sea:
Son to the Thunderer, his only Heir;
From Heaven sent by his Father to repair
And rule th'affairs of Mortals. This is He,
Whom you have bound, who must his Country free.
Rebellious Vassals, you have doomed your King.
I know the impious Race from whence you spring,
Your savage manners, cruel Ancestors,
Whom Nature, as her greatest curse, abhors.
Such, when the trembling Boy his brethrens hands,
Their truculent aspects, and servill bands
Beheld; though privy to a better fate,
Whose providence was to reward their hate:
Soon after, called to Niles seven channel'd Flood,
He famine from both Lands expelled with food.
So your seditious Fathers mutined
At Sina's rocks against their sacred Head:
And there the food of Angels loathed, which fell
From Heaven in showers: besotted Israel
Egypt and Servitude preferred above
The Tents of Moses, and their Countries love.
What numbers, with prophetic Raptures filled,
Have you, and yet not unrevenged, killed!
Memphis, devouring Deserts, Civil wars,
Often foreign Yokes, Assyrian Conquerars,
Great Pompeys Eagles, sacred Rites profaned,
Your Temple sacked, with slaughtered Levites stained;
Are all forgot? Yet worse attend your Hate.
O that I were the Minister of Fate!
I then would tear your guilty buildings down,
And in a crimson Sea their ruins drown.
Witness you Groves, late conscious to our cares,
Where Christ with tears poured forth his funeral prayers,
How I revenge pursued; and with their blood
Would have augmented Cedrons murmuring Flood:
But he, for whom I struck, reproov'd the blow;
And following his own Precept, cured his foe.
For Malchus, rushing on in front of all,
Perceiving part of his, without him, fall,
Searched with his flaming brand: the bleeding ear
See on the earth, revenge subdued his fear;
Who lowdly roaring shook his threatened bands,
And straight incountred those all-healing hands:
They to his Head that Ornament restored,
And benefits for injuries affor'd.
But O blind Mischief! I, who gave the Wound,
Am left at large; and he, who healed it, bound.
O Peter, can thou yet forbear to throw
Thy body on the weapons of the Foe!
If thou would vindicate thy Lord, begin
First with thy self, and punish thy own Sin.
Thou that dare menace armies, thou that art
Fierce, as a Midian Tiger, of a heart
Invincible, nor knows what it is to dread;
With Fortune, at the first encounter, fled.
A Fugitive, a Rebel; one that has
All crimes committed in this breach offaith.
Who towering hopes on his own strength erects,
Nor the selfe-flattering Minds deceit suspects,
But his vain Virtue trust; let him in me
The sad example of his frailty see:
From slippery heights how pronely Mortals slide;
Their heady errors punishing their pride.
What can I add to these misdeeds of mine!
Who have defiled the water, bread, and wine,
With my abhorred defection! O, could I
Those lips pollute with wilful perjury,
But newly feasted with that sacred food,
Presenting his torn flesh, and powr'd-out blood!
O Piety! for this, thou Renegate,
Did Jesus wash thy flying feet of late!
Not Jordan with two Heads, whose waters roll
From snow-top Libanus, can cleanse thy Soul:
Not thou Callirhoe; nor that ample Lake,
From whose forsaken shore my birth I take,
Could thou blue Nereus, in whose troubled Deep
Niles seven large Mouths their foming currents steep*
Or that red Sea, whose waves in Rampires stood
While our Forefathers past the parted Flood?
These purging streams from thy own Springs must flow.
Repentance, why are thy complaints so slow!
Raise storms of sighs; let tears in torrentsfall,
And on thy blushing cheeks deep furrows gall.
O so! run freely: beat thy stubborn breast:
Here spend thy rage; these blows become thee best.
This, wretched Cephas, for thy crimes I owe:
What can I for my injured Lord bestow!
My deeds and sufferings disproportioned are;
Nor must they in an equal sorrow share.
Should this Night ever last, to propagate
Increasing sorrows, till subdn'd by Fate,
My penitent Soul this wasted flesh forsake;
Yet can my guilt no reparation make.
Swollen eyes, now weep you? then you should have wept,
Besprinkled my devotion, and have kept
That holy Watch, when interdicted Sleep
Your drowsy lids did in his Lethe steep.
You should have dropped my brains into a Flood,
Before he at that dire Tribunal stood:
Ere thrice abjured, on me his looks he threw;
Or ere th'accusing Bird of Dawning drew.
Where shall I hide me! in what Dungeon may
My troubled Soul avoid the woeful Day!
Fly quickly to some melancholy Cave,
In whose dark entrails thou may find a grave
To bury thee alive: there waste thy years
In chearisht Sorrow, and unwitnest Tears.

PONTIVS PILAT. CAIAPHAS. TArpaean Jove; Mars, great Quirinus Sire;
You Household gods, snatched from Troys funeral Fire,
With greater Zeal adored; when shall I pay
My Vows! my Offerings on your Altars lay!
And see those Roofs which top the Clouds! the Beams
With burnisht gold inchac'd, and blazing Gems.
Those Theaters; which ring with their applause
Who on the conquered World impose their Laws!
And thee, the triple Earths imperious Guide,
Great-Soul'd Tiberius! whether thou reside
On Tibers banks, adored by grateful Rome;
Ambitious of his residence, for whom
She gave the World; or Caprae, much renowned
For soft delights, impoverish the Long-gown'd!
Far from my friends, far from my native Soil
I here in honorable Exile toil,
To curb a People whom the Gods disclaim:
Who cover under the usurped Name
Of Piety, their hate to all Mankind;
Condemn the world; in their own vices blind:
And with false grounded fear abjure for One,
All those Immortalls which the Heavens inthrone.
Their only Law is to renounce all Laws:
Their Error, which from others hatred draws,
Fomenting their own discord, still provokes
Their Spirits to Rebellion, who their yokes
Have often attempted to shake-off; though they
More easily are subdued, then taught to obey.
Clear Justice, sincere Faith, bear witness you
With how much grief our swords the Hebrews slew:
But such as stubborn and inhumane are,
Unless they suffer, would enforce a War:
And Reason urges those who Scepters bear,
Against their Nature, often to prove severe.
I go to question what these Prelates would:
Since they forbear to enter, lest they should
(Their Feast so near) with my unhallowed Floor
Their feet pollute. Who Is this, by such a power
In shackles led! How reverend his aspect!
How full of awe! these Looks no guilt detect.
Thou, Caiaphas, of Solyma the Prime,
And Prince of Priests, relate th'imputed Crime.

CAIAPHAS. Great Guardian of the Roman Peace, whom we
Next Caesar honor; to be doomed by thee
Our Senate brings The Infection of these Times:
Whom we accuse of no suggested crimes.
Those holy Rites which grave Antiquity
First introduced, since defended by
A long descent, this Innovator sought
To abolish, and a new Religion taught.
Nor fearing the Recesse of Gods own Seat,
The Temples ruin sings, and Roof repleat
With the full Deity: disturbs the Feast
Of the seventh Day, designed for sacred Rest.
Those laws rejects which Moses pen revealed,
Even those by God with dreadful thunder sealed.
Nor so content; with Heaven his fury wars,
Aspires that Throne, and tramples on the Stars.
Who styles himself, though of ignoble birth,
His only son, who made both Heaven and Earth.
This, Death must expiate; he has judged his Cause,
Who writ in leaves of Marble our ten Laws.

PILAT. When Wrath, the Nurse of War, and thirst of gold
Destructive Arts produced; the better Soul'd
No peace nor safety found, enforced to bear:
Life, of it self infirm, through common fear
Into Societies the scattered drew,
Who by united forces potent grew:
Entrenched Cities with high walls immured;
But more by well-digested Laws secured:
The Crime and Punishment proportion kept;
And Wrongs, like Wolves, on their first Authors leapt:
Justice from each Offense example took;
And his own weapon the Delinquent struck:
Spoil seaz'd on Rapine, Blood drew blood; detered
From doing that, which they to suffer feared.
But more then humane plagues attend on those
Who God provoke: he prosecutes his foes
With sure revenge. Why should those Hands which tear
The clouds with thunder, shake the World with fear;
Their wrath to Man resign? The impious find
Their scourge: the terror of th'astonish'd Mind
Affrights their peace: who feel what they deny;
And fear an unbeleeved Deity.
One Day no period to his torment gives:
To tremble at the Name of Death he lives;
Still apprehending what then death is worse;
Long life awarded to prolong his curse.
But if he have your laws infringed, be you
Your selves the judges, and his guilt pursue.

CAIAPHAS. Although those ancient Laws, which now remain
Among us, we acknowledge to retain
From Romes free bounty; yet to you it is known,
Our curbed Power can death inflict on none.
You, to whom Caesar's Fortunes recommend
His Rods and Axes, sacred Rule defend.
This guilty Wretch, whose practices we fear,
Of late his place of birth forsaking, where
The Sea is honored with Tiberius Name,
With troops of Clients to this City came.
Who seeds of War among the Vulgarsowes:
With what injustice Roman Arms impose
Their Tribute on a Nation ever free.
With magic Charms, and Stygian compact, he
Attracts belief: denies the dead their rest,
Of those un-envi'd Mansions dispossessed
By wicked Spells. These prodigies delude
The novelty-affecting Multitude:
Whom for their Lord their loud Hosannas greet;
And strew the noble Palm beneath his seet.
Imboldned by these Arts; He, as his own
By birth, aspires to David's ancient Throne.
When Rome, provoked by his rebellion, shall
Arm her just Grief; we by the sword must fall,
Our City sink in flames, our Country lie
Depopulated. But since One must dye
To save the General; sentenced by thy breath,
Let him redeem his Nation with his death.

PILAT. Such doubtful causes grave advice require:
Here, if you please, attend; while I retire.
The Prisoner to the Soldiers care commit:
On whom this day we will in judgment fit.

CHORUS OF JEWISH WOMEN. YOu lofty towers of Solyma,
Thou ancient Throne of Sovereign sway:
To thee the conquered Tribute paid,
From th'Isthmos, crowned with Ebon shade,
To great Euphrates trembling Streams:
Arabians, scorched by Phoebus beams.
Th'admiring Queen, winged with thy Fame,
From her black-peopled Empire came.
Great Kings, ambitious of thy love,
To join with thee in friendship strove.
Those who Canopus Scepter bore;
Those Monarchs who the Sun adore,
And over the wealthy Orient reign:
Sarrana, Sovereign of the Main.
Now, ah! a miserable Thrall!
O, nothing, but a prey to all!
This Land, the one God once chastely wed,
How often has she changed her Head,
Since they our Temples ruined pride
With bad presage reedifi'd!
Since those, in foreign bondage born,
Did with their servile Fates return!
On us Antiochus guilt reflects:
Our Fathers Sins sit on our necks.
What durst that wicked Age not do,
Which could those Altars naked view,
Often flaming with celestial Fire!
Provoking Heavens deserved ire
With their adult'rat Sacrifice!
For this did Ours so highly prize
Th'Ionian Gods, by mortals made,
And incense to those Idols paid?
Since when th'Accurst their brothers slew;
Wives, less malicious poison brew;
Sons fall by Mothers: we have known
That, which will be believed by none.
Twice vanquished by Roman Arms;
Twice have their Conquerours our harms
Removed for greater: Fortunes change
To our proud Masters proved as strange.
Yet this no less our grief provokes,
Our kindred bear divided yokes:
One part by Roman bondage wrung;
The other two by Brothers, sprung
From Savage Idumaeans, whom
Our Fathers have so often ore-come.
O thou the Hope, the only One
Of our distress, and ruined Throne;
Of whom, with a prophetic tongue,
To Judah dying Jacob sung:
The crowned Muse on ivory Lyre,
His breast inflamed with holy Fire,
This often foretold; That thou should free
The People consecrate to thee;
That thou, triumphing, should revoke
Sweet Peace, then never to be broke;
When freed Judaea should obey
One Lord, and all affect his Sway.
O when shall we behold thy Face,
So often promised to our Race!
If Prophets, who have won belief
By our mishaps and flowing grief,
Of joyful change as truly sung;
Thy absence should not now belong.
Thee, by thy Virtue, we entreat;
The Temples Veil, the Mercies Seat;
That Name, by which our Fathers swear,
Which in our vulgar Speech we dare
Not utter, to compassionate
Thy Kindreds Tears, and ruined State.
Have, to our great Redemption, have,
O thou most Holy! and at last
Bless with thy Presence; that we may
To thee our Vows devoutly pay.

THE THIRD ACT.
JVDAS. CAIAPHAS. YOu who preserve your pure integrity;
O you whose crimes transcend not credit, fly
Far from my presence! whose envenomed sight
Pollutes the guilty. Thou, who wrong and right
Distinctly can discern; whose gentle breast
All faith has not abandoned, but art blessed
With children, brothers, friends; nor have declined
The sweet affections of a pious Mind;
Shut up the winding entry of thine ear,
Nor let the world of such a bargain hear.
A Sin so horrible should be to none
Besides the desperate Contractors known.
Where Is now that mitred Chief? where that dire Train
Of Sacrificers, worthy to be slain
On their own Altars? I have found my Curse:
The Sun, except my self, sees nothing worse.
Hear, without hire; O hear the too well known:
If you seek for a witness; I am one
That can the truth reveal: Or would you find
A Villain? Here Is a self-accusing Mind.
That sacred Life, O most immaculate!
More then my Masters! to your deadly Hate
Have I betrayed: discharge my hands I may,
Although not of the Guilt, yet of the Prey.
Receive the gift you gave: a treachery
Second to mine, you may of others buy.

CAIAPHAS. If thou accuse thy self of such a Sin
Deservedly, thou have a Court with-in,
That will condemn thee. Thy offenses be
No Crimes of ours: our consciences are free.
Nor shall the sacred Treasury receive
The price of blood. Thee to thy Fate we leave.

JVDAS. Is this the doctrine of your piety
To approve the Crime, yet hate the Hire? O fly,
Fly, wretch, unto the Altar, and pollute
The Temple with thy Sins accursed fruit.
Nor will I for my self with hopeless prayer
Solicit Heaven; lost in my own despair;
But Gods stern Justice urge, that we, who were
Joined in the guilt, may equal vengeance bear.
Nor shall I in my punishment prove slow:
Behold, your Leader will before you go;
It Is fit you follow; to those silent Deepes,
Those horrid Shades, where Sorrow never fleepes.
Thou great Director of the rouling Stars,
Unless thou idly lookst on men's affairs,
And vainly we thy brutish Thunder fear;
Why should thy land so dire a Monster bear?
Or the Sun not retire, and yet behold?
If those thy fearful punishments of old
Require belief, in one unite them all:
Let Seas in Cataracts from Meteors fall,
Afford no shore, but swallow in their Brine;
That so the Worlds first ruin may prove mine.
Let melting Stars their sulphrous surfeit shed,
And all the Heavenly Fires fall on my Head.
And thou, O injured Earth, thy jaws extend,
That I may to the infernal Shades descend:
Less cause had thy revenge, when she the five
Enraged Conspirators devoured alive.
Those evils which amazed the former-times,
Thy fury has consumed on smaller Crimes.
O slow revenger of his injuries,
And he thy Son! some fearful death devize;
Unknown, and horrid: Or shall I pursue
My own offense, and act what thou should do?
You Legions of Heavens Exuls, you who take
Revenge on Mortals for the crimes you make;
Why troop you thus about me? Or what need
These terrors? Is my punishment decreed
In Hell already? Furies, now I come.
In your dark dungeons what more horrid Rome
Shall now devour me? Must I to that Place,
Where the cursed Father of a wicked Race
Your scourges feels? who, when the world was new,
And but possessed by four, his brother slew.
Or where that faithless Prince blasphemes? then all
His Host more eminent; who lest his fall
Should honor to his enemies afford,
Made way for hated Life with his own sword.
He most affects me, who his fathers Chair
Usurped; when caught by his revenging Hair,
He lost the Earth and Life: the way he led
T'avoided Death, my willing feet shall tread.
Master, I fly to anticipate the event
Of my foul crime with equal punishment.

PONTIVS PILAT. THE JEWS. HOrror distracts my sense: irresolute
Whether I should break silence, or sit mute.
Envy th'accus'd condemns, whom Justice cleares.
I must confess, persuaded by my Fears,
Lest I this State and People should insence,
I wished they could have proved that great Offense.
Yet whatsoever they enforced of late,
No fault of his revealed, but their own hate.
His silence was a vanquishing reply.
Who for detecting their false piety
(Whose supercilious looks, with fasting pale,
Close avarice, and proud ambition veil)
Is by their Arts made guilty: One that slights
The God they adore, and violates his Rites.
From hence those many-nam'd Offenses spring;
And his aspiring to become their King.
Can those poor Fishers of that Inland Sea,
And women, following him from Galile,
So great a Spirit in their Leader raise;
That Rome should fear, whom all the World obayes.
Yet he avers his Kingdom is unknown,
Nor of this World; and bows to Caesar's Throne.
Proved by the event: for when the Vulgar bound
His yielding hands, they no resistance found.
But his endowments, zealous in defense
Of clouded Truth, their mortal hate incense.
Followed by few, who like affections bear,
And with belief their Masters doctrine hear.
If true, he may speak freely; nor must dye
For Ostentation, though he broach a lie.
But if distracted, that is a punishment
Even to it self, and Justice does prevent.
He, whom this Annual Solemnity
Has now invited to the Temple by
His Father built, whose Kingdom borders on
The land innobled by Agenor's Throne,
Of these stupendous acts by Rumor spread
Could fix no faith, though in his City bred.
To laughter doomed, his Rival Herod seorn'd;
And sent him back, in purple robes adorned.
Th'implacable, now far more fiercely bent
To prosecute the twice-found innocent:
Perhaps afraid lest they their own should loose,
Unless they him of forged guilt accuse.
But when Revenge does once the Mind engage;
O how it raves! lost to all sense but rage!
No Lioness, late of her whelps bereft,
With wilder sury prosecutes the Theft.
O Shame I through fear I sought to shield the Right
With honest Fraud, and Justice steal by slight:
As when the laboring Bark, too weak to stem
The boisterous Tide, obliquely cuts the stream.
They have an ancient Custom, if we may
Believe the Jews, derived from that Day
When the delivered Sons of Israel
Fled from those banks whose floods in summer swel:
That ever when the Vernall Moon shall join
Her silver Orb, and in full luster shine,
They should some one release, to gratify
The People, by their Law condemned to die.
Now, hoping to have freed the Innocent,
The violent Priests my Clemency prevent:
Who urge the heady Vulgar to demand
One Barrabas; a Thief, who had a hand
In every murder, hot with humane blood.
How little it avails us to be good!
Preposterous Favor! through the hate they hear
His guiltless Soul, their Votes the guilty clear.
And now my Wifes not idle dreams perplex
My struggling thoughts, which all this night did vex
Her troubled slumbers: who conjures me by
All that is holy, all the Gods, that I
Should not the laws of Justice violate
To gratify so undeserved a hate.
For this shall I the Hebrew Fathers slight,
Th'indeavours of a Nation so unite,
Committed to my charge? Shall I for One
Poor Abject, forfeit all the good I have done?
These pestered Walls all Jewry now infold;
The Houses hardly can their Strangers hold,
Sent from all parts to this great Festival:
What if the Vulgar to their weapons fall?
Who knows the end, if once the Storm begin?
Sure I, their Judge, egregious praise should win
By troubling of the public Peace. Shall I
Then render him to death? Impiety!
For what offense? Is his offense not great,
Whose innovation may a war beget?
Lest Empire suffer, they who scepters bear
Often make a Crime, and punish what they fear.
One hope remains: Our Soldiers the Freeborn,
And yet by our command, with whips have torn.
A sight so full of pity may assuage
The swiftly-spreading fire of popular Rage.
Look on this Spectacle! his arms all over
With lashes galled, deep died in their own gore!
His sides exhausted! all the rest appears
Like that Fictitious Scarlet which he wears!
And for a Crown, the wreathed Thorns infol'd
His bleeding brows! With grief his grief behold!

JEWS. Away with him: from this Contagion free
The Infected Earth, and nail him on a Tree.

PILAT. What, crucify your King?

JEWS. Dominion can
No Rival brook. His rule, a Law to Man,
Whom Rome adores, we readily obey:
And will admit of none but Caesar's Sway.
He Caesar's right usurps, who hopes to ascend
The Hebrew Throne. Thy own affairs intend.
Do thou discharge thy Masters trust, if in
Thy government a president begin
So full of danger, tending to the rape
Of Majesty? Shall treason thus escape?

PILAT. The Tumult swells: the Vulgar and the Great,
Join in their Votes with contributed heat.
Whose whisperings such a change of murmur raise
As when the rising Winds first Fury strayes
Among wave-beat Rocks; when gathering Clouds deforme
The face of Heaven, whose Wrath begets a Storm:
The fearful Pilot then distrusts the Skies;
And to the nearest Port for refuge flies.
To these rude Clamours they mine ears inure:
Such sharp diseases crave a sudden cure.
You my Attendants, hither quickly bring
Spot-purging Water from the living Spring.
Thou liquid Crystal, from pollution clear;
And you my innocent hands like record bear,
On whom these cleansing streams so purely run;
I voluntarily have nothing done.
Nor am I guilty, though he guiltless die:
Yours is the Crime; his Blood upon you lie.

JEWS. Rest thou secure. If his destruction shall
Draw down celestial Vengeance, letit fall
Thick on our heads, in punishment renew:
And ever our dispersed Race pursue.

PILAT. Then I, from this Tribunal, mounted on
Imbellish'd Marble, Judgments awful Throne,
Thus censure: Lead him to the Cross; and by
A servil death let Judahs King there dye.

CHORUS OF JEWISH WOMEN JESUS. WE all deplore thy miseries;
For Thee we beat our breasts; our eyes
In bitter tears their moisture shed:
If thou be he by Ravens fed,
Aloft on flaming Chariot born;
Yet would to cruel Lords return:
Or that sad Bard, believed too late,
Who sung his Countries servil Fate;
Now come to sigh her destiny,
A like unhappy; twice to dye:
Or he, long nourished in the Wood,
Who late in Jordans cleansing Flood
So many washed; that durst reprove
A King for his incestious love;
Slain for a Dancer. If the same,
Or other of an elder fame,
Sent back to Earth, in vices drowned,
To raise it from that dark Profound;
It Is sure thy Sanctity exceeds,
Blazed by thy Virtue and thy Deeds.
O never more, ring'd with a Throng
Of Followers, shall thy sacred tongue
Inform our Actions; nor the way
To Heaven, and heavenly joys, display!
The Blind, who now the unknown light
Beholds, scarce trusting his own sight,
Thy gift, shall not the Giver see.
Those maladies, subdued by thee,
Which powerful Art and Herbs desie,
No more thy sovereign Touch shall fly.
Nor Loaves, so tacidly increast,
Again so many thousands feast.
Thou Rule of Life's Perfection,
By Practice, as by Precept, shown;
Late hemb'd with Auditors, whose store
Encumbered the too-narrow Shore,
The Mountains covered with their Preasse,
The Mountains then their People less;
For whom our Youths their garments strew,
Victorious Boughs before thee threw,
While thou in Triumph rid'st along,
Saluted with a joyful Song:
Now, see what change from Fortune springs!
O dire Vicissitude of Things!
Betrayed, abandoned by thy own;
Dragged by thy Foes, opposed by none.
Thou hope of our afflicted state,
Thou Balm of Life, and Lord of Fate;
Not erst to such unworthy bands
Did thou submit thy powerful Hands.
Lo, he who gave the dumb a tongue,
With patient silence bears his wrong!
The Soldier, ah! renews his blows;
The whip new-op'ned furrows shows,
Which now in angry tumors swel:
To us their wrath the Romans sell.
Lo, how his members flow! the smart
Confined to no particular part:
His stripes, which make all but one sore,
Run in confused streams of gore.
Art thou the Slave of thy own Fate,
To bear thy torments cursed weight?
What Arab, though he wildly stray
In wandering Tents, and live by prey;
Or Cyclop, who no pity knows,
Would such a cruel task impose?
O that the fatal pressure might
Sink thee to Earth, nor weigh more light
Then Death upon thee; that thy weak
Untwisted thread of life might break!
It were a blessing so to dye:
But O for how great cruelty
Art thou reserved! the Cross thou now
Support'st, must with thy burden bow.

JESUS. Daughters of Solyma, no more
My wrongs thus passionately deplore.
These tears for future sorrows keep:
Wives, for your selves and children weep.
That horrid day will shortly come,
When you shall bless the barren Womb,
And Breast that never infant fed:
Then shall you wish the mountains head
Would from his trembling basis slide,
And all in tomb's of ruins hide.

CHORUS. Alas! thou spotless Sacrifice
To greedy Death! no more our eyes
Shall see thy Face! ah, never more
Shall thou return from Deaths dark shore.
Though Lazarus, late at thy call,
Brake through the bars of Funeral;
Raised from that Prison to review
The World which then he hardly knew:
Who forthwith former sense regains;
The blood sprung in his heated Veins;
His sinews supple grew, yet were
Again almost conjeal'd with fear.
Thy followers, Sadock, now may know
Their Error from the Shades below.
A Few, beloved by the Most High,
Through Virtue of the Deity,
To others rarely rendered breath:
None ever raised himself from death.

THE FOVRTH ACT.
FIRST NVNCIVS. CHORUS OF JEWISH WOMEN. SECOND NVNCIVS. I From the horrid'st
Act that ever fed
The fire of barbarous Rage, at length am fled:
Yet O too near! The Object still pursues;
Flotes in mine eyes, that sad Scene renewes.

CHORUS. Art thou a witness of his misery?
Saw thou the Galilean Prophet die?

1. NVNCIVS. Those Savages, to Scythian Rocks confined,
Who know no God, nor virtue of the Mind,
But only Sense pursue; who hunger tame
With slaughtered Lives; they, and their food, the same;
Would this detest.

CHORUS. Vain Innocence! would none
Lend him a tear! were all transformed to stone!

1. NVNCIVS. No certainly: yet so commiserate,
As Pity proved more tyrannous then Hate.
The cursed Tree with too much weight oppressed
His stooping shoulders: Death had now releast
His fainting Soul: but O, the Lenity
Of Malice would not suffer him to die,
Part of the load imposed with idle scorn
On Lybian Simon, in Cyrene born.
To whom th'affected quiet of the fields,
Secured by Poverty, no safety yields.
The Furies of the City him surprise,
Who from the vices of the City flies:
Who bears not his own burden, that none may
Misdoubt, the Innocent became their prey.

CHORUS. Forthwith unmask this wretched face of Woe:
All that he suffered, and the manner show;
What words brake from his sorrow; give thy tongue
A liberal scope: Our minds not seldom long
To know what they abhor: nor spare our ears;
What can be heard, is fancied by our fears.

1. NVNCIVS. Without the City, on that side which lies
Exposed to the boisterous injuries
Of the cold North, to War a fatal Way,
Infamous by our slaughters, Golgotha
Exalts his Rock. No flowers there paint the field,
Nor flourishing trees refreshing shadows yield:
The ground all white, with bones of mortals spread,
Stencht with the putrefaction of the dead,
And relics of unburied Carcases.
Who on his aged Fathers throat durst sease,
Rip-up his mothers womb; who poison dressed
For his own brother; or his unknown Guest
Betrayed, and gave his mangled flesh for food
Unto the wild inhabitants of the Wood;
This Stage of Death deserved: while every soul
Misdeed of theirs pursues the guilty Soul.
Now when the Nazarite at this dismal place
Arrived, with a weak and tardy pace;
Least he should die too quickly, some prefer
Sweet wine, mixed with the bitter tears of Myrrh.
He of the idle present hardly tastes;
But to encounter with his torments hasts.
The Steel now bored his feet, whose slit veins spout
Like pierced conduits; both his arms strechtout.
His hands fixed with two nails. While his great Soul
These tortures suffered, while the rising Bole
Forsook the Earth, and crimson Torrents sprung
From his fresh wounds, he gave his Grief no tongue.
The Cross advanced and fixed; then, as more nigh
To his own Heaven, his eyes bent on the Sky,
Among such never to be equaled woes
(Who would believe it!) pities his stern foes;
And thinks those false Contrivers, those who gored
His flesh with wounds, more fit to be deplored:
Who even their merited destruction fears;
And falsely judged, the truly guilty cleares.
Father, he cries, forgive this sin: they knew
Not what they did, nor know what now they do.
Meanwhile the Soldiers, who in blood delight,
With hearts more hard then Rocks, behold this sight;
And savage Rigor never reconciled
To Pity, all humanity exiled:
Who, used to pillage, now intend their prey;
Nor for his death, though then a dying, stay;
But he alive, and looking on, divide
The Spoil; yet more in the Spectatour joy'd.
Fury in trifles sports: their scorn his poor,
Yet parted garments, distribute to four.
His inward Robe, with one contexture knit,
Nor of the like division would admit,
Their votes to the dispose of Lots refer,
Electing Chance for their blind Arbiter.
Nor wast the least of evils to behold
The ignoble Partners of his pain; who old
In mischief robbed the murdered Passengers;
Followed by Troops, that filled the Night with fears.
While thus they hung, none could the doubt explain,
Whether He more had saved then They had slain.
The numerous Index of each bloody deed
Now brand their lives: when those who could not read
At such a distance, of the next inquire
For what they died; who had the same desire.
But above his declining Head they hung
A table in three Languages: the Tongue,
The first of tongues, which taught our Abrahamites
Those heavenly Precepts, and mysterious Rites;
Next, that which to th'informed World imparts
The Grecian Industry, and learned Arts;
Then this, from whence the conquered Earth now takes
Her Laws, and at the Roman Virtue quakes;
All of one sense. His place of birth, his Name
Declare; and for the Hebrew King proclaim.
After the bloody Priests so long had fed
On this loved Spectacle; at length they read
The Title: and in such a misery,
So full of ruth, found something to envy.
The Governor entreating to take down
That glorious Style; lest he the Hebrew Crown
Should vindicate in Death; and so deny
That Princes by Subordinates should die.
But who that Day soreadily compli'd
To give a life, austerely this denied.

CHORUS. While lingering Death his sad release deferred,
How looked the standers by? what words were heard?

I. NVNCIVS. Not all alike: discording murmurs rise.
Some, with transfixed hearts, and wounded eyes,
Astonished stand: some joy in his slow fate,
And to the last extend their Barbarous hate.
Motion it self variety begets,
And by a strange vicissitude regrets
What it affected, nor one posture bears:
Tears scornful laughter raise, and laughter tears.
Who to the Temple from th'impoverisht shore
Of Galilee his followed steps adore,
And ministered to his life, now of his End
The Witnesses; still to their dying friend
Their faith preserve: which, as they could, they show
In all th'expressions of a perfect woe.
One, from her panting breast her garments tare;
Another, the bright tresses of her hair;
This, with her naked arms her bosom beats;
The hollow rock Her fearful shriekes repeat;
She, stiff with sorrow. But what grief could vie
With that example of all piety,
His virgin Mothers! this affords no way
To lessening tears; nor could it self display.
Where should she fix her looks! if on the ground;
She sees that with her blood, he bleeding, drowned:
Or if she raise her eyes; the killing sight
Of her wombes tort'red Issue quenched their light.
Fearing to look on either, both disclose
Their terrors; who now licenses her woes.
Ready to have stepped forward, and imbrast
The bloody Cross, her feeble lims stuck fast:
Her feet their motion lost; her voice in vain
A passage sought: such Grief could not complain.
Whose Soul almost as great a Sorrow stung,
As his, who on the Tree in torments hung.
That Youth, one of the Twelve, so dignified
By his dear Masters love, stood by her side.
Beholding this sad Pair, those Souls that were
To him then life, while life remained, more dear;
He found an other Cross: his spirits melt
More for the sorrow seen, then torments felt.
At length, in strength transcending either, brake
The bars of his long silence, and thus spoke:
A legacy to each of you I leave:
Mother, this son in stead of me receave
By thy adoption: and thou gentle boy,
The seed of Zebedeus, late my joy,
Thy friend now for thy mother take. This said,
Again he to his torments bowed his Head.
The Vulgar with the Elders of our Race,
And Soldiers, shake their heads in his disgrace:
Is this the man, said they, whose hands can raise
The Temple, and rebuild it in three days?
Now show thy strength. Or if the Thunderer
Above the rank of Mortals thee prefer,
Acknowledged for his Heir; let him descend,
Confirm thy hopes, and timely succor lend.
Behold, the help thou gav'st to others, fails
The Author. Break these Bonds, these stubborn Nails,
And from the Cross descend: then we will say
Thou art our King, and thy Commands obey.
Nor wast enough that the surrounding Throng
Wound with reproaches: Who besides him hung,
Does now again a murderers mind disclose;
And in his punishment more wicked grows.
Who thus: If thou be he whom God did choose
To Govern the freed Nation of the Jews,
Thy self, and us release: thus honor win.
The Partner of his death, as of his sin,
Who had his fierceness, with the thief, cast-off,
Ill brooks, and thus reprooves, that impious scoff:
Have thou as yet not learnt to acknowledge God?
Nor sacred Justice fear? who now the rod
Of vengeance feel'st? will thou again offend,
And to the jaws of Hell thy guilt extend?
This death we owe to our impiety:
But what are his misdeeds? why should he die?
Then looking on his face with dropping eyes:
Forgive me, O forgive a wretch, he cries:
And O my Lord, my King, when thou shall be
Restored to thy own Heaven, remember me.
He mildly gives consent; and from the bars
Of that sad Cross, thus raised him to the Stars:
With me, a happy Guest, thou shall enjoy
Those sacred Orchards where no frosts destroy
The eternal Spring, before the Morn display
The purple Ensign of the ensuing Day.

CHORUS. What Is this! the Center pants with sudden throws!
And trembling Earth a sad distemper shows!
The Sun, affrighted, hides his golden Head;
From hence by an unknown Ecliptic fled!
Irregular Heavens abortive shades display;
And Night usurpes the empty Throne of Day!
What threats do these dire Prodigies portend
To our offending Race! Those ills transcend
All that can be imagined, which enforce
Disturbed Nature to forget her Course.
I hear approaching feet: What ere thou art,
Whom darkness from our sight conceales, impart
All that thou know to our prepared ears:
Accomplish, or dissolve our pressing fears.

II NVNCIVS. Fury (from which, if loose, the Earth had fled)
And fatal Stars have their event: He Is dead.

CHORUS. O Heaven! we pardon now Days hasty flight;
Nor will complain, since they have quenched this light.
Yet tell how he disposed of his last breath;
The passages, and order of his death.

II NVNCIVS. As the declining Sun the shades increast,
Reflecting on the more removed East,
His blazing hair grew black: no clouds obscures
His vanished Light; this his own Orb immures.
The Days fourth part as yet invests the Pole,
Were this a Day; when from the afflicted Soul
This voice was clearly heard, not like the breath
Of those who labor between life and death;
My God, O why do thou thy own forsake!
Which purposely the Multitude mistake,
But to prolong their cruel mirth; who said,
He on the Thesbian Prophet calls for aid;
Now to return, and draw from Heaven again
Devouring Showers of Fire, or Floods of Rain.
With silence this he indures. His body rent,
His blood exhausted, and his Spirits spent,
He cried; I Thirst. As servants to his will,
The greedy hollowes of a sponge they fill
With vinegar, which Hyssops sprigs combine,
And on a reed exalt the deadly Wine.
This scarcely tasted, his pale lips once more
He opens, and now louder then before
Cried, All is finished; here my labors end:
To thee, O heavenly Father, I commend
My parting Soul. This said, hung down his head;
And with his words his mixed Spirits fled:
Leaving his body, which again must bleed,
Now senseless of the Cross. From prison freed,
Those happy seats he injoyes, by God assigned
To injured Virtue, and th'etheriall Mind.
But Terrors, which with Nature war, affright
Our peacelesse Souls. The World has lost its Light:
Heaven, and the Deeps below, our Guilt pursue:
Pale troops of wandering Ghosts now hurrie through
The holy City; whom, from her unknown
And secret Womb, the trembling Earth has thrown.
The cleaving Rocks their horrid jaws display:
And yawning Tombs afford the dead a way
To those that live. Heaven is the general
And undistinguisht Sepulcher to all.
Old Chaos now returns. Ambitious Night
Impatient of alternate Rule, or Right,
Such as before the Days etheriall birth,
With her own shady People fills the Earth.

CHORUS. How did the many-minded People look
At these Portents? with what affection struck?

II. NVNCIVS. The Lamentations, mixed with the cries
Of weeping Women, in lowed Vollies rise.
Those who had known him, who his followers were
While yet he lived, and did in death adhere,
In that new Night sighs from their sorrows send;
And to those Heavens they could not see, extend
Their pious hands; complaining that the Sun
Would then appear when this was to be done.
The safety of their lives the Vulgar dread:
Some for themselves lament, some for the dead;
Others the ruin of the world bewail.
Their Courages the cruel Romans fail:
Those hands, which knew no peace, now lazy grew;
And conquering Fear to earth their weapons threw.
Th'amaz'd Centurion with our thoughts compli'd;
And swore the Heroes most unjustly died:
Whose punishment the Earth could hardly brook,
But groaning, with a horrid motion shook.
Confirmed by the Days prodigious flight
To be a beam of the celestial Light:
And so the mourning Heavens inverted face,
Shows to the Under world his Heavenly Race.

CHORUS. Why flock the People to the Temple thus?
No cause, excepting piety, in us
Can want belief. Hope they to satisfy
With Sacrifice the Wrath of the most High?

II. NVNCIVS. New prodigies, as horrid, thither hale
Th'astonisht Multitude. The Temples Vale
That hung on gilded Beams in purple died,
Asunder rent, and fell on either side.
The trust of what was sacred is betrayed;
And all the Hebrew Mysteries displayed.
That fatal Ark, so terrible of old
To our palefoes, which Cherubins of Gold
Veiled with their hovering wings; whose closure held
Those two-leav'd Tables, wherein Godreveal'd
His sacred Laws; That Food which by a new
Example fell from Heaven in fruitful Dew
About our Tents, and tacidly expressed
By intermitted showers the seventh Days rest;
The Rod with never dying blossoms spread;
Which with a Miter honor Aarons Head:
These, with the old Temple perished: The Eye could reach
No object in this rupture, but the Breach.
What was from former Ageshid, is shown;
Which struck so great a reverence when unknown.
The Temple shines with flames; and to the sight
That feared Recesse disclosed with its own Light.
Either Religion from their fury flies,
Leaving it naked to profaner eyes:
Or God does this abhorred Seat reject,
And will his Temple in the Mind erect.

CHORUS. Shall Punishment in Death yet find an end?
Shall his cold Corpse to earth in peace descend?
Or naked hang, and with so dire a sight
Profane the Vefper of the sacred Night?

II. NVNCIVS. Too late Religion warmes their savage breasts,
Lest that near Hour, which harbengers their Feast;
Should take them unprepared: to Pilat they
Repair; entreat him that the Soldier may
From bloody crosses take their bodies down,
Before their Festivalls the Morning crown:
That no uncleanness might from thence arise;
In memory of the Egyptian Sacrifice.
The legs of the two Thieves, they brake, whose breath
Yet groaned between the bounds of life and death.
The crashing bones report a dreadful sound;
While both their souls at once a passage found.
Nor had the Cohortlesse to Jesus done,
Who now the Courseprescrib'd by Fate had run:
But dead, deep in his side his trembling spear
A Soldier struck: his entrails bare appear;
And from that wide-mouthed Orifice, a flood
Of water gusht, mixed with a stream of blood.
The Crosses now discharged of their fraught,
The People fled; not with one look or thought:
Part sad, and part amazed. Spent Fury dies.
Whither so fast? run you to sacrifice
A silly Lamb? too mean an Offering
Is this for you, who have sacrificed your King.

CHORUS. Either deceived by the ambiguous Day,
Or troops of mourners to my eyes display
A perfect Sorrow: Women with their bare
And bleeding breasts, drowned cheeks, dissheveld hair.
The Soldiers slowly march, with knees that bend
Beneath their fears, and Pilats stairs ascend.

CHORUS OF ROMAN SOVLDIERS. O Thou who on thy flaming Chariot rid'st,
And with perpetual Motion Time divid'st;
Great King of Day, from whose farre-darting Eye
Night-wandring Stars with fainting Splendour fly;
Whither, thus intercepted, do thou stray!
Through what an unknown darkness lies thy way!
In Heaven, what newborn Night the Day invades!
The Mariner that sails by Tyrian Gades,
As yet sees not thy panting Horses steep
Their fiery fet-locks in th'Hesperian Deep.
No pitchy storm, wrapped up in swelling Clouds
By Earth exhaled, thy golden Tresses shrouds:
Nor thy pale Sister in her wandering Race
With interposed wheels obscures thy Face;
But now farre-off retires with her stolen Light,
Till in a silver Orb her horns unite.
Has some Thessalian Witch with Charms unknown
Surpised and bound thee! What new Phaeton
With feeble hands to guide thy Chariot strives,
And far from the deserted Zodiac drives!
What horrid fact, before the approach of Night.
Deservedly deprives the World of Light!
As when stern Atreus to his Brother gave
His Childrens flesh, who made his own their grave:
Or when the Vestall Ilia's God-like Sun,
Who our unbounded Monarchy begun,
Was in a hundred pieces cut; by theft
At once of Life and Funerals bereft.
Or has that Day wherein the Gods were borne
Finished the Course of Heaven in its return;
And now the aged Stars refuse to run
Beyond that place from whence they first begun!
Nature, what plagues do thou to thine intend!
Whither shrinks this hugh Mass! what fatal end!
If now the General Flood again retire,
If the World perish by licentious Fire,
What shall of those devouring Seas become!
Where shall those funeral Ashes find a Tomb!
What ever innovates the Course of Things,
To men alone, nor Nations, ruin brings:
Either the groaning Worlds disordered Frame
Now suffers, or that Power which guides the same.
Do proud Titanians with their impious War
Again provoke the Olympian Thunderer?
Is there a mischief extant, greater then
Dire Python, or the Snake of Lerna's Fen,
That poisons the pure Heavens with Viperous breath?
What God, from Gods derived, oppressed by Death,
Is now in his own Heaven bewailed? Divine
Lyeus gave to man less precious Wine;
Not Hercules so many Monsters flew;
Unshorn Apollo less in Physic knew.
Sure we with darkness are invelloped
Because that innocent blood by Envy shed,
So dear unto the Gods, this place defamed:
Which shook the Earth, and made the Day ashamed.
Great Father of us all, whose Influence
Informs the World thou made; though Sin incense
Thy just displeasure, easy to forgive
Those who confess, and for their Vices grieve;
Now to the desperate Sons of men, who stray
In sins dark Labyrinth, restore the Day.
One Sacrifice seek we to expiate
All our Offenses, and appease his hate.
Which the Religion of the Samian,
Nor Thracian Harp, wild beasts instructing, can;
Nor that Prophetic Boy, the Gleabs swart son,
Who taught the Thuscans Divination.
The Blood, which from that mangled body bled,
Must purge our sins, which we unjustly shed.
O smooth thy brows! Receive the innocence
Of one for all; and with our guilt dispense.
For sin, what greater Ransom can we pay?
What worthier Offering on thy Altar lay?

THE FIFTH ACT.
JOSEPH OF ARIMATHEA. NICODEMVS. SEe, Citizens, we Pilats bounty bear:
Without a suite men cannot man interre.
The Roman Progeny nor freely will
Do what is good; nor, unrewarded ill.
Nothing is now in use but barbarous Vice:
They sell our blood, on graves they set a price.

NICODEMVS. O Joseph, these vain ecstasies refrain:
But if it seem so pleasant to Complain,
Let Rome alone, and seek a nearer guilt:
His blood not Romulus sons, but Abraham's spilt.
Who so the purer sense sincerely draws
From those celestial Oracles and Laws,
By God above himself inspired, will say
None led to Eternity a straighter way.
What Is that to Pilat? fell the Innocent by
A Roman Oath? was it through the subtilty
Of Senators or Priests? The Doom displayed
They Caesarlesse then Caiaphas obay'd.
Let us transfer the fact; the impious Jew
With heart, with tongue and eyes, first Jesus slew:
The Romans only acted their Offense.
How well the Heavens with Hebrew hands dispense!
For this the Jew th'Italians Crime envied,
And wished himself the bloody Homicide.
Do we as yet our servitude lament,
When such a murder meets no punishment?
This do they, this command.

JOSEPH. The Progeny
Of Roman Ilia, and of Sara, I
With equal detestation execrate.
O may they perish by a fearful Fate!
Just Heaven, why sleeps thy Lightning! in a Shower
Of pitch descend: Let stenching Seas de your
This cursed City. Sodom, thou art clear,
Compared to ours. No more will I a tear
Shed for my Country. Let the Great in War,
Worse then the Babylonian Conquerar,
Enter her Breaches like a violent Flood,
Until the bloody City swim in blood.
Is this too little? Let Diseases sow
Their fruitful Seed, and in destruction grow:
Famine, in their dry entrails take thy seat;
What Nature most abhors, enforce to eat.
Let the Infant tremble at his Fathers knife;
The Babe re-enter her who gave it Life.
While yet the eager Foe invests the wall,
Within may they by their own weapons fall:
The Temple wrapped in flames. Let the Enemy
Decide their Civil Discord, and destroy
With fire and sword ungrateful Solyma:
The relics of their slaughter drive away;
Nor seventy years dissolve their servill bands;
Despised, and wretched, wander through all Lands:
Abolished be their Law; all form of State:
No Day see their return. Let sudden Fate
Succeed my curses. This infected Soil
No more shall feed me. What unusual toil
Shall my old feet refuse, so they no more
Tread on this Earth! though to that unknown shore,
Which lies beneath the slow Boots VVaine,
Dashed by the unconstant billows of that Maine.
That Country shall be mine, where Justice swayes;
And bold Integrity the Truth obayes.

NICODEMVS. This Error with a secret poison feeds
The minds Disease. Who censures his own deeds?
Who not another? These accusing Times
Rather the men condemn, then tax their Crimes.
Such is the Tyranny of Judgment; prone
To sentence all Offenses, but our own.
Because of late we cried not Crucify,
Nor falsely doomed the Innocent to die,
Our selves we please: as it a Virtue were;
And Great one, if from great Offenses clear.
Confess; what Orator would plead his Cause?
To vindicate his truth who urged the Laws?
Or once accused their bloody suffrages,
By Envy signed? Who durst those Lords displease?
So Piety suffered, while by speaking they,
And we by silence, did the Just betray.
When women openly their zeal durst show,
We, in acknowledging our Master, slow,
Under the shady coverture of Night
Secured our fears, which would not brook the Light.
Joseph, at length our faith it self expressed;
But to the Dead.

JOSEPH. This is a truth confessed.
The Evening now restored Day subdues:
And lo, the Vigil with the Night enseues.
Not far from Golgotha's in famous Rocks
A Cave there is, hid with the shady Locks
Of funeral Cypress, hewne through living stone:
The house of Death; as yet possessed by none.
My Age this chose for her eternal rest:
Which now shall entertain a nobler Guest.
That ample Stone which shuts the Sepulcher,
Shall the inscription of his Virtues bear.
Who knows but soon a holier Age may come,
When all the World shall celebrate this Tomb;
And Kings as in a Temple hereadore;
Through fire and sword sought from the farthest Shore?

NICODEMVS. Pure water of the Spring, you precious Tears,
Perfumes which Odor-breathing Saba bears,
With your preservatives his body lave,
Sink through his pores, and from corruption save.
Nor God, nor Fate will suffer, that this pure,
This sacred Corpse, should more then death endure.
Religion, if thou know the Shades below,
Let never filthy putrefaction flow
Through his uncovered bones; nor wast of Time
Resolve this beavenly figure into slime.

JOHN. MARY THE MOTHER OF JESUS. THou reverent Virgin, of his royal Blood,
Who all between the Erythrean Flood
And great Euphrates won by strenuous Arms:
Assume his noble fortitude; those harms
Which press thy Soul, subdue: ungentle Fate
Has by undoing thee secured thy state.
Fortune her strength by her own blows has spent.
Judaea's kingdom from thy Fathers rent
By foreign hands; of ancient Wealth bereft;
Except thy Son, what was for danger left?
These storms by death dispersed, serene appear:
For what has childlesse Poverty to fear?

MARY. O John, for thee in such extremes to mourn
Perhaps is new: but I to grief was born.
With this have we convers't twice sixteen years:
No form of sorrow has beguiled our fears.
To me how ominously the Prophets sung,
Even from the time that heavenly Infant sprung
In my chaste Womb! Old Simeon this revealed;
And in my Soul the deadly wound beheld.
When One, among so many Infants slain,
Was by the Tyrants Weapons sought in vain,
No miracles had then his fame displaid,
Or him the object of their envy made.
Perfidious Fraud in Sanctities disguise,
Nor the adulterated Pharisees,
By his detection had he yet inflamed;
Nor for despising of their Rites defamed;
A Trumpet of intestine War: the Earth
Of nothing then accused him, but his birth.
Not that fierce Prince, so cruel to his Own;
Nor his Successor in that fatal Throne,
As high in vice, who with the Prophets Head
Supplied his Feast, and on the blood he had shed
Fed his incestuous eyes, in dire delight
To highthen impious Love, could me affright:
Nor yet the vulgar, hating his free tongue;
And showers of stones by a thousand Furies flung.
I though no mischief could our steps pursue,
That was more great; or to our sufferings new.
What wants example, what no mother feared;
This, this alone my dying hopes interred.
Wretch, will thou seek for words to express thy woes!
Or this so vast a grief in silence close!
Great God (such is my faith) why would thou come
To this inferior Kingdom through my womb!
Why made thou choice of me to bring thee forth
For punishment! unhappy in my worth!
No woman ever bare a Son, by touch
Of man conceived, whose Soul indures so much:
No mother such an issue better gained;
Nor lost it worse; by cursed Death profaned.

JOHN. What louder grief with such an emphasis
Strikes through mine ears! What honored Corse is this,
With Tyrian linen veiled? What Is he whose hairs
Contend with snow, whose cies look through their tears,
Who on those veins, yet bleeding, odors powers?
Or his assistant, crowned with equal hours?
What troops of women hither throng! what storms
Rise in their looks! Grief wanders through all forms.
My eyes, ah! wound my Heart. This was thy son;
This is thy blood, thy mangled flesh. O run,
Take thy last kisses, ere of those bereft
By funeral: What else of all is left?

MARY. My Soul, tired with long misery,
A midst these greater Sorrows die;
While Grief at his sad Exequies
Poures out her last Complaints in these.
Let me this snowy Paul unfold,
Once more those quickening looks behold.
O Son, born to a sad event;
Thus, thus, to thy poor Mother sent!
O Salem, was thy hatred such,
To murder him who loved so much!
Ah see, his side gored with a spear!
Those hands, that late so bounteous were,
Transfixt! his feet pierced with one wound!
The Sun had better never found
His loss, then with restored light
To show the World so dire a sight.
You Neighbors to the Suns up-rise,
Who read their motions in the Skies;
O you in chief who found your Lord,
And with such lively Zeal adored,
Now view the Heavens inverted laws:
With me bewail the wretched Cause.
His Birth a Star, new kindled, signed:
To see his Death the Sun grew blind.
Thou hope of my afflicted State;
Thou living, I accused not Fate:
The Day again with light is crowned,
But thou in Night for ever drowned.
O could thou see my broken heart!
The flowing tears these springs impart!
Thy mother, whom man never knew;
Who by the Word then fruitful grew:
My Womb admired that unknown Guest,
Whose burden for nine Moons increast.
Thy Mother, to a Scepter borne,
With age and wrinkling sorrow worn,
This Country sees to get her bread
With labor, in an humble Shed.
Thy milk from these two fountains sprung:
These arms about my neck have hung,
Coucht on the flowery bancks of Nile:
Egypt, so just to thy exile,
Has now redeemed her former Curse;
Our Jews then those of Memphis worse.
If his chaste blood at length assuage
The bitter tempest of your rage;
If you can pity misery,
O let me by your mercy dye:
Or, if not glutted with his blood;
With mine increase this purple flood.
O my dear son! what here our eyes behold,
What yonder hung, or what Death could infold
In endless Night; is mine, and only mine:
No mortal did in thy conception join,
Nor part of thee can challenge: Since the loss
Was only ours, let us the grief ingrosse.
Ungrateful Man! who his Protector slew:
Nor feels his Curse, nor then his Blessing knew.
Poor wretch! no soul in thy defense durst rise:
And now the murdered unrevenged lies.
The Lame, who by thy powerful Charms were made
Sound and swift-footed, ran not to thy aid:
Those Eyes, which never saw the glorious Light
Before thy sovereign touch, avoid thy sight:
And others, from Deaths silent mansion by
Thy Virtue ravished, suffered thee to dye.

JOHN. Too true is thy Complaint, too just thy Woes:
Such were his friends, whom from a World he chose.
O desperate Faith! from whence, from whom are we
Thus fallen! our Souls from no defection free!
Some sold, forswore him; none from tainture clear;
All from him fled to follow their own fear.
Thou Oracle! a father in thy care,
In love a brother, the delinquent spare,
In thy divine affection o too blessed!
Whom Yester-night saw leaning on thy breast:
If Love in death survive, if yet as great;
Even by that Love thy pardon I entreat:
By this thy weeping Mother: I the Heir
By thee adopted to thy filial care,
Though alike wretched, and as comfortless;
Yet, as I can, will comfort her distress.
O Virgin Mother, favor thy Relief;
Though just, yet moderate thy flowing grief:
Thy downe-cast Mind by thy own Virtue raise.
The Old Prophets fill their Volumes with thy praise:
No Age but shall through all the round of Earth
Sing of that heavenly Love, and sacred Birth.
What female glory parallels thy Worth!
So grew a Mother, such a Son brought forth!
She who proved fruitful in the extreme of age,
And found the truth of that despised presage:
She, whose sweet Babe, exposed among the reeds
Which ancient Nilus with his moisture feeds,
Who then, a smiling Infant, overcame
The threatening flood; aspired not to thy fame,
But these expressions are for thee too low;
The opening Heavens did their observance show:
Those radiant Troops, which Darkness put to flight,
Thy Throws aslisted in that festive Night:
Who over thy adored Infant hung
With golden wings, and Allelu jah's sung:
While the Old Sky, to imitate that birth,
Bare a new Star to amaze the wondering Earth.

MARY. Sorrow is fled: Joy, a long banished Guest,
With heavenly rapture fill's my enlarged breast:
More great then that in youth, when from the Sky
An Angel brought that blessed Embassy;
When Shame, not soon instructed, blushed for fear,
How I a Son by such a Fate should bear.
I greater things foresee: my eyes behold
What ever is by Destiny inrold.
With troops of pious Souls, more great then they,
Thou to felicity shall lead the way.
A holy People shall obey thy Throne;
And Heaven it self surrender thee thy own.
Subjected Death thy Triumph now attends,
While thou from thy demolished Tomb ascends.
Nor shall thou long be seen by mortal eyes,
But in perfection mount above the Skies;
Propitious ever, from that height shall give
Peace to the World, instructed how to live.
A thousand Languages shall thee adore:
Thy Empire know no bounds. The farthest Shore
Washed by the Ocean, those who Days bright Flame
Scarce warmes, shall hear the thunder of thy Name.
Licentious sword, nor hostill Fury, shall
Prevail against thee: thou, the Lord of all.
Those Tyrants, whom the vanquished Worlds obey,
Before thy feet shall Caesar's Scepter lay.
The Time draws on, in which it self must end,
When thou shall in a Throne of Clouds descend
To judge the Earth. In that reformed World,
Those by their sins infected, shall be hurled
Down under one perpetual Night; while they
Whom thou have cleans'd, enjoy perpetual Day.

The End.
THe Tragedy of CHRIST'S PASSION was first written in Greek by Apollinarius of
Laodicea,, Bishop of Hieropolis: and after him by Gregory Nazianzen; though
this, now extant in his Works, is by some ascribed to the former: by others
accounted supposititious, as not agreeing with his Strain in the rest of his
Poems; which might alter in that particular upon his imitation of Euripides.
But Hugo Grotius, of late has transcended all on this Argument: whose steps
afar-off I follow.

ANNOTATIONS UPON THE FIRST ACT.
VErse 23. Ephratian Dames] Of Ephrata, the same with Bethlehem. Ver. 33. Magi]
Tradition will have them three, of several Nations, and honor them with
crowns. But the word delivers them for Persians, for so they called their
Philosophers; such as were skillful in the Celestial Motions, from whence
they drew their predictions: and with whom their Princes consulted in all
matters of moment. Some write that they were of the posterity of Balaam, by
his Prophesies informed of the birth of Christ, and apparition of that
narrative Star: but more consonant to the Truth, that they received it from
divine inspiration. Ver. 34. My Starre] None of those which adorn the
Firmament; nor Comet, proceeding from condensed Vapors inflamed in the Air;
but above Nature, and merely miraculous: which, as they write, not only
illuminated the eye, but the understanding; excited thereby to that heavenly
inquisition. Some will have it an Angel in that form. The excellency whereof
is thus described by Prudentius. This, which in Beams and Beauty far
Excelled the Suns flame-bearing Car,
Showed Gods descent from Heaven to Earth,
Accepting of a humane Birth.
No servant to the humerous Night,
Nor following Phoebe's changing Light;
But did thy single Lamp display
To guide the Motion of the Day.
Him Epiphaniae. It is probable that this Star continued not above thirteen
days, if we may believe that Tradition, How the Magi were so long in
traveling from their Country unto Bethlehem. Ver. 34. Mithra's flame] Mithra:
the same with the Sun, adored by the Persians. His Image had the countenance
of a Lion, with a Tiara on his head, depressing an Ox by the horns. Of this
Statius Come, O remember thy own Temple; prove
Propitious still, and Juno's City love:
Whether we should thee rosy Titan call;
Osyris, Lord of Ceres festival;
Or Mithra shrin'd in Persian rocks, a Bull,
Subduing by the horror of his skull.
Thebaid. l. 1. And in a Cave his Rites were solemnized: from whence they drew
an Ox by the horns; which, after the singing of certain Paeans, was
sacrificed to the Sun, Zorastes places him between Oremazes and Arimanius, the
good and bad Demon, from which he took that denomination. Verse. 39. Pharisees]
A precise Sect among the Jews, separating themselves from others in habit,
manners, and conversation: from whence they had their Name; as their Original
from Antigonus Sochaeus, who was contemporary with Alexander the Great. Men
full of appearing Sanctity; observant to Traditions, and skillful expositors
of the Moysaicall Law: wearing the Precepts thereof in Phylacters (narrow
scroules of parchment) bound about their brows, and above their left elbowes:
passing through the streets with a slow motion, their eyes fixed on the ground,
as if ever in divine contemplations: and wincking at the approach of women, by
means whereof they not seldom met with churlish incounters. Superstitious in
their often washing, keeping their bodies cleaner then their souls. They held
that all was governed by God and Fate; yet that man had the power in himself
to do good or evil: That his Soul was immortal; that after the death of the
body, if good, it returned into an other more excellent; but if evil,
condemned to perpetual torments. Verse. 43. Sadduces] These derived the Sect
and name from Sadock, the scholar of Antigonus Socaeus: as he his Heresy by
misinterpreting the words of his Master; that we should not serve God as
servants, in hope of reward: concluding thereupon that in another World there
was no reward for Piety, and consequently no resurrection: holding the Soul to
be annihilated after the death of the Body herein agreeing with the Stoics. As
smoke from trembling flames ascends, and there,
Lost in its liberty, resolves to air;
As empty Clouds, which furious tempests chase,
Consume and vanish in their aerie race;
So our commanding Souls fleet with our breath:
After Death nothing rests; and nothing Death,
But of swift Life the Gole. Ambition lay
Thy hopes aside; nor Care our peace betray.
Inquir'st thou to what place thou shall return
When dead? To that, where lie the yet Unborn.
Seneca in Troad. They held that there was neither Spirits nor Angels; rejected
all Traditions; and only allowed of the five books of Moses; that there was no
such thing as Fate; that no evil proceeded from God; and that Virtue and Vice
were in our own Arbitrements. The Pharisees were sociable among themselves: but
the Sadduces ever at discord, and as uncivil to their own Sect as to
strangers. This Heresy infected not a few of the High Priests: for Hircanus
with his two Sons, Aristobulus and Alexander, were Sadduces; so was Auanus the
younger. Verse. 151. Now the full Moon] In the first full Moon after the Suns
ascending into the Equinoctial, they celebrated the annual Passover,
according to the positive Law of Moses; eating the Lamb in the Evening at
their private houses, and lying about the table on beds, as the Romans upon
their Trielinium: never fewer then ten together; if they wanted of their own
Family, they supplied themselves with their Neighbors; nor above the number of
twenty. This Feast was only to be kept at Jerusalem: but those that came short
of the Day by reason of the distance, or were defiled with the Dead, had a
second Passover in the month following assigned. Verse. 161. Our washings
past] It was the Custom as well of all the Eastern Nations, as of the Jews,
to wash the feet of their Guests, though performed by inferior Servants; but
here by Christ himself, to give an example of humility. They had vessels
standing by, ready filled with water for that purpose. This, at this Feast, was
observed between the first and second lying down, by way of Purification: Verse.
175. Phosphorus] The same with Lucifer, which is a bringer in of Light; and
therefore the Harbinger of the Day: said to conduct and withdraw the Stars in
that the last that shines. This is the beautiful Planet of Venus; which when
it rises before the Sun is the Morning Star; and setting after it, the
Evening. Now sea-bath'd Hesperus, who brings
Night on, and first displayes his wings:
Now, radiant Lucifer; who Day
Exalting, chaceth Night away.
In regard that her Course is sometimes swifter then the Sun, and sometimes
slower: yet never far off, and fulfilling the same period. Verse. 193. Those
Cities, etc.] The Cities which lie at the foot of Libanus, on the North of
Galilee; whereof Cesarea Philippi, the Seat of the Tetrarch, was the
principal: where Jordan not far above descends from Ior and Dan, two
neighboring Fountains. Verse 198. A Sea-resembling Lake.] The Lake of
Genesareth called also the Sea of Galilee, and of Tiberias; taking this name
from that City there built by Antipas in honor of Tiberius. It extends
forty fur-longs in breadth, and in length an hundred: the shore once enriched
with the Cities of Capharnaum, Tiberias, Bethsaida, Bethsan, Gadra, Taricha,
and Chorosaim. Verse. 199. Those VVoods of Palms.] In the Plains adjoining to
Jericho: from theirabundance called the City of Palms. Verse. 200. Of fragrant
Balsamum, which etc.] As in Engaddi, so Balsamum grew plentifully about
Jericho. A plant only proper to that Country: and from thence transported
into Egypt by Antonius, to gratify Cleopatra. It dies, if it be touched with
iron: and therefore they lanch the rind with sharp stones, or knives of bone,
from whence that precious liquour distilleth. Verse. 203. That mount] Phasga:
from whence Moses saw all the land of Promise from Dan to Bersheba; and there
died: buried in an unknown Sepulcher by an Angel, lest that should have drawn
the Israelites to Idolatry. Saint Hitrome writes, how the Devil, endeavoring
to reveal the place, was resisted by Michael the Archangel. Verse 209.
Cepheans, whose strong walls, etc,] Cepheus, the son of Phoenix, reigned in
Ioppa: A city built by Iaphet before the Flood, and rather covered then
demolisht by that Deluge. The Inhabitants, with their territories, took the
name of their King: Who worshipped Dercetis the Goddess of the Ascalonites
their neighbors. She, as they fable, inflamed with the love of a beautiful
Youth who sacrificed unto her, having by him a Daughter (who after, in that
nourished by Doves, was called Semiramis) ashamed of her incontinency, put away
the Youth, exposed the child to the mercy of the Deserts; and distracted with
sorrow, threw her self into a Lake near Ascalon, and there was changed into a
fish. Of which Ovid. -- To insist upon
The sad Dercetis of great Babylon:
Who, as the Palestines believe, did take
A scaly form, inhabiting a Lake.
To whom a magnificent Temple was erected, with her image in the likeness of a
fish from the navell downward. This was that Dagon, the Idol of the
Ascolonites, according to S. Hierome, (by interpretation the Fish of Sorrow)
which fell before the Ark of God, when it was brought into her Temple. Verse.
214. Azotus, both the Jamnes] Maritim towns belonging to the Philistines: the
latter so called of the flourishing Soil. Verse. 215. Lydda] A City seated in
the valley above, and a little to the North of Ioppa: called after, the City
of Jupiter: famous for the Allegorical Combat of St George, and his
Martyrdom. Verse. 216. Caparorsa] A City of Iudaea according to Ptolomey;
rather of Idumea, as here intimated by our Author. Verse. 217. Damascus] The
regal City of Syria: as pleasant as great; here said to have commanded ten
Nations. It lies on the North of Galiee, in a valley beyond Antelibanus: six
short days journey from Jerusalem. Verse. 219. Sabaste] Samaria, the sovereign
City of those ten Tribes which fell from the House of Judah: not much above a
days journey from Jerusalem. Built by Amri on the top of a Hill, presenting an
admirable Prospect, which he bought of Samarus, of whom it was called Samaria.
The Inhabitants infamous for their frequent falling from God to Idolatry. Verse.
221. Phoenicians, who] The Inhabitants between the great Sea and Galilee (so
called of Phoenix their king, the fifth in descent from Jupiter) honored for
the invention of Letters. Phoenicians first expressed (if Fame be true)
The fixed voice in rude figures. Memphis knew
Not yet how streame-lov'd Biblus to prepare:
But birds and beasts, carved out in stone, declare
Their Hieroglyphick Wisdoms.
Lucan. l. 3. These Cadmus the son of Agenor communicated to the Grecians.
Verse. 223. Tyrus, full of Luxury] The Metropolis of Phoenicia; once sovereign
of the Sea, and of all the World: the greatest Emporium: whose beauty,
commerce, and riches, the parent of luxury, is by the Prophet Ezekiel most
gloriously described. Verse. 224. Mother Sidon] The ancientest City of
Phoenicia built by Sida, the daughter of Belus, or rather by Sidon the
firstborn of Canaan. The mother of Tyrus; for the Tyrians were a Colony of the
Sidonians. Verse. 226. Among the Syrians, those, etc.] The Syrians would eat no
fish; not only in regard of the fabulous transformation of their Goddess
Dercetis; but that they held it injustice to kill those Creatures which did
them no harm, and were fed on, rather for luxury then necessity: Withal,
conceiving the Sea to be the original and father of all that had life, and
that man was engendered of a liquid substance, they adored fishes as being of
their own generation and Subsistence. So did they a Dove; not only because
their glorious Empress Semiramis carried that name, and was after, as they
fable, transformed into that creature: but expressing the Air by the Dove, as
by a fish the water; reverencing both, as comprising the Nature of all things.
V. 229 From Belus, whose etc.] From certain marshes in the valley of Acre runs
the River of Belus with a tardy pace, and exonerates it self into the Sea hard
by Ptolemais: whose sand affords matter for glass, becoming fusible in the
furnace. Strabo reports the like of diverse places there about: and Josephus,
speaking of this, that there is an adjoining Pit, an hundred cubits in circuit,
covered with sand that glistered like glass; and when carried away (for
therewith they accustomed to ballast their ships) it forthwith was filled
again, borne thither by winds from places adjacent. Moreover, that what
mineral soever was contained therein converted into glass; and glass there
laid, again into sand. Verse. 231. From Arnons banks; those, etc.] Arnon
rises in the mountains of Arabia; and dividing the Country of the Moabites
from the Ammonites, falls into the Dead Sea. By those ancient Wars is meant
the Overthrow which Moses gave unto Og and Sehon. Verse. 234. Asphaltis] The
Dead Sea, or Lake of Sodom and Gomorrah; having no egresse, unless under the
Earth; Seventy miles in length, and sixteen broad: here at large described by
our Author. Verse. 237. What over flies, etc.] The like is written of Avernus:
whereof the poetical Philosopher Avernus called: a name imposed of right,
In that so fatal to all Birds of flight.
Which when those aerie Passengers of re-fly,
Forgetful of their wings, they fall from high
With stretched out necks: on Earth, where Earth partakes
That killing property; where Lakes, on Lakes.
Lucr. l. 6. Verse. 215. When she, etc.] Lots wife. Josephus writes that he
himself had seen that Statue of Salt: yet extant, if Brocardus and
Saligniacus, professed Eyewitnesses, be to be believed. Verse. 255. Devout
Esseans] A Sect among the Jews; strictly preserving the worship of God, the
rules of Religion and Justice: living on the common stock; never eating of
flesh, and wholly abstaining from Wine and Women. They wore their apparel
white and cleanly: prayed before the rising of the Sun; labored all day long
for the public utilitie; fed in the evening with a general silence; and had
their Sobriety rewarded with a life long and healthful. Their chief study was
the Bible; and next to that, Physic, taking their name from the cure of
diseases. All were servants one to an other. They never swear an oath, nor
offered any thing that had life in their sacrifice: ascribing all unto Fate,
and nothing to free Will. They preserved their Society by the adoption of
children, inured to piety and labor. Their Sect, though ancient, has no known
Original; yet much agreeing with the discipline of the Pythagoreans. Verse.
274. The first unleavened Bread] Eaten with the Paschal Lamb at the Israelites
departing out of Egypt: the Ceremonies used therein are at large delivered by
Moses. Verse. 275. She never would retaine] The Liberty they lost in the
Babylonian Captivity, was never absolutely recovered: for the most part under
the Persians, Grecians, Egyptians, or Syrians (although in the reign of the
Asmones they had the face of a Kingdom, yet maintained with perpetual
bloodshed) after governed by the Idumeans, and lastly by the Romans: often
rebelling, and as often suppressed. Ver. 278. Horned Hammons Temple] Jupiter
Hammon, which signifies Sand; because his Temple stood in the Lybian Deserts:
with such difficulty visited by Alexander. Or rather being the same with Ham
the son of Noah; from whom Idolatry had her Original: who usually wore the
carved head of a Ram on his Helmet; whereupon his Idol was so fashioned. But
Jupiter Hammon is also taken for the Sun; Hammah signifying Heat in the
Hebrew. And because the Year begins at his entrance into Aries, he
therefore was carved with Rams horns. Ver. 281. Built his proud City]
Alexandria in Egypt; built by Alexander the Great upon a Promentory near the
Isle of Pharos: so directed, as they write, by Homer in a Vision. Verse. 282. To
their old prison, Babylon] Not all the Jews returned with Zorobbabel, but
remained at Babylon, and by the favor of succeeding Princes planted thereabout
their Colonies; grew a great Nation, observing their ancient Rites and
Religion. These were called Babylonian Jews: to whom not a few of their
Country men fled from the troubles of their Country. Verse. 283. To freezing
Taurus, etc.] The greatest Mountain of the World, which changes its name
according to the countries through which it extends: that part properly so
called, which divides Pamphilia and Cilicia from the lesser Armenia and
Cappadocia: Whither many of the Jews were retired. Verse. 284. And Tiber now,
etc.] Rome, the Empress of Cities adorning the banks of Tiber, to which the
Ocean then yielded Obedience.
ANNOTATIONS UPON THE SECOND ACT.
VErse 1. Bloodthirsty Romulus] The Original of the Race and Name of the
Romans: who laid the Walls of Rome in the blood of his brother Remus. Verse.
15. To such a Guide, etc.] It was a Custom among the Eastern Nations, and not
relinquished by many at this Day, for men to kiss one another in their
salutations. So did the Romans, until interdicted by Tiberius. With the Jews
it was a pledge of peace and amity: used also to their Lords and Princes by
way of homage and acknowledged subjection: as perfidious Judas did here to his
Master. Verse. 55. Memphis] By this is meant the Egyptian Servitude; Memphis of
old the chief City in Egypt. Verse. 55. Devouring Desarts] All the
Israelites, that came out of Egypt, perished in the Deserts, but Ioshuah and
Caleb. Verse. 55. Civil warres] As between the Tribe of Benjamin, and the rest
of the Tribes; the Jews and Israelites; Israelites against Israelites, and Jews
against Jews. Discord threw her Snakes among the Asmones, nor had Herod's
Posterity better success. Verse. 56. Often foreign yokes] Often subdued by
their Neighbors, and delivered by their Judges and Princes. Verse. 56. Assyrian
Conquerers] Who sacked Jerusalem, destroyed the Temple which was built by
Solomon, led their King captive, and their whole Nation, unto Babylon. Verse.
57. Great Pompeys Eagles] Pompey, who bore the Roman Eagle on his Standard,
took Jerusalem and the Temple by force (yet would not meddle with the Treasure,
nor sacred Vtensils) subdued the Jews, and made them tributaries to the
Romans. Verse. 57. Sacred Rites Profan'd] Who entered the Sanctum Sanctorum with
his followers, and profaned the Religion of the place by beholding that which
was to be seen but by the High Priest only. Verse. 58. The Temple sacked, with
blood, etc.] He slew twelve thousand Jews within the walls of the Temple. Verse.
66. Cedron] This Brook, or Torrent, runs thorough the Vale of Iehosaphat,
between Mount Olivet and the City, close by the Garden of Gethsemane, where
Christ was betrayed. Verse. 103. Not Jordan with two, etc.] See the Note upon
verse. 195. Act. 1. Verse. 105. Callithoe] A City in the Tribe of Ruben, so
called of her beautiful Springs: where from a Rock two neighbor Fountains
gush out as from the breasts of a woman: the one of hot, but sweet water; the
other of cold and bitter; which joining together make a pleasant Bath,
salubrious for many diseases; and flows from thence into the Lake of
Asphaltis. Herod in his sickness repaired to this place: but finding no help,
and despairing of life, removed to Jericho; where he died. Verse. 105. That
ample Lake] The Sea of Galilee, by which Peter was borne. Verse. 107. Blew
Nereus, etc.] Nereus is taken for the Sea in general, but here for the
Egyptian; into which Nilus discharges his waters by seven currents; the fresh
water keeping together, and changing the color of the Salt, far further into
the Sea, then the shore from thence can be discerned. Verse. 128. Lethe] A River
of Africa, passing by Bernice, and running into the Mediterranian Sea near the
Promontory of the Syrtes. It has that name from Oblivion, because those, who
drunk thereof, forgot whatsoever they had formerly done. Of this Lucan. Where
silent Lethe glides: this (as they tell)
Draws her Oblivion from the veins of Hell.
So feigned, because of the oblivion which is in Death; as allegorically for
that of Sleep. Verse. 139. Tarpean Jove] Tarpeus is a Mountain in Rome, taking
that name from the Vestall Virgin Tarpea, who betrayed her Fathers Fort to the
Sabines, upon promise to receive what they ware on their left arms for her
reward; she meaning their golden bracelets: which they not only gave, but
threw their shields upon her (a part of the bargain) and so pressed her to
death; who buried her in the Place: since called the Capitol, where Jupiter had
his Temple. Verse. 139. Mars, great Quirinus Sire] Romulus was called Quirinus
of his Spear; or for his uniting the two Nations of the Cures and Romans: as
the son of Mars, in that so strenuous a Soldier. Plutarch writes that he was
begotten by his Uncle Aemulius, who counterfeiting Mars, disguised in Armor,
ravished his mother Ilia: not only to satisfy his Lust, but to procure her
destruction, as the heir to his elder brother, the law condemning a defiled
Vestall to be buried alive. Verse. 140. You Household Gods, snatched, etc.]
Penates: which Aeneas saved from burning at the sack of Troy, and brought them
with him into Italy: supposing that from them they received their flesh, their
life, and understanding. Verse 151. Caprae] A little Island in the Tyrrhen Sea,
and in the sight of Naples, naturally walled about with up-right Cliffs, and
having but one passage into it. Infamous for the Cruelties and Lusts of
Tiberius; who retiring thither from the affairs of the Commonwealth, sent from
thence his Mandates of death; polluting the place with all variety of
uncleanness; whereupon it was called the Island of secret lusts, and he
Caprenius: conversing there with Magicians, and South-sayers; whereof the Satyr
speaking of Sejanus: The Princes Tutor glorying to be named;
Sitting in caves of Caprae with defamed
Chaldeans.
Iuv: Sat. 10. Ver. 152. The long-gown.] The gown was a garment peculiar to
the Romans, by which they were distinguished from other Nations; as of what
quality among themselves by the wool and color, fashion, and trimming. In so
much as they were called Togati: Whereof Virgil in the person of Jupiter Cursed
Juno, who Sea, Earth, and Heaven above,
With her distemper tires, shall friendly prove;
And join with us in gracing the Long-gownd
And Lordly Romans, still with conquest crowned.
Aen. l. 1. Verse. 157. Their hate to all etc] The Jews with the hate of an
enemy detested all other Nations: would neither eat with them, nor lodge in
their houses; but avoided the stranger as a pollution. Proud in their greatest
poverty: calling themselves the elect of God: boasting of their Country, their
Religion, and ancient Families: in their conversation austere and respectlesse.
So full of jealous envy, that by a Decree in the reign of Hircanus and
Aristobulus such suffered the dreadful censure of a Curse, who instructed
their sons in the Grecian Disciplines: and much regrated that the laws of Moses
was translated into a profane language by the command of Philadelphus;
expressing their grief by an annual Fast, which they kept on the Eighth day of
the month Teveth. Verse. 159. Abjure for one, etc.] Pilat accuses them here
for their piety: who after the Captivity, as much detested Idolatry as they
affected it before: who could not be compelled by their Conquerours to worship
the Images of Tiberius Caesar, which Pilat brought into the City, but was
forced to carry them away upon their refusal. Caius not long after commanded
that the Statues of the Gods should be erected in their Temple; menacing, if
they should refuse it, their utter subversion. But his death prevented their
ruin: who before had made their protestation, that they would rather suffer
the general destruction of themselves, and their City, then suffer such an
abomination, so repugnant to their Law and Religion. Verse. 168. With how much
grief our swords etc.] Josephus mentions one slaughter only, which Pilat, as
then, had made of the Jews; and that about the drawing of water by conduits
into the sacred Treasury; which diverse thousands of the Jews tumultuarily
resisted. Pilat environed them with his Soldiers, disguised in popular
garments; who privately armed, fell upon the naked People, and by the slaughter
of a number appeased the mutiny. Verse. 234. Rods and Axes] Borne before the
Roman Consuls, Pretors, and Governors of Provinces: bound together in
bundles, to inform the Magistrate that he should not be too swift in
execution, nor unlimited: but that in the unbinding thereof he might have time
to deliberate, and perhaps to alter his sentence: that some are to be corrected
with Rods, and others cut off with Axes, according to the quality of their
offenses. Verse. 254. Since one must die, etc.] Caiaphas prophesied; being then
the High Priest, though not of the House of Aaron. He was thrown out of his
Office by Lucius Vitellius, who succeeded Pilat, and Jonathan the son of
Annas placed in his room: when distracted with melancholy and desperation, he
received his death from his own hands. Verse. 242. Stygian] Styx is a Fountain
of Arcadia, whose waters are so deadly, that they presently kill whatsoever
drinks thereof: so corrodiating that they can only be contained in the hoof of
a mule. This in regard of the dire effects, was feigned by the Poets to be a
river in Hell. Verse. 361. Solyma] So called by the Grecians; as by the Hebrews
Salem; and when David had taken it from the Iebusites, Jerusalem, which is as
much as Jebusalem, turning B into R for the better harmony: called after the
building of the Temple Hierosolyma by the Greeks, of Hieron which signifies a
Temple in their language. Verse. 264. From the Isthmos] This Isthmos lies
between Egypt, and the bottom of the Red Sea, from whence to Euphrates David
extended his conquests: enforcing all the Arabians to become his Tributaries.
Who also overthrew the King of Sophona hard by the eruption of Tygris, overcame
the Mesopotamians, the King of Damascus, and drew that City, with all Syria,
under his obedience: having before subdued the neighboring Nations. Verse. 267.
Th'admiring Queen, etc.] Josephus makes her Queen of Aethiopia; and to have
bestowed on Solomon that precious Plant of Balsamum, which he after planted in
Engaddi: but this grew in Canaan in the days of Jacob, who sent a Present
thereof, among other fruits of that Country, into Egypt. The Ethiopian
Emperors glory in their descent from Solomon by this Queen; in regard whereof
they greatly favor the Jewish nation. They have a City called Saba, which
lies on the West side of the Arabian Gulf. But by the presents which she
brought, and vicinitie of the Country, it is more probable that she came from
Saba, the principal City of Arabia the Happy. Verse. 271. Canopus Scepter
etc.] Kings of Egypt, of Canopus a principal City, which stood on that branch
of Nilus which is next to Alexandria; taking that Name from Menelaus his Pilot,
there buried by his shipwrackt master. Verse. 272. Those Monarchs etc.] Chaldean
Monarchs: Babylon, the seat of their Empire; who, as the Persians, adored the
Sun under the name of Mithra. Verse. 274. Sarrana] Tyrus: so called in that it
was built on a rock: the Arabians pronouncing Scar for Sar, from whence the
Tyrian purple takes the name of Scarlet. He Cities sacks, and houses fills with
groans;
To lie on scarlet, drink in precious stones.
Virg. Geor. l. c. Not only Josephus, but the Scriptures, make often mention
of the ancient amity between the Jews and Tyrians. Verse. 277. Ths land etc.]
See the Note upon V. 275. Act. 1. Verse. 283. Antiochus guilt] Antiochus
Epiphanes; who abrogated their Law, and by threatenings and tortures enforced
the Jews to Idolatry: polluting their Altar with sacrificed Swine. Verse. 291.
Ionian Gods] The Gods of Greece: Antiochus being of a Grecian Family, and
zealous in their Superstitions. Verse. 293. Their brothers slew, etc.]
Aristobulus, the first that ware a Crown of the race of the Asmones upon a
false suspicion, by the machination of Salome the Queen, caused his valiant and
affectionate brother Antigonus to be treacherously murdered; who before had
imprisoned the rest of his brethren, and famished his mother. After the
desperate death of Aristobulus, Alexander his brother was removed from a Prison
to a Throne: who slew his third brother out of a vain suspicion of his aspiring
to the Kingdom. To conclude, from the first King of the Asmones, to the last
of the Herod's, no history is so fruitful in examples of unnatural Cruelties.
Verse. 297. Twice vanquished etc] Pompey was the first of the Romans that
subdued the Jews: neither were the Romans expulsed by any foreign Prince; but
until this time maintained their Government. It must then be meant by their
expulsion of one another in their Civil wars: Inlius Coesar vanquishing
Pompey: Mark Anthony being his Lieutenant in Syria (who gave a great part of
the Territories of the Jews to Cleopatra) after absolute Lord of the Eastern
parts of the Roman Empire; in the end overthrown and deprived of all by
Augustus. Verse. 303. One part by Roman etc.] Judea reduced into a Roman
Province by Pompey, and then governed by Pontius Pilat. Verse. 304. The other
two by brothers etc.] Philip and Antipas (called also Herod) sons to Herod the
Great: the one Tetrarch of Iturea, a Country which lies at the foot of
Libanus; and the other of Galilee: to who^m Agrippa succeeded, the son of
Aristobulus slain by his father Herod, with the title of a King bestowed by
Coesar. Verse 305. From savage Idumaeans] Antipater, the father of Herod, was an
Idumoean; who in the contention between the two brethren Hircanus and
Aristobulus, about the Kingdom, took part with Hircanus; and grew so
powerful, that he made a way for his son to the Soveraigntie, though he
himself was prevented by poison. Verse. 327. That Name] Iehova.
ANNOTATIONS UPON THE THIRD ACT.
VErse 47. Brutish Thunder] The Philosophers will have two sorts of Lightning:
calling the one fatal, that is, pre-appointed and mortal; the other Brutish,
that is, accidental, and flying at random. Verse. 119. He, whom etc.] Herod
Antipas; then Tetrarch of Galilee: whose father Herod the Great so
magnificently reedified the Temple, that the glory of the latter exceeded that
of the former. Verse 122. The land etc.] Phoenicia; the ancient kingdom of
Agenor, son to Belus Priscus: who was reputed a God after his death, and
honored with Temples; called Bell by the Assyrians, and Baal by the Hebrews.
Verse 142. Whose floods in Summer swell] Nilus, which constantly begins to rise
with the rising Sun on the seventeenth of June, increasing by degrees, until
it make all the Land a Lake. Not tied to laws of other Streams; the Sun
When furthest off, thy streams then poorest run:
Intemperate heaven to temper, midst of heat,
Under the burning Zone, bid to grow great.
Then Nile assists the world; lest fire should quell
The Earth: and make his high-borne waters swell
Against the Lions flaming jaws. --
Lucan. l. 10. Ver. 187. The free born] It was the custom of the Romans to
punish slaves only with whips, but their children and the free, with rods.
Verse 195. The wreathed Thorns] in reverence of this crown of Thorns, which was
platted about the brows of our Savior, the Christians forbear to wear any
garlands on their heads in their Festivalls; although it were the custom of
those Nations, among whom they lived. Verse. 221. Thou liquid crystal, etc.]
Pilat washed not his hands to express his innocence, as a Roman Custom; but
therein observing the Jewish Ceremony: which was, that he who would profess
himself guiltless of a suspected Man slaughter should wash his hands over a
Heifer, with her head cut off. Verse 338. Let it fall etc.] This imprecation
soon after fell upon them in all the fullness of horror; and throughout the
world at this day pursues them. Verse 233. Drag him to the Cross, etc.] Pilat
not only out of fear, and against his conscience; but therein infringed a Law
lately made by Tiberius, in the sudden execution: for by the same no offendour
was to suffer within ten days after his condemnation. But he met with a
Nemesis; soon after turned out of his Government by Vitellius for his cruelty
inflicted upon the Samaritanes, and sent to Rome with his accusers. But
Tiberius dying before his arrival, he was banished the City by Caius: who
troubled in mind, and desperate of restitution, slew himself at Vienna in
France within two years after. Verse. 238. If thou be he, etc.] By this place
taken out of the Gospel, it appears that diverse of the Jews were of the
opinion of the Pythagoreans, or the Pythagoreans of theirs, concerning the
transmigration of Souls into other bodies. All alter, nothing finally decays:
Hither and thither still the Spirit strayes;
Guest to all Bodies: out of beasts it flies
To men, from men to beasts, and never dies.
As pliant wax each new impression takes;
Fixed to no form, but still the old forsakes;
Yet it the same: so Souls the same abide,
'Though various figures their reception hide.
Ovid. Met. l. 15. Herod conceived that the Soul of John the Baptist, by him
wickedly murdered, was entered into the body of our blessed Savior: And
Josephus in his Oration to his desperate Companions in the Cave of Iotopata:
Those poor Souls which depart from this life by the law of Nature, and
obediently render what from God they received, shall by him be placed in the
highest Heavens; and from thence again, after a certain revolution of time,
descend by command to dwell in chaste bodies. Verse. 249. Slain for a dancer]
This daughter of Herodias, as Nicephorus writes, going over a River that was
frozen, fell in all but the head, which was cut off with the ice, as her body
waved up and down underneath. Verse. 331. Sadock] The Author of the Sect of the
Sadduces. See the Note upon Verse. 43. Act. 1.
ANNOTATIONS UPON THE FOVRTH ACT.
VErse 35. To War the fatal way] The City of Jerusalem is only on that side
assailable: there forced and entered by the Babylonians, and after by Pompey.
Verse. 36. Golgotha] Mount Calvary: a rocky hill, neither high, nor ample, lying
then without the North-West wall of the City: the public place of execution.
Here they say that Abraham would have sacrificed Isaac; in memory whereof there
now stands a Chapel: as an Altar, where the Head of Adam was found, which
gave the name to that Mount: buried in that place that his bones might be
sprinkled with the real blood of our Savior, which he knew would be there
shed by a prophetical foreknowledge. It is said to stand in the midst of the
Earth; which must needs be meant by the then habitable: for what middle can
there be in a Sphericall Body? V. 49. The Nazarite] Not as Sampson by vow, nor
of that Sect: but so called of that City, wherein he was conceived, and where
he inhabited after his return out of Egypt. Verse. 52. Mixed with the bitter
tears of Myrrh] Some suppose that this was proffered him by his friends, being
of a stupifying quality, to make him less sensible of his torments. But it
appears by Petronius and Pliny, that it was a mixture much used in their
delights: Whereof Martial The tears of Myrrh in hot Falernum thaw:
From this the Wine a better taste will draw.
Epig. l. 14. Strengthening the body, and refreshing the Spirits; and therefore
more likely proffered by his enemies to prolong his sufferings. Verse. 81. His
inward Robe] There be, who write that this was woven by the Virgin Mary: and we
read in the Scriptures, as frequently in Homer and other Authors, that women,
and those of the highest quality, usually wrought garments for their Children
and Husbands. Verse. 203. The Center pants, etc.] This Earthquake proceeded not
from the Winds imprisoned in the bowels of the Earth, struggling to break
forth, or from any other natural cause, but by the immediate singer of God.
Verse. 205. The Sun affrighted hides, etc.] Miraculous; without the
interposition of the Moon, or palpable Vapors, was that defect of the Sun,
and unnatural Darkness, in the sixth hour of the Day: which appears by the
Text to have covered all the World, and not Judea alone, as some have
conjectured. Diverse Authors have recorded this in their Annals and Histories:
but none so exactly as Dionysius Areopagita; who then resided in Egypt, and
was an eyewitness. Verse. 240. The greedy hollowes of a Sponge, etc]
Physicians agree that Vinegar being drunk, or held to the nose, has in it a
natural Virtue for the stenching of blood. Pliny attributes the like to
Hyssop, and the better if joined. Neither is it to be thought that the Jews
offered this unto JESUS in humanity, but rather out of their hatred, that by
prolonging his Life until the Evening, his legs might have been broken to
the increase of his torments. Verse. 256. Pale troops of wandering Ghosts] These
were the real bodies of the dead, which entered the City from their graves (for
it was, as now, their Custom to bury in the fields) and seen by day. Whereas
deluding Spirits assume an Aerie, thin and fluxative Body, condensed by cold,
but dissipated by heat, and therefore only appear in the Night time. Which
Virgil intimates in the Ghost of Anchises: And now farewell: the humid Night
descends;
I sent Day's breath in his too-swift repair.
This said, like smoke, he vanisneth to air.
Aen. l. 12. Ver. 259 The cleaving Rocks] The Rock of Mount Calvary was rent by
that Earthquake from the top to the bottom, which at this day is to be seen:
the rupture such as Art could have no hand in; each side answerable ragged, and
there where unaccessible to the workman. Verse 263. Old Chaos now returnes] That
confused Mass, out of which God created the beautiful World: into which it
was imagined that it should be again reduced. The aged World, dissolved by the
Last
And fatal Hour, shall to Old Chaos have.
Stars, justling Stars, shall in the Deep confound
Their radiant fires: the Land shall give no bound
To swallowing Seas: the Moon shall cross the Sun,
With scorn that her swift wheels obliquely run,
Days throne aspiring. Discord then shall rend
The Worlds cracked Frame, and Natures Concord end.
Lucan. l. 4. But many of our Divines are of opinion, that the World shall
neither be dislolved nor anihilated: strengthening their assertion out of the
eighth of the Romans, and other places of Scripture. Ver. 238. Th'amaz'd
Centurion] To this Centurion, who professed CHRIST to be the Son of God, they
give the name of Longinus, and honor him with the crown of Martyrdom. Verse.
296. The Temples Veile] Described by Josephus to consist of Violet, Purple, and
Scarlet Silk, cunningly mixed and wrought by Babylonian Needles: the colors
containing a mystical sense. Such was that of Solomon's, and of the traveling
Tabernacle; but that they were powdered with Cherubins. This, it should seem,
was renewed by Herod, when he so magnificently repaired the Temple. It hung
before the Sanctum Sanctorum; into which none but the High Priest, and that but
once in the year, was to enter: violated by Pompey, pursued by a miserable
Destiny. There was an out-ward Veil, not unlike the other, which separated the
Priests from the People: this, contrary to the Opinion of our Author, Baronius
conceives to be that which then rent asunder: interpreted to signify the
final abolishing of the Law Ceremonial. They write that at the tearing
thereof a Dove was seen to fly out of the Temple. Verse. 319. Or God does this
abhorred etc.] Eusebius, St. Jerome, and others report, that with this
Earthquake at the Passion, the Doors of the Temple flew open, and that the
Tutular Angels were heard to cry, Let us remove from this place: though
Josephus refer it to the destruction of the Temple. Verse. 362. Tyrian Gades]
Gades, now called Cales, an Island lying on the South of Spain without Hercules
Pillars, held to be the uttermost Confines of the Western World, was planted by
a Colony of the Tyrians. Verse. 363. As yet sees not thy panting Horses, etc.] A
Chariot and Horses were attributed to the Sun, in regard of the swiftness
of his Motion; and to express what is beyond the object of the sense by that
which is subject unto it. These also by the Idolatrous Jews were consecrated
unto him. The Sun was feined to descend into the Sea, because it so appears
to the eye; the Horizon being there most perspicuous. Verse. 371. Has some
Thessalian Witch, etc.] The Thessalian women were infamous for their
enchantments: said to have the power to darken the Sun, and draw the Moon
from her Sphere. Such Lucans Erictho: Her words to poison the bright Moon
aspire;
First pale, then red, with dark and terrene fire:
As when deprived of her Brothers sight,
Earth interposing his Celestial Light:
Perplexed with tedious Charms, and held below,
Till she on under Herbs her gelly throw.
Pha^. l. 6. The Author of this opinion was Aglonice the daughter of Hegaemon:
who being skillful in Astronomy, boasted to the Thessalian women (foreknowing
the time of her Eclips) that she would perform it at such a season: which
happening accordingly, and they beholding the distempered Moon, gave credit to
her deception. The like may arise from the Eclipses of the Sun, Verse. 372.
What new Phaeton] The fable of Phaeton, the son of Phoebus, as the Allegory,
is notorious; who by misguiding the Chariot of the Sun set all the World on
a conflagration. Verse. 377. As when stern Atreus etc.] Atreus, having had his
bed dishonored by his brother Thyestes, slew his children, and gave them for
food to their father: when the Sun, to avoid so horrid a sight, fled back to
the Orient. So fained in that Atreus first discovered the Annual Course of the
Sun, which is contrary to his Diurnall. Verse. 379. Ilia's god-like son, etc.]
Romulus: cut into a hundred pieces by the hundred Lords of the Senate, for
being so rigorous to them, and so indulgent to the People; every one carrying a
piece away with him under his long Gown to conceal the murder: when Julius
Proculus, to appease the People, swore that he saw him ascend into Heaven:
whereupon they consecrated Temples unto him, and gave him divine honors;
changing his Name into Quirinus. Verse. 383. Or has that Day, etc.] The Great
Year: when all the Planets (here called Gods because they carry their Names)
shall return to that position which they were in at the beginning: Comprising,
according to Cicero's Hortensius, the revolution of twelve thousand nine
hundredth and fifty years. Verse. 390. If the World perish by licentious fire]
The Romans could not then have this from St. Peter; but rather from the
Prophesies of the Sibyls: These Signs the Worlds combustion shall fore-run:
Arms clashing, Trumpets, from the rising Sun
Horrible fragors, heard by all: this Frame
Of Nature then shall feed the greedy flame.
Men, Cities, Floods, and Seas, by ravenous lust
Of Fire devoured, all shall resolve to dust.
Orac. l. 4. From hence perhaps the Ancient Philosophers derived their
opinions; as Seneca a Latter, The Stars shall encounter one another, and what
now shines so orderly, shall burn in one Fire. Verse. 395. Either the groaning
world, etc. Verse. 397. Do proud Titanians etc] The Poets feign that the angry
Earth, to be revenged of the Gods, brought forth the Titans, as after the
Giants; who by throwing mountains upon mountains attempted to scale the
Heavens, and disinthrone Jupiter; who overthrew them with his Lightning, and
cast those conjested Mountains upon them. Pherecydes the Syrian writes, how the
Devils were cast out of Heaven by Jupiter (this fall of the Giants perhaps
alluding to that of the Angels:) The chief called Ophionius, which signifies
Serpentine: having after made use of that Creature to poison Eve with a false
ambition. Verse. 400. Dire Python] A prodigious Serpent, which after Deucalions
Flood lay upon the Earth like a Mountain, and slain by Apollo: the sense of the
Fable being merely Physical; for Python born after the deluge of the humid
Earth, was that great Exhalation, which rose from the late drowned world; at
length dissipated by the fervor of the Sun, or Apollo. The Earth then soaked
in showers, yet hardly dry,
Threw up thick clouds, which darkened all the Sky:
This was that Python.
Pont. Meteor. The word signifies putrefaction: and because the Sun consumes
the putrefaction of Earth, his beams darting from his Orb like arrows, with his
arrows he is said to have slain Python. Verse. 400. Lerna's Fen] In this lay
that venomous Serpent Hydra; which is said to have many Heads, whereof one
being cut off, two rose in the room more terrible then the former, and with her
poysnous breath to have infected all the Territories adjoining. This Fable had
a relation to that place, which through the eruption of waters annoyed the
neighboring Cities; when one being stopped many rose in the room: this Hercules
perceiving, burnt them with fire. Corruption boyls away with heat;
And forth superfluous vapors sweat.
But Physically, Hydra signifies water, and Hercules according to Macrobius,
presents the Sun, whose extraordinary fervor dried up those noisome and
infectious vapors. Verse. 404. Lyaeus gave to man less precious wine] Lyaeus
is a name of Bacchus, because wine refreshes the Heart, and freeth it from
sorrow. Noah was he who immediately after the Flood first planted a Vineyard
and showed the use of wine unto man: wherefore some write that of Noachus he
was called Boachus, and after Bacchus by the Ethnicks, either by contraction,
or through ignorance of the etymology. This comparison has relation to
Christ's conversion of water into such excellent wine at Cana in Galilee. Verse.
405. Not Hercules so many Monsters slew] Hercules, says Seneca, traveled over
the world, not to oppress it, but to free it from Oppressors; and by killing
of Tyrants and Monsters to preserve it in tranquillity. But how much more
glorious were the victories of Christ; who by suffering for Sin, subdued it;
led Captivity captive, was the death of Death; triumphing over Hell, and those
Spirits of Darkness. Verse. 406. Vnshorn Apollo desse in Physic knew] Apollo;
to whom they attribute long yellow hair, in regard of his beautiful Beams, is
said to have invented the Art of Physic (his name importing a preservation
from evil) because the Sun is so powerful in producing physical Simples,
and so salubrious to our bodies: when Christ by his own Virtue cured all
diseases; gave sight to the blind by birth, which surpasleth the power of art;
threw out wicked Spirits from the tortured bodies of the possessed; and called
the Dead from their beds of death to converse again with the Living. Verse 419.
With the Religion of the Samean] Of Pythagoras of Samos; who by his doctrine
and example withdrew the Crotonians from luxury and idleness to temperance and
industry; calming the perturbations of the Mind with the music of his Harp:
for he held that Virtue, Strength, all Good, and even God himself, consisted of
Harmony: That God was the Soul of the World; from whence each creature received
his life; and dying, restored it. And lest it might be doubted that the Souls
of all had not one Original, in regard of their different understandings, he
alleged how that proceeded from the natural complexion and composition of
the Body, as more or less perfect: whose opinions are thus delivered by
Virgil. The arched Heavens, round Earth, the liquid Plain,
The Moons bright Orb, and Stars Titanian,
A Soul with-in sustaines; whose Virtues pass
Through every part, and mix that huge Mass.
Hence men, hence beasts, what ever fly with wing,
And Monsters in the marble Ocean spring:
Of Seed divine, and fiery Vigor, full;
But what gross flesh, and dying member dull.
Thence fear, desire, grief, joy; nor more regard
Their heavenly Birth, in those blind Prisons barred.
Aen. l. 6. Moreover, he held that this visible Soul or Godhead, diffused
throughout all the world, got it self such diversity of Names, by the manifold
operations which it effected in every part of the visible Universe. Verse. 420.
Nor Thracian Harp, wild Beasts instructing, can] Orpheus of Thrace; who with
the music of his Harp and voice attracted even beasts and senseless stones to
hear him. The moral of which Fable may parallel with that of Amphion.
Orpheus the Gods Interpreter, from blood
Rude men at first deterred, and savage food:
Hence said to have Tigers and fell Lions tamed.
Amphion so, who Theban bulwarks framed,
To Have led the stones with music of his lute,
And mild requests. Of old in high repute:
Public from Private, Sacred from Profane,
To separate; and wandering Lust restrain
With matrimonial ties; fair Cities raise,
Laws stamp in brass. This gave the honored Bays
To sacred Poets, and to verse their praise.
Horat. de Art. Poet. It is apparent by his Testament to his Scholar Musaeus
(whereof certain verses are recited by Justin Martyr) that his opinion in
divinity was in the main agreeable with the sacred Scriptures: As of one God,
the Creator of Heaven and Earth, the Author of all good, and punisher of all
evil; exhorting him to the hearing and understanding of that knowledge which
was revealed from Heaven: meaning nothing else by those various Names which he
gives to the Gods, but divine and natural Virtues: shadowing God himself under
the Name of Jupiter to avoid the envy and danger of those times; as is almost
evident by these attributes. Omnipotent Jove; the First, the Last of things;
The Head, the Midst: all from Joves bounty springs:
Foundation of the Earth, and starry Sky:
A Male, a Female; who can never die.
Spirit of all: the Force of awful Fire;
Sourse of the Sea; Sun, Moon, The Original,
The End of all things; and the King of all.
At first concealed, then by his wondrous Might
And sacred Goodness, all produced to light.
Verse. 421. Nor that prophetic Boy, etc.] Of whom Ovid. The Nymphs and
Amazonian this amazed,
No less then when the Tyrrhen Plowman gazed
Upon the fatal clod, that moved alone;
And, for a humane shape, exchanged his own.
With infant lips, that were but earth of late,
Revealed the Mysteries of future Fate:
Whom Natives Tages called. He, first of all,
Th'Hetrurians taught to tell what would befall.
Met. l. 15. And Cicero, in his second book of Divination: Tages, when the
Earth was turned up, and the Plow had made a deeper impression, ascended (as
they say) in the Tarquinian fields, and spoke to the Tiller. It is written in
the Hetrurian Records that he was seen in the form of a Boy, although old in
wisdom. The Husbandman amazed, and exalting his voice, drew thither a great
concourse of People; and with-in awhile all Thuscany: who spoke many things in
that populous audience; by them remembered, and committed to writing. His
oration only contained the discipline of Divination by the entrails of beasts:
which after increased by experience, but is referred to this Original. A
delusion of the Devils to introduce that Superstition.
ANNOTATIONS UPON THE FIFTH ACT.
VErse 30. O may they perish, etc.] This imprecation comprehends those
following calamities which the Divine Vengeance inflicted on the Jews: more,
and more horrid, then ever befell any other Nation. Verse. 35. Let the great in
War, etc.] Titus Vespasian: who besieged Jerusalem when almost all the Jewish
Nation was within the Walls, there met to celebrate the Passover: who took it
by force, consumed the Temple with fire, (which fell on that day in which it
was formerly burnt by the Chaldeans) and levelled the City with the ground:
eleven hundred thousand Jews there perishing by famine, pestilence, and the
sword: another hundred thousand Captives were publicly sold, for a Roman
penny a Jew; and sixteen thousand sent to Alexandria for servill employments:
two thousand of the most beautiful and personable young men reserved to attend
on his Triumph, who after, to delight the Spectators, were torn in pieces by
wild beasts in the Amphitheater. Verse. 26. Let Diseases sow, etc.] During the
siege the Pestilence violently raged, proceeding from the stench of dead
bodies, to whom they afforded no burial, but piled them up in their houses, or
threw them over the Wall of the City. Verse. 41. Famine, in their dry entrails,
etc.] Inexpressible was the Famine they endured; and pitiful, if they
themselves had had any pity: enforced to sees their Girdles and Shoes, and
fighting fiercely with one another for so course a diet. Driven in the end to
that exigent, that they were feign to rake the sincks and privies, and to feed
on that which was loathsome to behold; neither could they keep what they found
from the rapine of others. Verse. 44. The Babe re-enter her, etc.] Hunger had so
overcome Nature, that a Woman of riches and honor, named Mary, being daily
robbed of her provision by the Seditious, slew her own child which sucked at
her breast, and having sodden one half thereof, eat it. When at the sent of
flesh, they broke in upon her; who presented them with the rest; the thieves
then hardly refraining, though they trembled at so horrid a Spectacle. Verse.
45. While yet the eager Foe, etc.] The enemy assailed them without, and the
Seditious massacred one another within; divided into three parties: the
Zealous, the Idumaean Robbers, and the rest of the mutinous Citizens: but upon
every assault of the Romans, setting their private hatred aside, united
themselves, as if of one Mind, and with admirable courage repulsed the Enemy:
but upon the least cessation renewed their bloody discord; some beginning with
their own hands to set the Temple on fire. Verse. 47. Let The Enemy, etc.] See
the Notes upon the 35. Verse. Verse. 50. The Relics of their slaughter,] In
the days of Adrian, the Jews raised a new Commotion: of whom his Lieutenant,
Julius Severus, slew five hundred and four score thousand; transporting the
rest into Spain by the command of the Emperor: so that Iewry was then without
Jews, as it continues to this present. Verse. 52. Despised, and wretched,
wander, etc.] Out of Spain they were banished in the year 1500. by Ferdinand
and Emanuel. Now scattred throughout the whole World, and hated by those among
whom they live; yet suffered as a necessary mischief: subject to all wrongs
and contumelies; who can patiently submit themselves to the times, and to
whatsoever may advance their profit. Verse. 53. Abolished by their Law, etc]
This they lost in the destruction of their City. Yet daily expect that Messiah
who is already come: and, as they believe, shall restore them to their
temporal Kingdom. Verse. 55. This infected soil, etc.] The Ecclesiastical
Histories report, how Joseph of Arimathea, after he had suffered imprisonment
by the envy of the Jews, and was delivered by an Angel, left his Country, and
sailed to Marcellis in France: from thence passing over into this Island, he
preached the Gospel to the Britains and Scots: who there exchanged this life
for a better. Verse. 95. Who knows but soon a holier Age, etc.] Helena the
Mother of Constantine, throwing down the Fane of Venus, which Adrian had
erected on Calvary, covered both the Mount and Sepulcher with a magnificent
Temple, which yet has resisted the injuries of Insolence and Time: and what
was before without, in reverence to the place, is now in the heart of the City.
To recover this from the Saracens, diverse of the Western Princes have
unfortunately ventured their Persons and People: though Godfry of Bullein, with
an Army of three hundred thousand, made of the City and Country an absolute
Conquest: Whose Successors held it for fourscore and nine years, and then
beaten out by Saladine the Egyptian Sultan. Yet yearly is the Sepulcher
visited, though now in the possession of the Turk, from all parts of the World
by thousands of Christians, who there pay their vows, and exercise their
Devotions. Verse. 109. Of his Royal Blood, etc] Of David's: See the Notes upon
the 264. Verse of the second Act. Verse. 139. Not that fierce Prince, etc.]
Herod the Great, the murderer of the Infants: who put three of his sons to
death; with his wife Mariamme, whom he frantickly affected. Verse. 140. Nor his
Successor, etc.] Herod Antipas, who cut off the Head of John the Baptist.
Verse. 189. You neighbors to the Suns up-rise] The Persian Magi.
FINIS.
Imprimatur.

Ioannes Hansley.
September 27. 1639.

