TRVE RELIGION EXPLAINED And defended against ye Archenemies thereof in these
times, In six. Books. Published by Authority for the common good.

Buy the truth P(...)

LONDON Printed for Ri. Royston in Ivy lane. 1632

T C^^^ll sculp.



The mind of the frontisp^^^, or title page.
1. Ieheuah at the top ^eaching out (...) the old to the lew, and the new to
the (...) former with a promise, (...) the latt^ of the Gentle^ in the Gospel
without ex^ ^on of any, Hom. 1^.

2 Religion, the effects whereof the Apos^ Iam. 1. 2^.

1 For her habit. she has a (...) garment t^ she regards not the transiently
wealth and ^ty of this world.

2 She holds the book in her hand, where ^n the law^ God is written.

3 Her breast is ba^^, to show her Can^on and (...)

4 She leaves upon the Cross, because thereupon (...) finds rest and quiet
repose.

5 Winged sheis to reach men to mount up al^

6 As it were shining by a radiant (...) that she dispels the mysty dark^ (...)
of the mind.

7 The bridle is hung upon the cross to teach men how that they ought to
curb, bridle, and sub^ the tri^^le^^ passions of the mind.

8 She treads and examples upon death, because she^ very have and downfall of
death.

3 The Christian kneeles upon the Cross, which he m^ take up* Mat. 16. 24.
having^ glory shining upon him to represent the brightness of the Gospel and
t^ Religion.

4 The Turk stands with his sword in his hand, by which he defends his
Religion that sprang from Mah^met, a false Prophet, foretold in general by
Christ, Mat. 24. 5. 24. also a half Moon.

5 The lew kneeles, having the two tables of the law by which he hopes to be
saved, not as yet believing in Christ, because his eyes are blinded. Isaiah.
29. 10.

6 The Pagan has the sun before him, which together with other creatures he is
wont toworship: howbeit hope there is that all the heatheo shall become the
subjects of Christ's Kingdom, Psalm. 72. 11.

A Recapitulation of the chief points, according to the several sections of
each Book.
The Preface shows the occasion of this work.
The Contents of the first Book.
SECT. I. IN the first section it is proved there is a God. 2 That there is but
one God. 3 All perfection is in God. 4 And that after an infinite manner 5 God
is eternal, omnipotent, omniscient, and absolutely good. 6 God is the cause of
all things. 7 Answer to an objection concerning the cause of evil. 8 Against
them which imagine there are two principles, the one good and the other evil.
9 The whole universe is governed by God. 10 So are all sublunary things, yea
every particular and singular thing. 11 Which is declared by the preservation
of Empires. 12 And by miracles. 13 Especially such as were wrought amongst the
Jews, which are verified by the long continuance of their Religion. 14 Also by
the truth and antiquity of Moses. 15 And by the testimonies of strangers and
aliens from the covenans. 16 The same likewise is confirmed by predictions and
other arguments. 17 An objection answered for that no miracles are now to be
(...) as formerly has been. 18 And that iniquity so great^nds in these days.
19 In so much that good and go^dly men are oppressed, abused. 20 But this is
retorted to prove the immortality of souls after the death and ^lution of
bodies. 21 Which truth is further confirmed by tradition. 22 Namely such, as no
reason can be alleged against it. 23 But ^ther many arguments make for it. 24
Whence it follows that the end of man is his happiness and welfare after this
life. 25 Which to obtain, true Religion must be sought for, the same being the
only way to eternity.
The Contents of the second Book.
SECT. I. TO the end it may appear that the title of true Religion, agrees to
Christian Religion, the Author here proves first that Jesus once lived upon
earth. 2 And that he suffered an ignominious and reproachful death. 3 Howbeit
after his death, he was worshipped and adored by wise men. 4 The cause of
which their worshipping him, could be no other then for the wonders and
miracles that were wrought by him. 5 And these miracles were not to be
attributed to any efficacy of rature, or to the power of the Devil: but
proceeded only from the power of God. 6 The Author further shows the truth of
Jesus his resurrection by sufficient testimonies. 7 He answers a doubt, for
that the resurrection seems impossible. 8 This resurrection of Jesus being
granted it serves to confirm the truth of his doctrine. 9 Christian Religion
excells all other Religions in the world. 10 As is proved, first from the
excellency of the reward which is promised and propounded thereunto. 11
Whereupon by the way, an objection is answered, for that it seems impossible
for bodies once dissolved, to be restored again to their former integrity. 12
Secondly, the former truth is confirmed by the exact holiness of Christian
precepts, touching the worship and service of God. 13 Also from those courteous
duties of humanity, which we owe and ought to perform to our neighbors,
though hurt or injured by them. 14 Also from the union and love of man and
wife. 15 From the use of Temporal goods and commodities. 16 From an Oath. 17
And from other Christian Acts. 18 Answer to an objection taken from the
controversies that are among Christians. 19 The excellency of Christian
Religion is further declared from the dignity of its author. 20 From the
wonderful propagation thereof. 21 Specially considering the weakness and
simplicity of them which at the beginning taught the same. 22 Together with the
great impediments which might have withheld men from embracing it, or deterred
them from professing the same. 23 Answer made to them that do desire stronger
arguments.
The Contents of the third Book.
SECT. I. HEre is shown the authority of the books of the new covenant. 2
Such books as have names of authors are the same men's writings whose names
they bear. 3 Concerning such books as anciently were questioned the doubt
taken away. 4 Those books that have no name prefixed, have su^en^ authority,
as is proved from the quality of the writings themselves. 5 The holy pen men of
these books writ nothing but truth, because they had certain notice thereof.
6 And because they would not lie. 7 This is also evident by the miracles they
wrought: 8 And likewise because the events of many things therein recorded,
have made it appear the same were divinely inspired. 9 And lastly from the
care God was to have, that counterfeit writings might not be ob^ruded or forged
in the Church. 10 An objection answered that sundry of these books, were not
reserved by all. 11 A scruple taken away for that some impossibilities s^eme to
be (...): 12 Or such things as are r^ p^ to reason. 13 Another doubt answered,
touching some diversity ^rie^^, that seem to be in those writings. 14 The
consideration of foreign testimonies; which indeed make more for these books
that against them. 15 Answer made to that objection, concerning the
adulterating or falsifying of scripture. 16 Lastly, the authority of the books
of the old Testament is verified.
The Contents of the fourth Book.
SECT. I. IN particular, such Religions as be repugnant to Christianity are
confuted. 2 And first against Pa^nisme here is proved, that there is but one
God: that created minds are good or evil: The good are not to be worshipped,
but according to Gods prescript. 3 The bad Spirits are worshipped by the
Pagans, which is an odious thing. 4 Against the Pagans worshopping of ^en
deceased. 5 Against the worshipping of stars and elements. 6 Against the
worshipping of bruit beasts. 7 Lastly against the worshipping of such things as
are no substances. 8 Answer to the Pagans objection taken from some miracles
that were wrought among them. 9 And from their Oracles. 10 The Religion of the
Pagans is thereby confuted, for that the same of it own accord faded away as
soon as humane helps failed. 11 Answer to them that ascribe the beginning and
downfall of any Religion to the efficacy of the stars. 12 Lastly, the chief
points of Christian Religion were approved of by the wisest of the Pagans: and
if any thing seem incredible therein, the like may be found amongst the
Pagans.
The Contents of the fifth Book.
SECT. I. IVdaisme is confuted. 2 The Jews ought to account the miracles of
Jesus for sufficient. 3 Answer to that which they say, these miracles were done
by the assistance of Devils. 4 And by the power of words or syllables. 5 That
the miracles done by Jesus were divine, and that he taught the worship of one
God who is the maker of the world. 6 Answer to an objection taken from the
difference that is between the law of Moses and of Jesus: and that there might
be a more perfect law given than that of Moses. 7 The law of Moses was observed
by Jesus while he lived upon earth: and no other precepts were afterward
abolished, but sue^ were not essen tally good. 8 Such were the sacrifices which
of themselves were nev^ wel-pleasing unto God: 9 Also the difference of me^ 10
And of days; 11 And outward Circumcision. 12 And yet, the Apostles of Jesus
were gentle in the permission of toleration thereof. 13 An argument against the
Jews, for that they grant t^er^ was a worthy Messiah promised. 14 The same
Messiah came at the time appointed. 15 Answer to that which they object
concerning the deferring of his coming, for the sins of the people: 16 Also
from the present state of the Jews, compared with those things which the Law
promised. 17 Jesus is proved to be the Messiah, by those things which were
foretold concerning the Messiah. 18 Answer to what is said of some things not
yet fulfilled: 19 Also to that which is objected touching the m^e state, and
miserable death of Jesus: 20 As though they had been honest men that put him
to death. 21 Answer to that objection of many Gods, which they say are
worshipped by the Christians: 22 Also that the humane nature is worshipped. 23
A conclusion of this part, with prayer, and supplication to God for the Jews.
The Contents of the sixth and last Book.
SECT. I. MAhumetanisme con^uted the original thereof (...) set down. 2 The
ground of Mahumetism^ overthrown, chiefly for that the make it unlawful for
men the^ enquire into their Religion. 3 Proofs against the Mahu^^ans out of
the sacred w^ of Hebrews and Christians. 4 Mahumet compared w^ Christ in their
persons. 5 In their Acts. 6 The first Professors of both Religions. 7 The
manner how both laws were propagated and published. 8 Lastly, the precepts of
both compared. 9 Answer to that which Mahumetans object concerning the son of
God. 10 Sundry absurdities are ^epeated out of the books of the Mahumetans. 11
A conclusion of the whole work directed to Christians, who are admonished of
their duty by occasion of all that has been said before in the several
books.
A Christian prayer for the adversaries of true Religion.
MErciful God, who have made all men, and hate nothing that thou have made,
nor would the death of a sinner, but rather that he should be converted
and live, have mercy upon all jews, Turks, Infidels and Heretics, and take
from them all ignorance, hardness of heart, and contempt of thy word, and so
fetch them home (blessed Lord) to thy flock, that they may be saved among the
remnant of the true Israelites, and be made one f^ld ^nderone sleepheard,
Jesus Christ our Lord, who lives and reigns with thee and the holy Ghost,
now and ever. Amen.

OF THE TRVTH OF Christian Religion.
The Preface, showing the occasion of this work.
I Have eftsoons The occasion of the work.
been demanded by a man, that has deserved excellent well of his Country, and
of learning, and of me also, what the argument of those books was, which were
written by me in my Country language, in the behalf of Christian Religion:
Neither do I wonder that he should make such a question: For he that with so
good judgment did apply himself to the reading of all things worthy to be
read, was not ignorant with what skill that matter has been handled by
Raymond Sebund, after a subtle Philosophical manner; by Iudovicus Vives, in
diverse Dialogues; but especially with most learning and eloquence, by their
famous Mornay. Wherefore the translating of them into the vulgar tongue, was
more for use, than for making any new work: Whereof, what other men will
judge, I know not, but this I am persuaded will satisfy him, if I tell him,
how that reading, not only those Authors above mentioned; but also the
writings of the Jews, for their old Jewish, and also of Christians, for our
Christian Religion; I thought good withal to use my own judgment, (such as
it is) and give some f^eedome to my mind, which my body wanted when I writ
that work. For it seemed to me most sitting to contend for the truth only
with truth, and that also with such truth, as whereof I was persuaded fully in
my own mind. For I know it were but a vanity in me to go about to teach
others to credit those things that I could not be persuaded of my self:
Therefore omitting such arguments as in my judgment were of less importance,
as also the authority of those books which either I certainly knew, or justly
suspected to be forged and counterfeit, I have made choice of such reasons both
out of ancient and later writings, as may be best approved of. And as for
those which pleased me best, the same I did both methodically dispose, and also
expounded as plainly as I could, distinguishing them by certain verses,
whereby they might be the better committed to memory.

For my purpose was to benefit all my Contrymen, but specially
Sea-faring-men, that they might not (as too many do) lose and mispend their
time. Wherefore beginning with the commendation of our Country, which for
skill and diligence in Navigation excels the jest, I exhorted them to use that
art, not only for their own proper gain and commodity, but also for the
propagation of true Christian Religion. For neither is there wanting matter for
such their endeavors, since that they might try their fortunes abroad in far
distant-forren Countries, and make incursions either upon the Pagans, such as
live in Arabia and Guinea; or upon the Mahumetans, as those under the dominion
of the Turk, the Persian, and Carthaginians; or lastly, upon the Jews, and
such as at this day are professed enemies of Christianity, which are dispersed
through the most parts of the world. Neither are there wanting such wicked men,
as do (secretly for fear) harbor the poison of error, and publish the same
unto the weaker sort, when they see fit opportunity. Against which evils my
desire is we may be well fortified with truth; And that such as are furnished
with learning, would endeavor according to their ability to confute errors:
and in the mean while let others beware that they be not surprised by those
that are enemies of the truth. For which end, that I may make it appear how
that Religion is no vain frivolous thing; in my first book I do begin at
the ground or foundation thereof, which is, That there is a God: This truth I
thus proceed to prove, as follows.

The first Book. OF THE TRVNESSE OF Christian Religion.
SECT. I.
That there is a God.

THAT there are somethings which had a b^ginni^g, is clear to common sense,
and by the confession of all: howbeit those things were not causes to
themselves of their own being. For that which is not cannot produce any thing,
neither had it power to be before it was; therefore it follows, that the said
things had their beginning from some other thing different from themselves:
Which may be averred not only of such things as now we see, or ever have
beheld, but of such also as gave original unto these, and so upward until we
come to some prime cause which never began to be, and which (as we say) has
its existence by necessity, and not after any conting nt manner: And this, what
ever it be, (whereof by and by we shall speak) is that which is meant by
divine power or Godhead.

Another reason to prove that there is some such divine Majesty, is taken from
the most manifest consent of all Nations, such I mean as have not the light of
reason altogether eclipsed or abolished by their savage cruelty, and wild
affections. For seeing that such things as proceed from man's will and
arbitrament are not the same with all men, but often subject to mutability: yet
this notion is every where admitted of, and never was denied by any, no not by
Aristotle himself, a man not very credulous in this kind. Therefore there
must needs be some agent that extends it self unto all mankind: which can be
no other than either the Oracle of God himself, or some tradition derived from
the first parents of mankind: The former whereof if we admit, then we have
that which is in question; or if the later be granted, yet there can no good
reason be given why we may think that those first parents should gull all
posterity with any fulsity in a matter of the greatest moment.

Moreover, whether we consider those parts of the world which were anciently
known, or those that are lately found out, wheresoever there is (as we have
said) any relics of humanity, there certainly is this truth acknowledged, as
well by such Heathens as have any ingenuity and wisdom, as also by those that
are of a more dull and stupid disposition: The former whereof questionless
could not all be deceived; neither is it likely that these later so si ly and
simple should any way devise how to deceive one another.

Neither let any man here object, that in sundry ages there have been some
most commonly, which either could not believe, or else would not profess they
believed that there was a God. For inasmuch as the number of such Atheists was
but small, and in regard that straight way upon the discussing of their
rersons, their opinion generally was set at naught; thence it appears, that
this proceeded, not from the use of right reason, which is common to men; but
either from the affectation of singularity, such as was in him that would needs
demonstrate the snow to be black; or from a corrupt mind, like as when meats
to a distempered palate do taste otherwise than indeed they are. But
especially because both histories and other writings declare that by how much
any man was the more honest, by so much the more diligently did he preserve and
increase this knowledge in himself concerning God.

And further, that this conceit so opposite to the anciently received opinion,
chiefly proceeds from the bad disposition of those whom it would most of all
profit or advantage if there were no God, that is, no judge of humane actions;
it is evident in this respect, for that whatsoever they conclude or determine,
whether it be concerning the succession of some l^age without beginning, or the
confluence of Mores in the Sun, or what other thing soever they say in this
matter, the same has in it no less, if not more difficulties and absurdities;
neither can it be to any man, that does but with indifferency ponder the thing,
more credible than that opinion which is already received.

As touching that which some men pretend, because they cannot see God,
therefore they cannot believe that he is; if they see any thing, they see
enough to convince them; for if this were truth, what an indignity were it for
a man to believe he has a soul, which notwithstanding he never saw more than
the divine essence of God; neither ought we to deny that there is such a divine
nature, when by our weak judgment we cannot comprehend the same; for this is
common to every inferior creature, not to be able to comprehend those things
that be of a higher and more excellent nature. Thus the bruit beasts conceive
not what man is, much less do they know after what manner men do ordain and
govern common wealths, measure the course of the stars, or sail upon the
Ocean; for all these things are beyond and above their reach. Forasmuch then as
man has obtained a more excellent nature than the beasts, and that not of
himself, thence he may conclude, that that same thing whereby he is advanced
above the condition of bruits, is as far superior to him, as those bruits
are below himself; and therefore some more noble nature there is which
transcends his apprehension.

SECT. II.
That there is ba^ one God.

THis being manifest then that there is a God, it follows in the next place
that we speak of some of his attributes; the first whereof is, that there is
but one God, not many Gods. This truth may be declared, first, because God (as
was said before) is that same thing or essence which is most necessary, and of
himself. A thing is said to be necessary or of it self, not considered in any
other respect or notion, but truly as it is according to its own nature and
existence; now all particular things have such actual existence and being. But
if so be thou suppose or grant there are many Gods, yet surely thou art not
able to yield a reason why cach of them should of necessity have their being;
neither why any man should believe that there are in number rather two Gods
than three, or ten than five.

Besides, the multiplication of those particular things that are of the same
nature, proceeds from the exuperancy and fruitfulness of the causes whence
such things more or less are generated: but of God there is neither beginning
nor any cause.

Furthermore, in all particular things, there are certain special and
particular properties whereby the same things are severally distinguished: Now
to make such a distinction in God, is altogether needless and impossible,
since that he is most necessary and simple by nature; neither can any man
perceive any signs or tokens of the plurality of Gods. For this universal
Sphere or circumference which we behold, makes up but one complete world,
wherein there is one most beautiful and glorious part, the Sun: Likewise in
man, the little world, there is but one special governing part, to wit, his
soul or mind. Again, suppose there were two or three Gods, which being free
and voluntary agents, had power to will contrary things; yet hereby one would
be an obstacle or impediment to the other, so that they could not actuate and
bring to pass their different or contrary desires; now to say that God, who is
an omnipotent power, can be hindered, were a great dishonor to his Majesty.
But let us proceed to some other of his attributes.

SECT. III.
That all perfection is in God.

THat all perfection and accomplishment is in God may be thus demonstrated.
What perfection soever there is in all or any of the creatures, the same either
had a beginning, or else it had no beginning: To have no beginning is the
property of God alone; and whatsoever had beginning, the same must needs be
said to have something that gave to it such being. And further, seeing that
amongst the creatures there is nothing that can be generated of nothing; it
follows then that those perfections which appear to be in any effects, were
the reason why the cause thereof could produce any thing accordingly, and so
all are accomplished in the first cause. Neither must it be here imagined, that
the first cause can afterward be deprived of it is perfection, either by some
other thing different from it self, because that which is eternal has no
dependence upon any other thing, neither can be liable and subject unto their
actions; or of it self, because every nature desires its own perfection.

SECT. IV.
God is infinite.

ANd we may add further, that these perfections which are in God, are in him
after an eminent and infinite manner; for the nature of every thing is said to
be finite and limited, either for that the cause whence it proceeded has
communicated such a measure or degree of existence, and no more thereunto, or
for that the same nature was not capable of any further perfection; Now there
is no creature that does communicate any thing unto God, neither is he capable
of ought that any other thing can impart, he being (as before we said)
altogether absolute, entire, and necessary of himself.

SECT. V.
That God is eternal, omnipotent ^s^, and absolutely good.

Again, forasmuch as all things that have life, are said to be more perfect
than those without life; and those which have motion than those which want it;
and those endued with understanding superior to such creatures as lack it;
and those which are good better than those that come short in goodness;
therefore from that which has been spoken it follows, that all those
attributes are in God, and that after an infinite manner. Thus is he infinite
in life, that is, eternal; infinite power, that is, omnipotent; So likewise is
he omniscient, and good beyond all compare

SECT. VI.
That God is the Author and cause of all things.

Furthermore it follows from that which has bin spoken, that what things
soever subsist, the same have their original and first being from God: for we
have proved that that which is necessary of it self, can be but one; whence
we collect that all other things besides this had their original from some
what different from themselves.

Now such things as have their beginning from another, we have seen before how
that either in themselves or in their causes, they proceeded from him which had
no beginning, that is, from God.

Neither is this manifest by reason only, but also after some sort by very
sense: for if we consider the wonderful frame and fashion of man's body, both
within and without, and how that each part and parcel thereof has its proper
use without the the care and helping hand of his parents; yea, and that with
such a grace, as that the most excellent amongst Physicians and Philosophers,
could never sufficiently admire the same; this verily shows the excellency of
wisdom in the Author and workman of nature: concerning which matter Galen
has written well, especially where he speaks of the use of the eye, and of
the hand. Yea more, the very bodies of mute and bruit beasts do testify the
same: for their parts are not framed and composed by the power and virtue of
the matter whereof they consist, but by some superior and higher cause
destinating them to a certain end.

Neither is this plain by man and beasts alone, but also by plants and herbs,
as has accurately been observed by some Philosophers. This further is
excellently noted by Strabo, concerning the situation of the waters, which, if
we consider the quality of their matter, ought to be placed in the middle
between the earth and the air, whereas the same are now included and
dispersed within the earth, to the end they might be be no hinderance, either
to the fruitfulness of the ground, or to the life of man. Now to propose that,
or any other end, to any ^ction, is the peculiar property of ^n understanding
nature. Neither are all things only ordained for their proper ends, but also
for the good and benefit of the whole Universe, as appears particu^arly in the
water but now mentioned, which against its own proper nature is moved upward,
that their should be no gaping vacuity in the world; which world is so
composed, that the parts thereof do mutually sustain and uphold one another.
Now it cannot possibly be, that this common end should be thus intended
together with an inclination of things thereunto, but by the power and purpose
of some inteligent nature, whereunto the whole Universe is in subjection.
Moreover amongst the beasts there are certain actions observed to be so
regular and orderly done, that it is manifest enough the same proceed from some
kind of reason, as is plain in Pismires and Bees, and likewise in other
creatures, which before they have experience do naturally eschew such things
that are hurtful, and seek after such things as are profitable for them. Now
that this instinct or inclination of seeking and judging things, is not in them
by their own power, it is clear, for that they do always operate after the
same manner, neither have they any virtue or efficacy to do any thing which
is contrary, or above their ordinary course of operation: wherefore they must
needs receive their power from some reasonable external Agent, which directs
them or imprints in them such efficacy as they have, and this reasonable and
intelligent Agent, is no other than God himself.

In the next place consider we the Stars of heaven, and amongst the rest, as
most eminent, the Sun and the Moon, both which for the fruitfulness of the
earth, and for the preservation of living creatures, do so seasonably perform
their course of motion, as that a man cannot devise any thing better. For
though their motion through the Equator were much much more simple, yet we see
that they have another motion by an oblique Circle, to the end, the benefit of
their favorable aspects might be communicated to more parts of the earth.

Now as the earth is ordained for the use and benefit of living creatures, so
are all terrestrial things appointed for the service of man, who by his wit
and reason can subdue the most rackle and impetuous creature among them; whence
the very Stoics did collect, that the world was made for man's sake.

Howbeit, since it exceeds the sphere of humane power, to bring the heavenly
bodies in subjection to him; neither is it to be imagined that they will ever
submit themselves to man of their own accord; it follows: therefore that
there is some superior mind or spirit, by whose sole appointment those fair
and glorious bodies do service unto man, though he be placed far below them;
which same mind is no other than the framer of the stars, even the Maker of
the whole world. Also the motions of these stars which are said to be
Excentricall and Epicycticall, do plainly show, that their establishment and
being is from a free agent, not by the power of the matter in them.

Moreover, the most perfect form and figure of this world, to wit its
roundnesse, as also the parts thereof, shut up as it were in the bosom of the
heavens, and disposed with a mavelous order, do all expressly declare, that
they were not tumbled together, or conjoined as they are, by chance, but wisely
ordained by such an understanding as is endued with super-eminent excellency.
For what Ninny is there so sottish, what man so foolish, as to imagine, that so
complete and exact a work as this, came to pass by hap-hazard? he might as well
think that the stones and trees of any building were united into the form of
some house by chance, or scattered syllables and words became a Poem by mere
fortune: A thing so unlikely, that even a few Geometrical figures espied on
the Seashore, gave the beholder just ground to argue, that some man had been
there; it being evident enough that such things could not proceed from mere
chance.

Furthermore, that mankinds was not from all eternity, but at a certain time
had a common beginning, may be manifested by the course of Arts and Sciences,
yea, by the very ground whereupon we tread, which was anciently rude and
untilled, but afterward became possessed with Iuhabitants; which also the
language spoken in some Islands, derived from adjacent Countries, does
witness. The same is apparent by certain ordinances, so generally received
amongst men, that the institution thereof may not be thought to have proceeded
from the instinct of nature, or evidence of reason, but from the perpetual and
constant tradition of the Ancients, which was scarce ever interrupted in any
place, either by the malice or misery of man: such was that ordinance for the
killing of beasts in sacrifice, used in former times, and such also are now the
modesty and shamefastness about venereall things, the celebration of
marriages, and the banishment of incestuous persons.

SECT. VII.
Answer to that objection concerning the cause of evil.

NEither need we unsay that which has been spoken, because we see many evil
things come to pass, the source and cause whereof being not from God, who (as
before has been shown) is good, after the most perfect and absolute degree
of Goodness. For when we said that God was the author and cause of all things,
we added withal that he was the cause of such things as really do subsist:
And no absurdity (that I see) will follow, if we assirme that those things
which have true and real existence, may be the causes of some certain
accidents, as namely of actions, or the like. The Almighty (we know) created
both man, and those more honorable spirits, the Angels, endued with liberty of
action; which liberty in it self is not sinful, yet by power thereof some
sins may be committed: Now to make God the author of these sins, which are
morally evil, is no better than blasphemy: how be it there are other kind of
evils, so called because they afflict some person with grief or loss, and
these we may affirm to be inflicted by God for the reformation and amendment
of some sinner, or for the punishment of transgression; which to say is no
impiety, since that such evils have nothing in them contrary to goodness, but
rather they proceed from goodness it self like a bitter portion from a good
Physician.

SECT. VIII.
Against the occasion of two Principles or causes of things.

HEre by the way, it may be noted, that the opinion of those men is to be
abandoned and avoided, which make two efficient causes, the one good, and the
other evil: for from two contraries, there may follow the ruin and
destruction, but in no wise a well ordered composition of things. Neither is
this to pass for truth, to wit, that as there is something good of it self,
so likewise there must needs be something absolutely evil in it self; seeing
that evil is a certain defect, which cannot be but in a thing that has
existence, which very having of existence, or being is good.

SECT. IX.
That God does govern the whole world.

MOreover that this whole universe is governed by the providence of God, it is
evident, for that not only men, which have right reason and understanding, but
also the fowls, and beasts both wild and tame, have in them some thing
correspondent to reason, and do bear a kind of providence, or respectfull
care over the issue which they bring forth. Which perfection, since it is a
part of goodness, must needs be attributed to God; and so much the rather,
because he is both omniscient and omnipotent, so that he can no way be
ignorant of such things as are done, or to be done, but can easily direct and
order the same as he pleases. Hereunto also may that be referred which we
have spoken before concerning the moving of things contrary to their proper
nature for a common end.

SECT. X.
Yea sublunary things.

But those men are much out on it that include this providence only with in the
compass of Celestial orbs, and will have it to descend no lower than the
Moon: for that it is extended unto every creature, it is plain; both by
thereason but now mentioned; as also for that the courses and motions of the
stars; as the best Philosophers do confess, and experience it self
abundantly testifies, are ordained and appointed for the use of man. Now it
stands but with equity that that creature should be more regarded for whose
sake another is ordained, than that which is appointed for another use.

Neither are they less erroncous that say this providence is extended unto
universal things only, and not to particulars; for if they will have God to
be ignorant of particular things, as some of them have prosessed, then verily
God could not understand himself; neither should he be infinite in knowledge,
as we have proved him before to be, if the same were not extended unto every
thing. So then if God do know these things, why can he not also have care of
them; especially since that particulars, as they are particulars, are appointed
for some certain end, as well in special as in general: And the very
entities or common essences of things, which by the confession of the said
Authors are preserved by God, the same cannot subsist but in their singulars;
So that if these singulars, being forsaken by divine providence, may perish,
then likewise may those general essences also.

SECT. XI.
This is further proved by the preservation of Empires.

ANother forcihle argument of divine providence particularly over humane
affairs, both Philosophers and Historians acknowledge to be taken from the
preservation of Common wealths: first in general, for that wheresoever the
course and order of ruling and obeying is once admitted, the same always
continues there: Then also, oftentimes in particular, it is evident by the long
continuation of this or that very form of government through many ages, as of a
Monarchy with the Assyrians, Egyptians, and France; of an Aristocracy with the
Venetians, and the like. For although man's wisdom and policy have some stroke
in point of government; yet notwithstanding if we consider the multitude of
wicked men, and the harms that may proceed from without, and what mutabilities
are incident to humane affairs, it may seem impossible for any State so long
to subsist, unless it were vpheld by a constant particular care, and by the
power of a divine hand. Which is also further manifest where it pleases God to
change the form of government: for so it is, those men whom he uses as
instruments for the effecting of that matter, as being determined for him,
suppose they were like to Cyrus, or Alexander, or Caesar the Dictator, to them
all things, even those which are above the reach of man's prudence, do succeed
more beyond their desires and wishes than the diversity of humane casualties
ordinarily does permit. The which so great correspondence of events and
concurrence of things to a certain end, is an argument that there is an
all-guiding providence: like as in game at dice, a man may happen sometimes of
a win^eing cast, but if he throw the same cast a hundred times together, every
one will say, this proceeds from some skill or cunning he has in the game:
but to go on.

SECT. XII.
And by miracles.

ANother most certain proof of Gods providence, may be taken from those
miracles and prophecies which are recorded in histories: Where though many
fabulous things be related in that kind, yet those things that were testified
by sufficient witness living in the time when they, came to pass, such I
mean as were impartial both for judgment and credulity, the same are not to
be despised as altogether impossible. For in as much as God is both omnipotent
and omniscient, what can hinder him to demonstrate what he knows or what he
pleases to do, and that even beyond the common course of nature, which being
made and ordained by him, becomes subject unto him by the title of creation?
Now if any do object that such things might have been done by subordinate
powers and minds inferior to God: to them we answer, that so much may be
granted indeed: but yet this makes way that the same may the more easily be
credited of God, who is to be thought either to work by the mediation of those
Agents, or else out of his wisdom to permit them when they bring to pass any
such thing: like as in well ordered kingdoms there is nothing done against the
statutes and common laws but by by the arbitrament or permission of the
Supreme Governors.

SECT. XIII.
Specially among the Jews, whereunto credit may be given by reason of the
long continuance of their Religion.

NOw that therehaue indeed been some miracles seen, though the credit of
other histories be questionable, yet it is manifest enough in the Jewish
Religion: which albeit, it was destitute of all humane helps, yea, exposed to
contempt and seorne; yet for all that, it has still continued almost in all
the climates and parts of the world even unto this day; whereas all other
Religions (saving Christianity, which is the accomplishment of Iudaisme) have
either vanished away, together with the power and authority of them that
governed, as it is in Paganism; or else are yet upheld by the strength and
might of authority, as it is with Turcisme. Now if it be demanded why Iudaisme
has taken such deep root in the hearts of the Hebrews, as that it cannot
thence be eradicated? no better reason can be given or conceived than this;
namely, that those Jews that are now alive did from their parents, and again
those parents from their progenitors, and so upward until the times of Moses
and Joshua, receive those miracles mentioned in Scripture, by certain and
approved tradition; which miracles were done chiefly at the departing out of
Egypt, and in that journey to Canaan, and in the entrance into that Holy Land,
whereof their ancestors were then eyewitnesses. This in all probability was
the cause which moved that people, other whiles stiff-necked enough, to take
upon them the yoke of the Law, so combersome with rites and also that made wise
men, instead of other notes of Religion which humane reason perhaps would have
thought more f^^ to admit of Circumcision, which could neither be endured
without much grief, nor used without scorn by the Gentiles; having in it
nothing commendab^ save only divine institution.

SECT. XIIII.
Also by the truth and antiquity of Moses his story.

BEsides, The writings of Moses, wherein those miracle^ are recorded to
posterity, do gain the greatest credit thereunto, not only because it was
always a settled opinion and constant report amongst the Hebrews, that this
same Moses ^as commended by the oracle of ^od to be a leader of the people, ^t
also because it is manifest e^ough, that he neither affected ^s own glory,
nor desired their ^ches; forasmuch as himself ^veals his own faults and
de^nquences, which he might ^v^ concealed; and also he as^gned the dignity of
his kingdom and Priesthood unto ^rangers, whence his own po^erity was brought
to the com^on condition of Levites. By ^ll which it appears, that there was no
cause in him why he should forge untruths; Neither ^oth he use any
dissembling or ^lluring language, such as commonly colors over a lie, but ^e
speaks after a plain ingenious manner, according to the ^quality of the thing
he treats of.

Add hereunto the undoubted ^ntiquity of the books of Moses, to which no other
writings are therein comparable: An argument whereof is, for that the Grecians
(from whom all kinds of learning were derived to other heathens) do confess
they received their very letters from others; which letters of theirs have no
other order, or name, of ancient form than that of the Syriack^ or Hebrew
tongue: a^ also for that the most ancient Grecian laws, whence the Romans
collected theirs, had their Original from the Laws of Moses.

SECT. XV.
And by the testimony of many Gentiles.

MOreover besides these, there are many testimonies of such as were aliens from
the Jewish Religion, which declare what est^^me the writings of Moses had for
antiquity amongst all the Gentiles. Thus what things he related concerning the
beginning of the world, ^he same are found recorded in ^he most ancient
histories of the Syrians, which are collected by Sanchun, and translated by
Philo Byblius; and partly also found amongst the Indians and Egyptians: Hence
it is that in Lin^^, H^siod, and many of the Grecians mention is made of a
Chaos, which some have intimated by the name of an egg: also of the making of
living creatures, and of man according to a divine I^ge; and of man's dominion
over other creatures; all which may be read in sundry Authors, specially in
Ovid, who transcribed them out of the Greek writers. That all things were made
by the word of God was confessed even by Epicharmus and the Platonicks, and
before them by a most ancient writer, (note those hymns, which go under that
name) but of those verses which antiquity called Orphean verses, and that not
because they had Orphens for their author, but because they summarily comprised
his doctrine. Empedocles acknowledged that the Sun was not the primitive
light, but a fit receptacle of light. Arat^ and Catullus think that above the
sphere or orb of the stars there is a divine habitation wherein blind Homer
imagined there was petpetuall light.

That of all things God was the most ancient, because not begotten^; the world
most beautiful, because the work of God and that darkness was before the
light, were all the doctrines of Thales: the last point whereof is found in
Orpheus and Hesi^d; whereupon the Gentiles that are commonly superstitious in
following old fashious and customs, do number their particular times by nights,
not by days. It was the opinion of Athenago^ that all things were ordered and
disposed by the highest in^lligence; of Aratus, that the stars were made by
God; and after the Grecians, of Virgil, that ^e was infused into things by ^he
Spirit of God: and that man was formed of clay seemed not ^mprobable to Hesiod,
Homer, and Callimachus: Lastly, Maxi^us Tyrius affirms, that by the common
consent of the Heathen, there is but one supreme God, which is the cause of all
things. Thus also a celebration of the ^inishing of the creation within the
space of seven days, which is termed the Sabbath, was observed not only
amongst the Grecians and Italians (for of the Hebrowes it is clear ^^ough,)
but also by the ancient people of Spain, France, a^dia, commonly called the
C^lta; who all had their seasons and times, distinguished into weeks, as is
manifest out of Philostratus, Dion, Cassius, Justin Martyr, Clemens
Alexandrinus, and by the most ancient appellations of the days in the week.

Moreover, the Aegyptian^ taught that man at the beginning led his life in all
simplicity, being naked in his body and not ashamed; whence came the Poets
fiction of the golden age, which was famous even amongst the Iudians, as Strabo
relates: and that the lives of those which lived at the beginning, and
afterward were protracted almost to the space of a thousand years, it
witnessed by Berosus, Manethos, and others: which in deed seems the more
probable, because it is recorded in the histories of many nations, that upon
the openning of some Sepulchers, men's ^od appeared to far bigges in former
times than now, they are. C^ reports, and before him, very many Greeians, that
^ly ^ons appeared unto men before such time, as they by the multitude and
^einousnesse of their crimes did deprive themselves of that sa^d acquaintance
and conversation wish God, and his ministering Spirits. The wild life of the
Giants which Moses mentions, may be ^ead almost every where in the Greek, and
in some Latin Authors. It Is to be noted of Noah's ^od, that almost all the
histories and records of the heathen are drowned in it, yea even of such
nations as were unknown till of late years: whereupon Varro called all the
space before, the hid or unknown time. As touching those things which we
find involved in the licentious fables of the Ports, the same, as far as
they accord with the true story of Moses, are recorded by most ancient writers,
such are Boros^s of the Chaldees, A^bydentes of the Assyrians, who mentions the
sending of a dove; as also Bluiarch of the Grecians; and Lucian, who says,
that as Hiaropolis in Syria, there is to he seen a most ancient history both
of Noah's Arc, and of those that were saved therein, both me^ and beasts* the
same is confirmed by Melon and Nich, Damasce^^. In what part of the world men
lived before the flood, that note in Pliny of the building of Ioppe before the
same flood does testify. That the place whereon Nochs Arc rested after the
flood was in the G^rdien Mountains, it is manifest by the constant remembrance
thereof with the Armenians from all ages until this time. Iuphet the father of
the S^, whence came Io^, or ^ne lently they pronounced the word Iavon of the
Grecians, and Humme^ of the Africans, and forth (...), are names which are
found in Moses his writings, as by Iosephius in the appellations or desirations
of people and Countries, and also by others is observed. Which of the Poets do
not point a^^he much-desired Path way to Heaven? The burning of Sed^ms is
spoken of by Diedorus Siculus, Strabo, Tati^, Pliny, and S^l^. The most ancient
use of Circumcision has been related by Herodotus, Di^dor^s, Strabo, Phile
Biblius; and now is rereined by the posterity of Abraham, to wit, not only the
Hebrews, but also the Idumaans, Ismailites, and others. A certain history of
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and Joseph, agreeing with that of Moses, was anciently
extant in Phile Biblius out of Sanchuniath: in Berosus, Hecataeus, Damascenus,
Atrapanus, Epolemus, Demetrius, and partly in that old Author of the aforesaid
Orphean verses; and now also there are some remainden thereof in Justin, out of
Trogus, Pompaeus: And almost in every one of these authors aforenamed, there is
some mention made of Moses and his Acts: more particularly, how he was taken
out o^ the waters, and preserved by Pharaohs daughter, and how the two Tables
was given unto him of God, is plainly set down in those Orphean verses
aforesaid* Add unto these the testimony of Polemon; also what some of the
Egyptians themselves have recorded, to wit, Manethon, Lisimachus, and
Chaerimen, concerning the departingout of Egypt.

Neither will it enter into the heart of any wise man to think that Moses,
(having so many enemies both of the Egyptians; and of other nations, as the
Idumaans, Arabians, and Syrians,) would dare to divulge ought concerning the
beginning of the world, and other ancient things, which either could be
confuced by other more anesent writings, or were repugnant to the
common-received opinion in those times; neither doubtless would he publi^ny
thing touching the affairs in that age, which could be justly gainsaid or
disproved by the testimonies of any then living. Of this Moses there is mention
made by Diodorus (...), Strabo, and Pliny, by Tacitus also a and after all them
by Dionysius Longintus in his book concerning subtilty of speech. Likewise
Iamnes and Mambres that resisted Moses in Egypt are mentioned by the Authors
of the Talmud, by Pliny and Apulesus. Amongst others the Pythagorians speaks
much of the law which was given by Moses, and of the Legal rites. Both Strabo
and Justin out of Trogus give an excellent testimony of the anci^nt Jewish
Religion and Justice; insomuch that here (me thinks) it is needless to produce
any further testimony of such things as are found, or have anciently been
found consenting with the book of the Hebrews, touching (...) and others,
seeing other whosoever gives credit unto Moses, (which to do no man can
without great impudency refuse,) the same must needs confess, that there were
indeed wonderful miracles anciently wrought by God, which is the thing we
here chiefly go about to declare.

As for the miracles of after ages, namely of Elius, Eliseus, and others, none
may think them to be false or counterse it; because in those times when they
(...) wrought, the Jewish Religion was more known to the neighboring nations;
by whom, for the diversity thereof from theirs, it was had in great hatred and
disesteeme, so as if any untruth had been broached therein, they could have
easily then cons^ted the same.

Julian was an enemy as well to the Jews as to the Christians: yet
notwithstanding, the very evidence of history made him confess, that such men
lived amongst the Jews as were ^nspired with the holy Spirit of God; and (...)
f^re (...) on de^ from heaven, upon the sacrifices of Moses and (...) And
verily it is well worth our observation, that amongst the Hebrews there were
not only grievous punishments appointed for such men as did falsely assume to
themselves the prophetical function, but also many Kings and great men, that
might have by that office purchased authority to themselves, and likewise very
many learned men as was Esdras and others, that ever durst arrogate this
dignity, nor any man else, for diverse ages before the times of Jesus.

SECT. XVI.
The same is proved by perdictions.

But more unlikely it is, that so many thousand people should be deluded by
the testimony of a continued public wonder, to wit, the holy Oracle, which
after a resplendent manner shined from the brestplate of the high Priest: The
truth whereof was so strongly believed by all the Jews to have continued until
the destruction of the first Temple, that out of all doubt, their Aneestors had
certain knowledge concerning the same.

Like to this from miracles; there is another argument as forcible and
effectual to prove Gods providence, taken from those predictio^s of future
events; which among the Hebrews were many and manifest. Such was that
prophecy of calamity and desolation that should bes^^ him that did attempt to
reedis^e (...) and that of the overthrow of the Temple at Bethel by a King,
namely by I^siah, foretold above three hundred years before the thing came to
pass. So like wise the very name and chief acts of Cyrus foretold by Esaiah:
the event of Hier usalems siege by the Chald^ant, foreshowne by Iereuslah: So
also Daniels prediction touching the removing of the Empire the Assyrians unto
the Medes and Persians, then from them unto Alexander of Macedon, which
afterward was quartered and divided unto Selencin and other Successors of
Alexander. Likewise what evils the Hebrew^ should sustain of each of these,
but chiefly from that notorious tyrant Antiochus in all being so clear
prophecies that Pei phyr^ himself, comparing here with such Grecian histories
as were extant in his time, could no otherwise tell how to shift then off, than
by saying that those things which were fathered up on Daniel, were written
after such time as they came to, pass which is all one, as if one should deny
that that was written in the time of Augustus which has been punished in
Virgils name, and was always reputed for Virgils work. For there was never
any more scruple made of the former amongst the Helrews than of (...) letter
amongst the Romans. For this purpose also we might rehearse those many dreams
that so exactly have accorded with the events, which to the dreamers were
altogether unknown, as well in themselves as in their causes, so that, without
immodesty they (...) said to proceed from (...) or from any natural caus^^.
The like is said of certain Ghosts. that have not only appeared to the eye,
but also, have vt^^i^^ audible speeches, as is related by such historious (...)
no way euil^^ of superstitious and dulity in that kind.

SECT. XVII.
The objection is answered why miracles are not new to be seen.

NEither let any man here object that such miracles as we speak of, are but
fabulous, because that there are not the like to be seen in these days,
neither the like predictions heard of; For it is a sufficient proose of divine
providence, that such things did come to pass at any ^ime: which being once
granted, it will follow; that God may be thought with as much providence and
wisdom, now to cause them to surcease, as anciently he used the same. Neither
stands it* with equity, that those laws, which were generally ordained and
decreed concerning the natural course of things, and inconstancy of future
events should be violated always, but only at such a time, when either there
was a just cause, as when the worship of the true God was almost banished out
of the world, residing only in a little part thereof, to wit, in Ind^^, where
it necessarily was to be (as it were) fortified with new aids against the
impieries wherewith is was compassed about; or when Christian Religion (whereof
by and by we shall speak more particularly,) was by Gods decree to be
published through out the whole world.

SECT. XVIII.
And that now there is such liberty in offending.

SOme men there are; who beholding the multitudes of iniquities which abound in
the world, are thereby moved to doubt of the divine providenti^^ a chief act
whereof (they think) if there were any such Divine Providence should should
have been to bridle and restrain the wickedness that so abounds. But this is
easily answered, considering that whe^^ God had created man with freedom to
do good and evil, reserving absolute and immutable goodness to himself, it
had not been equity to have thwarted that liberty, by putting a hinderance of
committing evil actions. Howbeit to keep men from sin God uses every kind of
means which is not repugnant to the liberty aforesaid. Such is the ordeining
and publishing of the Law, together with inward and outward admonitions, both
by threats and promises. Nor did ever, the wit of malice and wickedness
prevail to far amongst men, that all kind of government and knowledge of
divine laws: was utterly o^t inguished or a bolished: Neither may those
delinquences which are permitted to be done amongst men, be thought altogether
^^fruitfull^ Since that (as before we (...) we touched) they may be used either
for the punishment of le^d ^ssors themselves; or for the chastisment at of such
as sometimes wander from the way of virtue; or lastly to demonstrate some
worthy parent of patience and c^cy, namely, in such as have made good,
proficiency in the school of piety and virtue. Lastly, even they who for some
season have seemed to cloak and bid^ their faults, are met, with of^ a while,
and ac^ing to the will of God. whom they provoked, by the wickedness of ^ons,
receive the due reward of punishment*

SECT. XIX.
Insomuch that good men are oppressed.

But, and if sometimes there seem to be no punishment at all inflicted upon
profane offenders, and even some good men (which may occasion the weak to be
offended) are sort oppressed by the insolences of the wicked, who many times
make them not only to leader wear some and miserable life, but also to
undergo a disgraceful death: howbeit for all this it cannot be denied, that
divine providence is extended unto humane affairs as before we have proved by
sufficient and evident reasons: but rather (as the wisest sort of men have
thought) we may conclude and argue thus.

SECT. XX.
The same argument is retorted to prove that the soul survives the body.

FOr as much as God has an eye unto all men's actions, and in himself is most
just, suffering such things to come to pass as we see they do; therefore we
^ust expect that there will be ^e future judgment after this ^e, to the end
such notorious ^s may not remain ^punished, nor well deserving (...) be
unrecompenced with due comfort and reward.

SECT. XXI.
Which is proved by tradition.

FVrther to confirm this truth it must necessarily be admitted that the
souls of m^n do survive their bodies, which being a most ancient tradition,
was derived from our very first parents (for from whence else could it
proceed:) almost unto all sorts, specially unto the more civil and tractable
kind of pe^people, as is plain by Homoverses; and by certain Philosophers,
not only of the Grecian but likewise the Druides (...) France, and Brachmans
in Ind^ and by those relations also which many writers have published
concerning the Egyptians and Thracians, and Germans. (...) like manner
touching Gods judgment to come after this life, many things were extant, as
well among the Grecians, as also among the Egyptians and Indians as we learn
out of Strabo, Diogenes, Laertius, and Plutarch, whereas to may be added that
old tradition of the consumption of the world by fire, which was anciently
found in Hystastis and (...) Sybals, and now also in Qvid (...) Lucas. Yea,
when the Ca^a^ America, and other foreign (...) were first discovered, this
(...) opinion of the immortality (...) and the last judgment was found among
the inha^ there.

SECT. XXII.
Against which no contrary reason (...) can be brought.

NEither can there any reason in nature ^ee given (...) so* ancient and common
received (...). For (...) ^ything that we can behold in this world comes to an
end, either by corruption through the opposition of some more forcible contrary
ag^nt* as coldness in any subject by reason of the more prevalent power and
intension of heat; or through the perishing of that subject, where upon i^
depends, as the quantity of the glass, when the glass is broken or through
the defect and de^^liction of the efficient cause, (...) light by the
Sunsetting. No^ none of all these can be said (...) happen unto the soul of
man* Not the first, because there is nothing that is contrary to the soul nay,
it self is of such a peculi^^ nature, that it is apt to receiv^ such things as
are contrary between themselves, at the sam^ time together; that is, after
Spiritual and intellectual manner. Not the second, for there is not any
subject whereon the nature of the soul has any dependence: if there were, the
same in all probability, should be some humane body: but that this cannot be
it is manifest, because the powers and abilities of the bodies are wearied in
their operations; ^ut the activity of the soul is ever subject to weariness:
likewise the powers of the body are ^^paired and weakened by the ^^dundancy or
excess of the ob^^ct, as the sense of seeing by the ^ull splendour and bright
face of ^he Sunn^: but the more excel^ent objects that the Soul is con^ersant
about, as about universals and things abstracted from ^ensible and corrupt
matter, it ^eceives thereby the more perfe^tion. Again, the powers that de^end
upon the body are only busied about such things as are limited to particular
time and ^lace, according, to the nature and property of the body it self: but
the mind has a more noble object, and ascends to the contemplation of that
which is infinite and eternal: wherefore then seeing that the soul depends
not upon the body in it is operation, much less does it in its essence: for we
danoor discorne the ^ture of invisible things other wise than by their
operation Neither is the third way of corruption^ incident to the s^ there
being no efficic^o cause fr^^ which the soul can always proceed: Thus we
cannot say t^ par^nti ^re, ^in^^ that common their children outlive them,
(...) if we will needs make some c^ from which the soul proceed then we can
imagine no oth^ save the universal cause of (...) things, which as in respect
o^ (...) power, is never deficient, so in respect of its will to be defecti^
that is, for the Almighty to (...) the ruin and destraction of t^ soul, no
man can ever be able (...) prove.

SECT. XXIII.
Many reasons may be alleged for it.

NAY there are many strong arguments for the contrary, ^ly, the dominion given
to unto man over his own actions; ^he natural desire that is in him ^o be
immortal; the comfort o^ ^ood conscience for well done ^eeds, though such were
accom^anied with much difficulty; and on the contrary, the sting of ^gnawing
conscience at the re^embrance of ungodly and ^icked actions, especially when
^he hour of death approaches unto the wicked, who do then ^eeme more
sensible of an immi^ent judgment; and this gnawing ^orme of conscience the
most ^rophane wretches and wicked ^yrants in the world could never ^tterly
mortifi^ and destroy in them, no not then when they most of all desired, as
diverse examples do testify.

SECT. XXIIII.
Whence it follows that the e^^ of all shall be man's happine^ after this life.

SEeing then the soul is of (...) nature that in it self has (...) ground or
cause of its own corruption; and seeing also thi^ God by many signs and
token^ has declared, that it is his wi^ the same soul should survi^ the body;
what more noble (...) can be propounded to man tha^ the state of eternal
happiness* which in effect is the same that Plato, and the Pythagorea^^ spoke
of, saying, that it were goo^ for man if he could become mo^^ like unto God.

SECT. XXV.
which to obtain men must get the true Religion.

NOw what this happiness is, and how it is to be attaine^ ^en may find out by
probable ^iectures: but if any thing concerning that matter be revealed ^y God
in Scripture, the same ^ust be held for a most certain and undoubted truth:
which ^nce that Christian Religion ^emes to pretend above others, (...) shall
be examined in the next ^ooke whether or no men ought ^o give credit thereunto,
and as^uredly build their faith thereon.

The second Book OF THE TRVNESSE OF Christian Religion.
SECT. I.
To prove the truth of Christian Religion.

IT is not our purpose in this second book to handle all the points of
Christianity; out after our hearty prayers made to Christ the King of Heaven,
that he would grant us the assistance of his holy Spirit, whereby we may be
enabled for such a work, we shall endeavor to make it appear that Christian
Religion is the most true and certain Religion of all the rest, namely as
follows.

SECT. II.
Here is showen that Jesus lived.

IT is a truth most sted fastly professed by all the Christian^ that breath
upon the face of the whole earth, that Jesus of Nazreth then lived in Judea
when Tiberius was Emperor of the Romans: which is acknowledged not only by
Christians, but also by all the Jews that ever lived heretofore, or yet
survive. Nay the very Pagan writers, the is, such as are neither of the Jewish
nor Christian Religion, namely, Suetonises, Tacitus, pliny the younger and many
more after them, do testify the same.

SECT. III.
And was put to an ig^ious death.

MOreover all be it such a kind of death might be thought inglorious and
dishonorable to their Lord and Master, yet all Christians do confess that
this same Iesis was crucified by Pontius Pilate governor of Judea. The Jews
also do the ^ike, though they cannot be ignorant how that they become most
odious to those Christians ^n whose dominions they live, because of this murder
committed by Pilate, whereof their ancestors were the chief authors; as the
heathenish writers have also recorded the same. Yea these acts of Pilate were
extant a long time after, whereunto the Christians did sometimes make their
appeal. And further, neither did Julian himself, nor any other adversaries of
Christianity ever make doubt hereof: So that hence it appears, that there was
never any more true and certain story than this; which (we see) may be
confirmed, not only by the testimonies of some few men but also by the
approbation of several nations otherwise disagreeing and jarring among
themselves.

SECT. IV.
Yet afterward was worshipped by by prudent and godly men.

ALL which though it was most true of Christ's ignominious death, yet we see
ho^ that thorowout the remo^ parts of the world he is worshipped as Lord; and
that not in our days only, but ever since the time that this was done, to
wit, ever since the reign of Nero the Emperor, when many people that
professed this worship of Christ, and Christian Religion were for that cause
tortured and put to death, as Tacitus and others do witness.

SECT. V
The cause whereof was, for that in his life time there were miracles done by
him.

NOw among such as professed Christianity there were many judicious and learned
men: For (to say nothing now of the Jews) there was Sergius governor of
Cyprus, Dionysius Areopagita, Polycarpus, Justinius, Irenaeus, Athenagoras,
Origin, Tertullian, Clemens Alexandrinus, with diverse others; who almost all
being broughtup in other religions, neither could have any hopes of wealth or
preferment in Christianity, yet became worshippers of this man that died so
ignominious a death, and exhibited due honor to him as God: no other reason
whereof can be given than this that moved them so to do; namely, because they
like prudent men in a matter of greatest moment, by diligent inquiry found the
truth and ground of that same which was bruted abroad concerning the miracles
wrought by Christ; as the healing of many that were sore diseased with his word
only, the restoring of sight to him that was borne blind, the feeding of many
thousands with some few Loaves of bread, the restoring of some to life again
that were dead, and many other such like wonderful works: The truth whereof
neither Celsus nor Julian when they writ against Christians durst dare to deny:
but it was confessed both by them, and also most plainly by the Hebrew doctors
that were Authors of the Talmnd.

SECT. VI.
Which miracles were not wrought either by the help of nature, or assistance
of the devil; but merely by the divine power of God.

THat theft wondrous works were not wrought by any natural power it is
manifest, because they were called wonders and miracles. For it is not possible
in nature that any grievous diseases and infirmities should be cured merely
by a man's voice, or by the virtue of a touch, and that even upon a sudden.
And it is likely if such works had been done by the power of nature only,
then the same would have been made known and revealed, either by those that
were professed enemies of Christ while he lived upon earth, or by those that
have been adversaries of his Gospel since his death.

By the same argument we may prove that such works came not to pass through
the power and deceit of Satan, or by any diabolical enchantments, because they
were done openly in the sight of all the people: amongst whom diverse of the
learned sort did malign and ^ear^ ill will unto Christ, not without envy,
observing all that he did. Add further, that the same works were often
iterated, and the effects thereof were not transitory but permaneant and
durable. All which being duly pondered, it must needs follow (as the Jews have
confessed) that these works proceeded from a more than natural or humane
power, that is, from some good or evil Spirit. That they proceeded not from
any evil Spirit may be proved, because that the doctrine of Christ, (for the
confirmation whereof these works were wrought,) was quite opposite and
contrary to bad Spirits. For it prohibits the worshipping of evil Angels, and
disswades men from all unclearnesse of affections and manners, wherein such
Spirits are much delighted. And this is also plain, for that wheresoever the
doctrine of the Gospel is received and established, there follows the ruin
and downfall of Idols, the contempt and detestation of magical arts, together
with a serious hatred of all diabolical worship, as being a thing contrary and
repugnant to the worship of the only, true GOD.

Neither is it, to be thought that any wicked Spirit is so ignorant and
foolish, as to effect and often bring to pass things that are causes of its
own hurt and disgrace, and no way conducing to its honor or benefit. Besides
it stands no way with the wisdom or goodness of God himself to suffer so
harmless and innocent men, such as feared him, to be deceived by the
delusion of devils: and such were the first followers of Christ, as is plain
by their innocent life, and by the many calamities which they endured for
conserence sake.

But on the other side, if thou affirm that those works of Christ proceeded
from some good Spirits which are inferior to God; in so saying thou do
confess that the same works were well pleasing unto God, and did tend to the
honor of his name; forasmuch as good Spirits do nothing but what is
acceptable and glorious unto God. To say no more then, some of Christ's works
there were so miraculous, that they might seem to have God himself for the
author of them, and could not have been done but by the immediate finger of an
omnipotent power, as specially, the restoring diverse persons from death unto
life again.

Now God does not produce any miracle, nor suffer any such wonders to be
wrought without just cause: For it becomes not a wise Law giver to forsake and
depart from his own laws, unless upon some good and weighty reason. Now no
other cause of these things can be given than that which was alleged by
Christ himself, namely, that hereby his doctrine might be verified and
confirmed. And doubtless they that were spectators of his works, could
conceive no other reason thereof: For since amongst those spectators and
beholders of his miracles, there were (as was said) many godly men, piou^ly and
devoutly affected, it is horrible impiety to imagine, that God did work these
things only to delude and deceive them. And this was one or the only cause
why very many of the Jews who lived about the time of Jesus, even such as
could not be persuaded to relinquish or omit one jot of Moses his Law, did
acknowledge that this Jesus was a Doctor or Master sent from heaven.

SECT. VII.
Christ's resurrection proved by credible reasons.

BEsides the miracles that Christ wrought to confirm his doctrine, another
argument may be taken from his wonderful resurrection to life again, after
that he was crucified, dead, and buried;

For the Christians of all ages and Countries allege the same, not only for a
truth, but also as the most strong sortresse and chiefest foundation of their
faith; which could not be, unless those that first taught Christianity, did
persuade their auditors that the thing was so for certain; And yet they could
not induce any wise man to the belief hereof, unless they could verily
affirm, that themselves were eyewitnesses of this matter. For without such an
ocular testimony no man of wisdom and judgment would willingly give credit
thereunto; specially in such perilous and dangerous times as then were. But
that this was their constant assertion, both their own books, and other
writings do testify. For out of their books it appears, that they appealed
unto five hundred witnesses that had beheld Jesus after he was risen from the
dead. Now it is not the fashion of liars and dissemblers to appeal to so great
a number of witnesses: Neither could it possibly so fall out that so many men
should agree and conspire together to bear false witness. Or suppose there
had been no other witnesses, save those twelve known Apostles, the first
publishers of Christian doctrine, yet this had been sufficient. No man is a
leasing-munger for God-a-mercy. Any honor for their lying they could not
expect, in regard that all kind of dignities and promotions did then belong
unto the Pagans or Jews, from whom they received nothing but reproach and
ignominy. Neither could they hope for any wealth and commodity, because this
profession was oftentimes punished with the loss of goods and possessions: or
if it was not; yet the Gospel could not be taught by them sincerely, unless
they omitted or neglected all sollicitous and anxious care for temporal
commodity. Neither could the hope of any other worldly profit move them to fit
or utter untruths; seeing that the very preaching of the Gospel did expose
them to labors, hunger, thirst, stripes, and imprisonments.

To get credit and reputation only among their own Country men was not so
much worth that they poor innocent men, (being such as in their life and
doctrine abhorred losty mindedness,) should therefore run upon so great
inconveniences. Neither again could they have any hope for the propagation of
their doctrine, w^^ was opposed, both by corupt covetous nature, and by the
greatness of them that were in authority, unless they had been some way
animated and encouraged by the divine promise of God.

And further, this fame or reputation, whatsoever it was, was not likely to
continue for ever; they could not promise to themselves that it would be
perpetual, seeing that God (purposely concealing his counsel concerning the
end and destruction of the world) has left the time thereof doubtful, as
being always imminent at hand, which the writings of the Christians that lived
in those times, and of those that succeeded the^ do most plain^^y witness. It
remains therefore, ^f they lied that they had for the defense of their
Religion: how bent this cannot justly be laid against them, if the thing be
rightly considered. For either they ^did sincerely believe that this Religion
which they professed was the true Religion, or else they were of a contrary
mind. If they did not believe it to be true; nay if they thought not that it
was absolutely the best, they would never have made choice hereof, and refused
other Religions far more safe and commodious. Nay further, though they
conceived it to be most true, yet they would not have professed it, unless
they had been fully persuaded, that the profession there of was necessary;
specially, for that they might have easily foreseen, and partly they could
tell by experience what troops of men were exposed to death for this
profession which without just cause to occasion was no better than plain
robbery or murder.

But if we say, they believed that this Religion was most true and the very
best, and altogether to be professed, and that after the death of their Lord
and Master: why surely, that could no way be so, if their Masters promise
concerning his resurrection had deceived them and not proved true. For that had
been enough to have un-faith't a sound Christian, and made the foundation of
his hope to have tottered.

Moreover, all sorts of Religion, specially Christianity, altogether prohibits
lying and bearing of false witness in divine things: wherefore they could not
for the love of Religion, principally such a religion, be induced to tell
untruths. Besides these men were of an upright conversation; their life was
spotless and unblameable even in the judgment of their adversaries; and
nothing could be objected against them, save their honest simplicity, which
verily is not wont to use lying and dissimulation. Nay, there were none among
these primitive Christians (whereof we speak,) who did not suffer grievous
torments for professing that Jesus was risen: and many of them were put unto
most exquisite pains of death for bearing testimony of the same. Now indeed it
is possible for some man out of a wilful pre-conceived opinion, to endure such
misery; but it is utterly incredible and unlikely that any one, much less so
many should be willing to suffer so great calamity for believing an untruth;
and that which they knew to be such an untruth as the belief thereof could in
no wise do them any good.

Besides, that these were not mad men both their conversation and their
writings do abundantly testify. Likewise what is spoken of them, may also be
said of Paul, who openly taught that he saw Christ sitting in heaven: who also
was not inferior to any in the Jewish Religion; nor might he have wanted
dignities and preferments if he would have followed the footsteps of his
Fathers:

Whereas on the contrary, by taking upon him the profession of Christianity,
he became liable to the hatred and malignity of his kins-folkes, and thereupon
was to undertake hard labors, dangerous and toilsome travels, and last of all
to undergo a disgraceful death and torment.

SECT. VIII.
Answer to the objection that the resurrection seems impossible.

SVch and such testimonies no man can disprove or gainsay, unless some will
reply, saying, ^ch a thing perhaps might be, ^ut it seems improbable or
im^ossible: and this (as they say) ^mplyes a contradiction. Howbeit that cannot
be affirmed of his matter. It might indeed, if ^ne could say that one and the
^lfe same man lived and died at ^e self same time: But that a ^an may be
restored from death (...) life, namely, by the power and virtue of him who
first gave life and being unto man, I see no reason why it should be accoun^ed
for a thing impossible.

Neither has it been thought impossible by wise men; Hence we find in
Plato, that the same thing happened to Eris an Armenian; The like is related of
a certain woman by Heraclide^ a Philosopher of Pontus, of Aristoeus by
Herodotus; and of another by Plutarch: all which, (whether true or false) do
show that in the opinion of learned and wise men the thing was conceived to be
possible.

SECT. IX.
The resurrection of Jesus being granted, the truth of his doctrine is
confirmed.

SInce then, as has been showen, it is not to be thought a thing impossible
for Christ to have been restored to life again: seeing also that this very
Christ, (as both his Countrymen and others do confess) did publish and preach
a new doctrine warranted by divine au (...) it follows therefore, that this
^me doctrine must be true, and ^ertaine. For it stands not with divine justice
and wisdom to beautify and adorn him after ^o excellent a manner, who should
utter an untruth in so ^ighty abusinesse: Specially, considering that Christ a
little before his death did foretell unto his Countrymen what death ^ee should
dye, and how he should be revived again; ad^ing further, that all these
things should come to pass for the establishing and confirming the Truth of
his doctrine.

Thus far touching those arguments which are taken from ^or of fact: in the
next place ^et us descend to such as are taken from the nature or quality of
his doctrine.

SECT. X.
Christian Religion preferred before all others.

IT is a most certain truth, that either all kind of divine worship
whatsoever must be rejected and utterly banished from among men, (which impiety
will never enter into the heart of any one that can believe there is a God that
governes all things; and with all considers how man is endued with excellency
of understanding, and liberty to choose what is morally good or evil; as also
how that in himself there is matter both of reward and punishment;) or else
this Religion is to be admitted and approved of for the very best: not only in
regard of the outward testimonies of works and miracles aforesaid; but also in
consideration of such inward and essential properties as are agreeing
thereunto: namely, because there is not, neither ever was there any other
Religion in the whole world, that can be imagined more honorable for
excellency of reward, more absolute and perfect for precepts, or more admirable
for the manner accordding to which it was commanded to be propagated and
divulged.

SECT. XI.
For excellency of reward.

FOr to begin with the reward that is at the end propounded to man, which
though it be the last in f^tion and execution, yet is it the first in his
intention: If we consider the institution of the Jewish Religion by the hand
of Moses, and the plain or express covenant of the Law, we shall find
nothing there promised save the welfare and happiness of this life: as namely,
a fruitful land, abundance of corn and victual, victory over their enemies,
soundness of body, length of days, the comfortable blessing of a hopeful
issue, and surviving posterity, and the like. For if there were any thing
besides, it was involved in dark shadows, requiring a leare and wise
understanding for the right manifestation and discreet apprehension thereof:
Which indeed was the cause why many (in particular the Sadduces, who professed
themselves to be followers and observers of Moses his law,) had no hope of
enjoying any happiness after this life.

As for the Grecians, such as received their learning from the Chaldeans and
Egyptians, what conceit or opinion soever they had of future w^l-f^rt and f^l
city, yet they spoke thereof only after a doubtful and ambiguous manner, as
appears by the disputations of Socrates in Tusties works, in Seneca, and
others. And the arguments they produce for them are grounded upon
uncertainties, proving no more the happiness of a man than of a beast: Which
while s^ of them observed, it was no wonder if they imagined, that souls were
translated and conveyed from ment^ beast^, and again from beasts into men.

But because this opinion was not confirmed by any testimonies, or grounded
upon certain reason, (it being undeniable that there is some and proposed to
man's actions,) therefore others were induced to think, that virtue was the end
or reward of men's endeavors* and that a wise man were happy enough, even though
he were put into that tormenting brazen Bull made by Phalaris. Howbeit this
fancy was justly distastefull and improbable to another sort, who saw well
enough that man's happiness and chiefest welfare could not consist in any thing
that included or was accompanied with perils, troubles, torment and death
(unless we had rather follow the sound of words than the sense of things:)
Wherefore they placed man's chiefest happiness in such things as were
delightful and pleasing to sense. But yet this opinion also was disproved and
sufficiently confuted by many, as being prejudicial to all honesty, the seeds
whereof are rooted in our hearts by nature: as also because it makes man, (who
is borne to contemplate heaven and heavenly matters,) to be no better, if not
worse than a beast, that pores only upon earthly things.

With these and such like uncertainties and doubtings was mankind distracted
at that time when Christ brought in the true knowledge of the right end: who
promised unto his followers not only eternity without all sorrow and
tribulation, but also such a life hereafter, as shall be accomplished with
endless joy and happiness: and that not of one part of man alone, to wit, of
his soul, (the felicity whereof after this life, partly by probable
conjecture, and partly from tradition, was hoped for before) but also of his
whole body and soul together. For as the body by divine appointment becomes
subject and liable to grievances, hurt, calamity, and vexation being united
with the soul; ^o likewise ought it to be made jo ynt partaker of the
recompense of reward. Now the reward and promised joys are not to be thought
of small value or little worth, like to the meat, or good cheer and dainty
fare wherewith the carnal Jews seed their gaping hopes; or like to the
sleshly voluptuousnes of carnal copulation, which the Turks expect to enjoy
after death: for both these sensualities are proper to this frail life, at the
bell being but helps or remedies of mortality, the former whereof conducing
after some sort for the preservation of every particular man or beast in
present being: and the latter for the continuation of the same creatures by
succession in their kind. But by the happiness aforesaid our bodies shall be
endued with constant vigor, agility, strength, and more than a starlike
beauty. In the soul there shall be an understanding without error, a beholding
of God himself and his divine providence, or whatsoever is now hid from us.
The will shall be freed from all turbulency of passions, busied about nothing but
the sight, the admiring and praising of the Almighty. In a word there shall be
joy and tranquillity, and all things, excellent beyond compare, such as we
cannot possibly conceive or apprehend in this mortal life.

SECT. XII.
Answer to an objection, that bodies once dead cannot be revived again.

BEsides the doubt but lately answered, there is another difficulty objected
against this doctrine of the resurrection: namely, how can it be possible for
humane bodies once dissolved into dust and corruption ever to be united and
jointed again? For answer we say, that this is not impossible: for seeing it
is granted by the most part of Philosophers, that the same substance or matter
of things, however diversely changed or altered, does remain still capable of
diverse forms; who can say then that the diverse parts of that matter whereof
humane bodies consisted, though the same be fan^ and wide a sunder, are
unknown to God; or that he has not power to recollect and join them together
again; or that he cannot do in this his world, like Chymicks in their
furnaces and ve^sels, gather into one, and r^i^^ things of the same nature?
Besides, we see in plants and living creatures, though the ^ormes seem to be
changed, and the subject be resolved into seed, its principle; yet the virtue
thereof remains, and the same subject afterward revives again. Neither is it
a hard matter to untie that knot, and answer ^ho doubt concerning humane bodies
which after corruption and transmutation become food for beasts and cattle;
then again the same beasts afterward become food for men: for we must know,
that the greatest portion of such things as we eat is not converted into
integrall parts of our bodies; but either the same is turned into excrements,
or becomes additions and humors of the body, as Fleame and Choler; yea much
of that which becomes our nourishment is wasted away either by diseases, or by
inward natural heat, or by the air about us. All which being so; he that so
carefully regards all kinds of bruit beasts that none of them perish, the same
God with a more special providence can also provide for humane bodies, that
though by tra^tation they become me^t for other men, yet they shall no more be
converted into the substance of those that eat them, than a^e poiso^s or
physical po^ions into the nature of such as receive them: And the rather,
because it seems unnatural for man to feed upon humane flesh. Or suppose this
which we say were false, and that something were added to the body, which must
needs afterward be diminished; yet thence it will not follow that the same body
does not remain, seeing that in this life there happen greater mutations than
so. Thus the Butterfly may be in a worm, and the substance of herbs or wine in
some small diminitive thing, whence they may be re-restored to their former
just magnitude and existence. Wherefore since all these things, and such like
are possible, there is no cause why any should think it impossible for humane
bodies after death to be revived again: forasmuch also as diverse learned men,
to wit, Zoroaster among the Chaldeans, Theopompus among the Peripatetik^s, and
almost all the Stoics did not only grant the possibility hereof, but were
assuredly persuaded it would come to pass indeed.

SECT. XIII.
The excellency of (...) precepts given for the worship of God.

THe second thing wherein Christian Religion excels all others that are, or
ever were, or can be invented, is the great holiness of laws and precepts, as
well in matters pertaining to the worship of God, as likewise in things
concerning our neighbor.

The Pagans in their divine service are given to more confidence and credulity
than truth, as Porphyry shows at large, and some late navigations have
discovered. For with them it is a common received opinion, that the Gods may be
appeased by the sacrificing of man's blood; which in humane custom was not
abolished, either by the great learning of the Grecians, or by the laws of the
Romans, as appears by those oblations offered unto Bacchus and Jupiter. The
hidden and most holy mysteries of the Goddess Ceres, and of Father. Bacchus,
being once looked into and revealed, were found to be full of all kind of
wantonness and uncleanness, as Clemens Alex. and others have shown at large.
Those Festival days consecrated to the honor of the Gods, were celebrated
with such solemnity of Pageants, and wanton shows, that grave Ca^o was a
shamed to be present at them. But in the Jewish Religion there was nothing
unseemely, nothing dishonest or unlawful. Howbeit to the end the people that
were prone to Idolatry might not decline or fall back from the same true
religion, it was loaded and burdened with many precepts, even concerning such
things as in themselves were neither good nor evil; such were the sacrificing
of beasts, the Circumcision, an exact rest from labor upon the Sabbath, and
the prohibition of eating some kind of meats; come of which customs the
Turks have borrowed from them; adding further a prohibition for drinking wine.

But the Christian Religion teaches, that as God is a most pure Spirit, So is
he to be worshipped with pureness of mind and Spirit, together with such
works a^ their own nature without a precept are most laudible and honest.
Thus the professors thereof are not to circumcise the flesh, but their carnal
lusts and desires: they are not to keep holi-day and refrain from all kind of
work whatsoever, but only from that which is unlawful. Nor are we to offe^
unto God the blood and fat of beasts; but if need be, even our own blood for
the testimony of the truth. And what bounty or liberality soever we bestow
upon poor and necessito^s persons, the same we must think is given to God
himself. We need not now abstain from any kind of meat or drink, but may
and ought to use them both with moderation, so that our health be not thereby
impaired; sometimes notwithstanding subduing our bodies to our minds by
fasting, that the same thereby may be the better fitted and prepared for more
cheerful devotion. But the chief point of this Religion consists in a holy
confidence, whereby we do wholly yield our selves in obedience unto God, and
rely upon his promises by a steadfast and lively faith, whence arises both hope
and true love of God and our neighbor. And hereupon it is that we do observe
his Commandments, not after a servile manner for fear of punishment; but that
we may please him, and that he may out of his goodness be unto us a loving
father and gracious rewarder.

Moreover we are taught to pray, not for riches or honors, or such things as
do little good to any that wish for them: but in our prayers we must first
and and chiefly crave that which tends to Gods glory; then such necessaries
for our selves as are requisite to the sustaining of nature, resting upon Gods
providence for temporal affairs, being not too much solicitous how the same
shall fall out, but very careful and desirous of such things as lead us to
eternal life; and that by petitioning pardon for sins bypast, together with
the assistance of Gods holy Spirit, that we may be preserved hereafter in the
way of godliness against all perils and temptations whatsoever.

This is the true worship of God in Christian religion, than the which nothing
can be invented more honorable for the Almighty.

SECT. XIIII.
Concerning the offices of humanity which we owe unto our neighbor.

LIke to these are the duties we owe unto our neighbor. As for Mahumets
Religion, it was hatched in wars, it breaths nothing but wars, it is
propagated by wars, and hostility. Aristotle condemns the laws and statutes
of the Lace demonians, which were so much applauded among the Grecians, even by
the Oracle of Apollo: Yet the same Aristotle allows and approves of war
against the Barbarians for a thing natural, whereas indeed the contrary rather
is true, namely, that by nature there ought friendship and amity to be
established in all societies of men. For what is more cruel than to delight in
murder, or in a bravery to vaunt and triumph in the slaughter of Nations, as in
some glorious exploit? Yet such was the custom anciently amongst the Romans,
that none was dignified with the title of any honor, unless they had deserved
and purchased the same in wars, which notwithstanding were apparently unjust,
as themselves confess of the wars against Sardinia and Ciprus. And indeed
generally amongst the heathen it was accounted no disgrace, no crime or offense
to pilfer and spoil those that were not within their own dominions, as we
find it recorded by worthy Historians. Aristotle and Cicero made the desire of
revenging a part of virtue. It was a fine sport and public recreation for
Pagans to behold swordplayers slash and wound one another: and to expose their
children was an ordinary thing with them: But the Hebrews had better laws and
more holy discipline, though notwithstanding they bare a mortal hatred
aagainst all those that differed from them in opinion, as at this day appears
by their prayers that they make against us Christians.

And yet again, their law suffered them to render like for like, and to have
equal recompense for any hurt offered: and thereby any man was permitted in
his own person to kill, or be revenged upon him that had slain any one of
his kindred. But the Commandment and law of Christ forbids us to revenge any
kind of injury whatsoever, whether it be offered in word or deed: that so we
may not seem to allow that wickedness in our selves, which we condemn in
others. Nay we ought to be so far from malice, that on the contrary we
must be kind and well-affectioned unto all: not only (though chiefly) to good
men, but also to the very wicked, like to God our heavenly father, who makes
the Sun and Stars, the air and winds, the rain and other common benefits to
descend upon all sorts of men, good and bad.

SECT. XV.
Of the bond of Wedlock.

THe bond or unity of man and wife, whereby mankind is propagated is a thing
most holy and honorable by our law; which being neglected by the Pagan; is no
marvel if they talked of the whoredoms and adulteries of those Gods they
worshipped, by whose examples they thought it not unlawful for one man to have
the filthy use of another, as (...) is reported of Ganymed and Antinous: which
filthiness at this day is ordinarily practiced among the Turks, the Sinanses
and other Gentiles as a thing with them not unlawful.

The Philosophers of Greece seem to be a little more modest ^n laboring to
give an honest ^ame to so lewd a crime; and indeed but a little: for what else
is that which the best of them commends touching the community of women, but
even to make one common stews or bawdy house of the whole commonwealth? To
avoid which ^urpitude and confusion, there is, ^s it were, a kind of wedlock
among the bruit beasts. How much more requisite is this league or bond for man
so holy a creature, to the end there may not be a mingle mangle of issues, or
the natural and mutual love of parents and children be utterly extinguished?
The law of the Hebrews prohibits all kind of uncleanness, yet tolerates a man
to have many wives, and in some cases licenseth the husband to put away his
wife: which the Mahumitans at this day use to do; like to the old Grecians and
Lacine^, (yea, Cato himself,) who were wont to lend their wives one to another
for a season.

But the most perfect Law of Christ strikes at the very root of this sin,
that lies lurking in the heart of men; accounting him that only casts a want
on eye upon a woman, to be guilty of committing adultery with her, at least in
thought, namely, before him that sees and judges the hearts of al men. And
because all true friendship is and ought to be constant and indissoluble,
therefore by this law it is appointed that husband and wise be yoke-fellowes in
a cohabitation and union of bodies and minds; which doubtless will be more
convenient and behoofefull for the education of their children. The Germans,
Romans, and some other people among the heathen were content with one wife
only. The Christians also follow this custom, to the end that loving
affection between man and wife may be mutually preserved, together with a
good success of affairs in domestical government under one head, that so
many wives cause not strife and contention amongst their several children.

SECT. XVI.
Touching the use of temporal things.

IN the next place let us come to the use of goods and temporal commodities,
concerning which we find, that amongst some heathenish Gentiles, to wit, the
Egyptians and Lacedaemonians, men were permitted to filch and steal. And
herein they seemed not unlike the Romans of old for robbings and deprecations,
of whom their Orator spoke; saying, that if every man had his own, there were
many that might lodge in poor cotages.

Now the Hebrews had no such custom; yet their Law, that it might seem more
easy, permitted them to take usury of strangers; amongst other things
promising the reward of riches^o them that observed the same law.

But the Law of Christianity forbids not only all kind of injustice, but also
it prohibits us to take any carking and excessive care for these transitory
things, because our mind is not able diligently and duly to attend unto two
several matters, either of which were enough to take up a whole man, and
oftentimes drives us into contrary thoughts and odd quandaries. Besides, the
excessive care both for getting and keeping riches is accompanied with a kind
of bondage and anxiety, which blunts all the pleasure and comfort that might
arise from a moderate desire and hope of commodity: And such things as nature
requires are not many or hard to be obtained, for nature is content with a
little: yet if God bestow any overplus upon us, so that we have some what to
spare, we are not commanded to cast the same into the Sea, as some
Philosophers unadvised have done; neither must we keep any thing unprofitably,
or lavish it out wastfully; bur rather therewith we ought to supply the wants
and ^xigences of other men, either by giving, or by lending to them that would
borrow: For thus it becomes us to think that we are not Lords and Masters of
the things we enjoy, but as stewards and Dispensers under God Almighty, the
Father and Master of all: knowing also that a benefit well bestowed is a
treasureful of good hope, which neither the wickedness of thieves, nor any
casualty can diminish.

A rare example of this true and unfeigned liberality we find in the primitive
Christians, who sent relief out of Macedonia and Achaiah to succor them that
lived in Palestine, as if the whole world had been but one family. And here in
the Law of Christ it is provided, that no hope of recompense or honor should
blemish and disgrace our bounty, which would be little set by in Gods sight,
if it were not wholly referred to his glory.

And that no man may cloak his covetousness (as many use to do,) by fearing
they shall have need of wealth when they are old, or that some mischance may
fall out which will drive them into poverty, therefore the Law promises a
special care for such as keep the commandments: And that they may be the
more animated and encouraged, they are put in mind of Gods providence in
feeding the wild beasts and cattle, in preserving the grass and flowers of
the field. Now it were a shame for us, and dishonorable to so good and
powerful a God, not to believe more than we see or have a pawn for.

SECT. XVII.
Of swearing.

THere are some laws that forbid perjury, but this law of Christ will have us
to refrain from all kind of swearing, unless we be lawfully called thereunto
upon necessity. Nay such faithfulness and truth should always be in our words
and actions, that there never needed any oath be exacted of us.

SECT. XVIII.
Of other matters.

MOreover there can nothing be found commendable and praiseworthy, either in
the Philosophical writings of the Grecians, or in the sayings of the Hebrews
and other nations, which is not either expressly or vertually contained in the
precepts of Christianity, being established by divine authority: as namely
concerning modesty, temperance, goodness, honesty, prudence, the office of
Magistrates and subjects, Parents and children, Masters and servants, man and
wife between themselves; and chiefly the eschewing those vices which among
many of the Grecians and Romans went under the name and color of honesty; such
were the desires of honors and glory. And to be short, admirable is the
substantial brevity of these precepts, namely comprehended in these few word,
that we ought to love God above all things, and our neighbors as our selves,
that is, we must do as we would be done unto.

SECT. XIX.
Answer to an objection touching the controversies abounding among Christians.

But here peradventure some will object against this which we speak concerning
the excellency of Christianity, and tell us of the great diversity of opinions
amongst Christians, whereupon there have sprung so many sects and factions as
do now abound in the Church.

For answer whereunto, we may observe that the like diversity of opinions
happens almost in all kind of Arts and sciences, to wit, partly through the
weakness of humane apprehension, and partly because man's judgment is hindered
and entangled with many employments. Howbeit this variety of opinions is
contained within certain bounds and limits: for there are some common
principles whereof it is agreed upon by all, and whereupon they ground their
doubts. Thus in Mathematics it is questioned, whether a circle may be made
quadrangular; but not whether after the taking away of equal parts from equal,
the residue will not remain equal. The same may be seen in natural
Philosophy, also in the art of Physic, and in other disciplines. In like
manner the difference of opinions that is amongst Christians does not hinder
the common consent and agreement in those fundamental principles, for which
chiefly we have commended Christian Religion; the certainty whereof appears
in this, namely that those which out of mutual and deadly hatred sought all
the occasion and matter of contention they could, durst not for all that
proceed so far, as to deny that these precepts were commanded by Christ: no
not even those that refuse to frame their lives and actions according to that
rule.

Howbeit if there be any such as will contradict this that we say, the same
may be likened to those Philosophers that denied the snow to be white: For as
these are confuted by sense, so are those convinced by the unanimous consent of
all Christian nations, also by the many books that the first professors of
Christian Religion, and they which followed, and diverse succeeding Doctors have
written: as also by the testimony of them that have witnessed their faith in
Christ by their death. For in the opinion of any indifferent Judge the same
must needs be reputed the true doctrine of Christ, which so many have
successively acknowledged and professed, like as we are persuaded the same was
the doctrine of Socrates which we read in Plato and Xenophon; as also that of
Zene the Philosopher, which we find held by the Stoi ks.

SECT. XX.
The excellency of Christian Religion is further proved from the dignity of the
author.

THe third thing wherein we said Christian Religion excelled all others that
are, or can be thought of, was the manner whereby it was delivered and
divulged. Where first we shall speak of the Author.

They that were authors of the wisdom among the Grecians, confessed that they
could not allege almost any certainties in their doctrine, because (quoth
they) truth lies hid in a deep pit; and our minds are no less dazeled in the
contemptation of divine things, than the eyes of an owl in beholding the
bright shining of the Sun: Besides, there was none among them but was guilty
of some vice: For some were flatterers of Princes, others addicted to bawdery,
and wantonness, and a third sort to malapart boldness. A great argument of a
general envy among them was their contention about words and matters of small
or no moment. In their devotions they were cold and heartlesse: For those that
did believe there was one God, neglected his honor, and worshipped such things
as they knew were no Gods; making that only the rule of their Religion which
was commonly received and practiced in public. Touching the reward of
godliness they determined nothing for certain, as appears by the last
(farewell) disputation of Socrates at his death.

Mahumet, another Author of another Religion far dispersed in these times,
throughout his whole life was inclined to lust, and sensuality, as his own
followers cannot deny: neither did he leave any testimony or assurance whereby
his promise of such a reward as consisted in the free use of junkets and
venery, can appear to be true after his return; since that his body is not
yet revived, but remains at Medina until this day.

But Moses, the author of the Hebrew Law, was an excellent man; though not
without his faults, as namely, when with some discontent and grumbling he so
hardly took upon him the Embassage which God commanded him touching the King
of Egypt; conceiving also some distrust of Gods promise for bringing water out
of the rock, as the Hebrews themselves confess: yet did he scarce partake of
any one of those promises which by the law he made unto the people, but was
perplexed with continual mut^ies and seditions in the wilderness; neither was
he permitted to enter into that blessed and pleasant land, so much desired.

But above all these, Christ is most honorable; in that neither his
contrymen, nor any other could ever convince him of sin. For whatsoever
he commanded others to observe, the same did he observe and perform himself,
and the Commandments that God gave him, he faithfully fulfilled, leading a
most pure and upright course of life; being also most patient in suffering
wrongs and abuses, as was manifest at his death upon the cross; yea so
affectionate was he toward his very enemies, that he prayed God to pardon
even those that put him to death.

As for the reward which he promised unto his Disciples, we verily believe
that himself is made partaker thereof after a most eminent and excellent
manner. For after he was risen from the lead there were many that beheld, and
heard, and saw him: who also ascended up into heaven in the sight of his twelve
disciples; where he obtained all power, as was evident in that according to his
promise made at his departure he endued them that were his followers with the
gift of tongues and other admirable virtues: all which may be a sure warrant
for us not to doubt either of the truth or possibility of the reward which he
has promised. And thus we have shown how that this Religion is more
excellent than others in regard that Christ the author of it has himself
performed what he commanded; as also in his own person obtained, and already
enjoys the happiness that he promised.

SECT. XXI.
Also from the wonderful spreading of this Religion.

LEt us in the next place descend to the effects of this doctrine aforesaid,
which doubtless being well weighed, are such as plainly declare this doctrine
to be sacred and divine, if so be that God have any regard of humane
affairs. For as it argueda divine providence to cause thi^ thing which should
be best of all to be of most large and ample extent; so has it happened to
Christian Religion, which we see is published and taught thorowout all Europe,
not excepting the Northern parts thereof, so likewise thorowout Asia, together
with the Islands in the Ocea^* thorowout Egypt also, ^iopia, and some other
parts of Africa^ And lastly, in America. Thus is (...) ^ow, and thus was it
anciently, as is witnessed by the histories of all times, by the books of
Christians, the acts of Synods, and by that old tradition at this day held
among the Barbarians concerning ^he travels or pilgrimages of Thomas, Andrew,
and other Apo^^les, Clemens, Tertullian, and some ^ncients besides, have noted
how ^ar the name of Christ was known amongst the Britains, Germans, and
other remote nations in their times. And certainly at this day there is no
other Religion comparable hereunto for ample and ^arge extent. Paganism indeed
is a large name, but cannot be said to be one Religion, since that it is not
agreed upon by the Professors thereof what one thing they should worship; but
some adore the stars, others the elements, and a third sort reverence their
Catell, or such things as have no subsistence: Neither have they the same
customs, or any common Lord of all.

The Jews on the other side are dispersed and scattered up and down, yet
remain one people. Howbeit their Religion had never any great growth or
increase after Christ's ascension: and the^ Law was not so much propagated by
them, as by Christians.

Then for Mahumetanisme, it is possessed of land enough, but it is not alone:
for Christian Religi^^ has a greater number of Professors in some places where
Turks domineere: And again there are many Christians in most quatters where
Turks or Mahum^ have no footing.

SECT. XXII.
Considering the meekness and simplicity of them that first taught this
Religion.

IT follows that we consider by what means this Christian ^eligion had its
augmentation and increase, that therein it may ^e comparable, and preferred
be^re others. We see it commonly ^ue of most men, that they will ^llow the
examples of Kings and ^otentates what way soever they ^oe; specially if law or
necessity ^ompell them to it. Hereby were ^he Religions of the Pagans, and of
Mahumet much augmented. But ^las they that first taught the Christian Religion
not only wan^d all civil power and authority, ^ut were of mean condition, no
better than poor Fishermen, weavers, and the like. Yet by such men's pains and
industry, that doctrine, within the space of thirty years, or thereabouts, was
published not only thorowout all the parts of the Roman Empire, but also among
the Parthians and remote Indians.

After this beginning, almost for three several ages together this same
Religion was so promoted by the studious endeavors of some private men, (not
with any threatenings or alluring promises, but even in spite of them that were
in authority,) that the greater part of the Roman world was Christian before
that Constantine professed Christianity.

Amongst the Grecians that taught morality, diverse there were very commendable
in other arts and disciplines; as the Pla^^nicks for the study of Geometry, the
Peripateticks for the history of plants and other living creatures, the Stoics
for Logical subtilty, the Pythagoreans for knowledge of numbers and harmony:
many also were admirable for eloquence, ^s Xenophon, Plato, and Theophra^us.
But the first Doctors and teachers of Christianity were endued with no such
art, but used plain ^anguage without enticing words; only after a bare manner
or na^ed form of speech pronouncing their precepts, promises, and ^hreatnings.
Which seeing they had no such efficacy in themselves for the propagation of
this truth, we must needs thereupon think that there was either a miracle, or
Gods secret power assisting the business, or both together.

SECT. XXIII.
What great impediments there were that might terrify men from the embracing
or the professing hereof.

HEreunto may be added another thing considerable, namely, how they who
receive^ Christianity by the ministry of the said men, had their minde^
prepossessed with another form o^ Religion; and therefore less docile or
capable of this doctrine, after that they had learned either the Pagans service
and ceremonies, or the Law of Mahumet, being thereby no way prepared and fitted
for the receiving of this instruction, as the Hebrews were for the receiving
of Moses his Law by their circumcision, and the knowledge of one God. Ha^^ng
their minds thus filled with preconcerned opinions concerning heathenish and
Jewish rites, whereunto they were habituated by custom which is a second
nature, it was strange that they entertained any new ordinances and
instructions, specially such as these were, contrary to the laws wherein they
had been educated, and confirmed by their parents authority.

Besides this there was another (...), to wit, the great adversity they were to
undergo, and the most grievous miseries which they suffered or stood in ^eare
of for professing Christianity. for seeing that humane nature ^bhorres such
evils, it must needs ^ollow that the causes of such e^ils cannot be admitted
of without much difficulty. A long time ^ere the Christians deprived of ^ll
honors and dignities, being much afflicted with diverse penalties, with
confiscation of goods and banishments: which notwithstanding were all but
flea-bi^ings in comparison of the cruel (...) they endured when they were put
into hot scalding metals, and tormented with the most grievous punishments that
could be devised.

Neither did this happen to a few only; but such multitudes of them were thus
tortured to death, that there was never in one age before so many men swept
away and devoured, either by famine, o^ pestilence, or war, as the writers of
those times do testify. Their manner and kind of death also was not
ordinary, but some were burned quick, others nailed upon crosses, and racked;
most of them put to such grievous torments as cannot be read or conceived
without horror and wonder. And this savage cruelty against Christians, which
continued in the Roman world and else where, (scarce with any intermission,)
until the time of Constantine, did not so depopulate the Church, but that out
of the seed thereof, (the blood of the Martyrs,) there sprang up ever a new
supply of Professors.

Now if herein we compare Christianity with other Religious, we shall find
that amongst the Grecians and other Pagans, though they were wont to magnify
their own Worthies above measure, yet is there but a short Catalogue of such
as suffered death for the testimony of their doctrine: only we read of
certain Philosophers in India, of Socrates also and some few more: who no
doubt, being the most eminent men in those times, had a desire to perpetuate
their fame to posterity. But amongst those Christians that suffered martyrdom^
for their faith, there were very many of mean rank, being of the common sort
of people, such as were scarce ever taken notice of or known to their
neighbors that lived hard by. There were women also, wives, virgins, and young
men; such as (it is probable), never covered or hoped for any renown in their
sufferings: whereupon in the books of martyrs we find the names but of a few in
comparison of the whole number of those that were put to death, and the rest
only registered in gross.

Add further that the heathen for the most part under any slight pretense, as
the casting of some frankincense upon the Altar, could free themselves from the
pain of such a death and so cousen the world, but this can in no wise be said
of those, who (whatever they thought in their hearts) dealt plainly in their
deeds and accommodated themselves to the nature and condition of the vulgar.
And such were the Jews and Christians, who alone can be said to have undergone
death for the honor of God. Neither can we attribute this praise and
commendation to any Jews after the times of Christ who also before Christ came
short of that great number of Christians that in one only Province were
persecuted for the Gospel of Christ the greatest suffering of the Jews being
only during the times of Manasses and Anti^chus.

Wherefore seeing that Christianity so far excels all other Religions in this
particular, it may justly thereupon be preferred before all others. And seeing
likewise that so great a multitude of men of every rank and degree, thorowout
all ages and places have not feared to suffer death for this Religion, we must
needs conceive there was some notable ground or cause of such their constancy,
which could be nothing save the plain evidence of truth together with the
holy Spirit of God.

SECT. XXIIII.
Answer to them that require more forcible reasons.

FInally if any yet be not satisfied with these arguments abovesaid, but desire
more forcible reasons for confirmation of the excellency of Christian Religion;
let such know that as there are variety of things which be true, so are there
diverse ways of proving or manifesting the truth. Thus is there one way in
Mathematics, another in Physics, a third in Ethics, and lastly another kind
when a matter of fact is in questio^^ wherein verily we must rest content with
such testimonies as are free from all suspicion of untruth; otherwise down
goes all the frame and use of history, and a great part of the art of Physic
together with all dutifulness that ought to be between parents and children:
for matters of practic^ can no way else be known but by such testimonies. Now
it is the pleasure of Almighty God that those things which he would have us to
believe (so that the very belief thereof may be imputed to us for obedience)
should not so evidently appear, as those things which are apprehended by sense
and plain demonstration but only be so far forth revealed as may beget
faith, and a persuasion thereof in the hearts and minds of such as are not
obstinate: That so the Gospel may be as a touchstine for trial of men's
judgments, whether they be sound or unsound. For seeing these arguments,
whereof we have spoken, have induced so many honest, godly, and wise men to
approve of this Religion, it is thereby plain enough that the fault of other
men's infidelity is not for want of sufficient testimony, but because they would
not have that to be had and embraced for truth which is contrary to their
wilful desires; it being a hard matter for them to relinquish their honors,
and set at naught other commodities; which thing they know they ought to do,
if they admit of Christ's doctrine and obey what he has commanded. And this is
the rather to be noted of them, for that many other historical narrations are
approved by them to be true, which notwithstanding are only manifest by
authority, and not by any such strong proofs, and persuasions, or tokens, as
do declare the history of Christ to be true: which are evident partly by the
confession of those Iowes that are yet alive; and partly in those companies and
congregations of Christians which are any where to be found; whereof
doubtless there was some cause.

Lastly, seeing the long duration or continuance of Christian Religion, and the
large oxtent thereof can be ascribed to no humane power, therefore the same
must be attributed to miracles: or if any deny that it came to pass through a
miraculous manner; this very getting so great strength and power without a
miracle, may be thought to surpass any miracle.

The third Book OF THE TRVNESSE OF Christian Religion.
SECT. I.
To prove the authority of the books of the new covenant.

AFter that a man is once persuaded by the reasons abovesaid, or is induced by
any other arguments to believe that this same Religion which Christians
profess is the truest, and absolutely the best; if he desire more distinctly
to know the parts thereof, then must he have recourse unto the most ancient
writings that contain the same Religion, and which commonly we call the
books of the new Testament or new covenant.

This truth no man can justly deny: for as every sect, be they good or bad,
should be believed when they tell us truly in what book or writing their
opinions are comprised: thus we credit the Turks who affirm that the
Religion of Mahumet is contained in the Alcoran; So it must be granted that the
doctrine of Christianity is contained in the said books of the new covenant,
since the same is generally agreed upon, and constantly ave red by all
Christians.

Forasmuch then as we have before proved that this Religion is most true; if
there were no other ground, yet this alone were sufficient to prove and avouch
the authority of those books aforesaid, wherein the same Religion is contained.

Which truth to demonstrate more particularly, let us in the first place take
for granted by all indifferent men that he who goes about to disprove the
authority of any book or writing which has bin a long time received and
allowed of, must use such arguments as do derogate from the truth of that
book: Otherwise the authority thereof is no whit diminished, but may still be
defended and maintained.

SECT. II.
Here is shown that such books were written by the Authors whose names they
have prefixed.

WE say then that those books which are not in question amongst Christians,
but have certain titles, are the very works of those authors whose names they
bear; to wit, because those primitive fathers, Justin, Iraeneus, Clemens, and
others do commend those books under the same Authors names; as also be cause
Tertullian witnesses that there were Orignall copies of those books extant in
his time And besides all the Churches received those books for authentical
before there were any common public meetings. Neither did ever the Pagans or
Jews make doubt thereof, but Iudian himself plainly confesses that those were
the writing of Peter and Paul, Matthew, Mark, and Luke which Christians under
those names have read and received. For as no man can doubt that those writings
which go under the names of Homer and Virgill are truly theirs, because the
one has been so long time received among the Latins, and the other among the
Greek authors: in like manner, it were more absurd to bring the authors of
those books in question which are granted almost by all the nations in the
world.

SECT. III.
Some books were anciently doubted of.

IN the volume of the new Covenant, there are some books now received, which
were not so received from the beginning, as namely the one Epistle of Peter,
that of James and Jude, two of John the Presbiter, the Revelation and the
Epistle to the Hebrews; which, though not in all, yet were still allowed by
most Churches, as is very probable, in that the ancient Christians did allege
diverse testimonies out of them as being sacred and holy. And it is likely too
that such Churches as from the beginning had not those books, either were
ignorant of them or doubtful. Yet afterward when they were better informed
touching the same, they admitted them into the Canen (as we now see) according
to the example of other Churches.

Neither can any good reason be given why we should think them to be
supposititious and counterfeit writings; for there is nothing comprised in
them, neither can ought thence be collected which is not abundantly expressed
in other Books unquestioned.

SECT. IIII.
The authority of such books as have no titles is proved from the quality of
the writers.

ANd here let no man mistrust the verity of the Epistle to the Hebrews,
because the writer of it is unknown; nor doubt of the two Epistles of John and
the Revelation, because some men do question, whether the author of them was
John the Apostle, or some other of that name? For the name is not so much to
be regarded as the quality or condition of the writers Hence it is that we
receive many books of history, whose authors are to us unknown; As that
concerning the Alexandrian war by Caesar: because we may perceive that he
whosoever writ the same, lived in those times, ad was present when the things
were done. In like manner it ought to suffice us that whosoever wrote the
books we speak of, both lived in the primitive age and were endued with
Apostolical gifts. For he speaks very improbably that says, these qualities
were but counterfeit, and that other writings might bear the names of these
authors; who every where pressing truth and pretty cannot be thought to play
the ^ning Sophisters and be guilty of falsehood, a thing not only odious among
all good men, but by the Roman laws was to be punished with death.

SECT. V.
These penmen writ the truth, because they had certain knowledge of what they
writ.

THus it being plain that the books of the new covenant were written by those
authors, whose names they bear, or by such as bear witness of themselves; if
we add further that they know well the matters where of they wrote to be
true, and had no purpose to lie or dissemble, it will follow that the things
which they committed to writing were both certain and true, because every
untruth proceeds either from ignorance, or from a wicked desire to deceive.

As touching Matthew, John, Peter and Iohu, they were all of the society and
fellowship of those twelve whom Jesus did choose to be witnesses of his life
and doctrine; so that they could not be ignorant of those things which they did
relate. The same may be said of James, who was either an Apostle, or as some
think, the next a kin to Jesus, and by the Apostles consecrated Bishop of
Jerusalem. Paul also could not err through lack of knowledge, either about
those points which he professes were revealed to him by Jesus himself
triumphing in heaven; orabout the things that were done by him, having Luke a
follow companion with him in his journeyes. This Luke might easily know the
certainty of those things which he writ concerning the life and death of
Jesus: For he was borne and bred in the places next adjoining to Palestina;
through which country when he traveled, he says he speak with such
persons as were eyewitnesses of the things that were done. For doubtless
besides the Apostles with whom he had familiarity, there lived many others at
that time who had been cured by Jesus, whom they saw both before his death and
after his resurrection.

If we will give credit to Tacitus and Suetoni^ in those things which happened
a long time before they were borne, because we are confident that they
diligently enquired into the truth thereof; how much more ought we to believe
this writer, who says that he reeived all the things which he relates from
them that had seen the same.

It is credibly reported of Mark that he was a daily companion with Peter, so
that whatsoever he writ may be thought as suggested or witnessed by Peter, who
could not be ignorant thereof. Besides, the same things that he writes are
almost all extant in the Acts of the Apostles. Neither could the author of the
apocalypse be deceived or deluded in those visions, which he says were
revealed to him from heaven. No more could he that writ the Epistle to the
Hebrews err in those things which he professes, either to be inspired into
him by the Spirit of God, or else taught him by the Apostles.

SECT. VI.
As also because they would not lie.

THe other reason we spoke of to prove the truth of the said holy writers, was
because they had no will or desire to tell an untruth: And this has been
touched before in general, when we proved the truth of Christian Religion, and
of the history of the resurrection of Christ.

Those that will accuse any witnesses for the pravity of their will, must
produce such proofs and evidences as may probably make it appear why the will
should be diverted from uttering the truth: but this cannot be averred of the
said authors. For if any do object and say that they spoke for their own
advantage, upon enquiry it will appear that they sought after no such by-end,
having neither hope of getting commodity, or of eschewing any danger; but
rather by their profession they were more likely to lose all their commodities
and be liable unto all sorts of perils. If they aimed at any advantage, it was
only to gain honor unto God, which doubtless cannot be compatible with
lying and dissembling, specially in such a business as whereon depends the
everlasting salvation of mankind: Far be it then from any man to think that
they were guilty of so great impiety, their doctrine being full of all sanctity,
and their lift exemplary for innocence and integrity, free from the accusation
of their greatest adversaries; who only condemned them for lack of knowledge,
a fault unlikely to be the mother of falsehood. No, if they had been guilty of
never so little fraud or deceit in that kind, surely they would not have
recorded to posterity their own trespasses, as namely, their forsaking of
Christ when he was in danger, and Poters denial of him three times.

SECT. VII.
A confirmation of the sidelity of these authors from the miracles which they
wrought.

ON the other side God himself gave testimony of their fidelity by working
wonders which both they and their Disciples with great boldness publicly
avouched, adding also the names of the persons; places and other circumstan^es:
So that the truth or falsehood of their assertion might easily have been
discovered by the inquisition of the Magistrate.

More particularly, among the wonders that they wrought, we may note (as most
sensible and certain) the use of tongues among so many thousands which never
learned them; and their curing the diseases of the body upon a sudden in the
sight of the people. Neither were they any whit dismayed with fear either of
the Jewish Magistrates of those times whom they knew to be most maliciously
set against them; or of the Romans, who dealt very unjustly with them, omitting
no fit occasion that might be matter for traducing or accusing them as
inventors of a new Religion: Nay, the very Jews or Pagans, in the times
immediately following, durst never deny, that wonders were wrought by those men
For so much is confessed of Peter's miracles by Phlegon in his Annals, who lived
under Adrian the Emperor. Moreover the Christians themselves in those books
that contained a reason of their faith, which they exhibited to the Emperors,
to the Senate, and to the governors, do relate these things as most manifest
and unquestionable truths, yea they openly report that there continued a
wonderful virtue of working strange effects at their Sepulchers for certain
ages after their death; which if it had been false, they knew that to their
shame and punishment the Magistrates could have confuted the same: and this
that we have spoken may suffice concerning the authors.

SECT. VIII.
The truth of the writings connirmed by the events that have come to pass
accordingly as they were revealed.

THere are other reasons to prove the truth and sidelity of these authors
writings. For many things are therein f^re old should after ward happen, which
notwithstanding were impossible for men by their own power and ingeny to know
or bring to pass: yet we see the truth thereof confirmed by the event which
have come to pass accordingly.

For so it was foretold that this Religion should upon a sudden have a large
and ample increase; that it should continue for ever; and thought it were
rejected by most of the Jews, yet should it be embraced by the Gentiles that
were strangers to it. Thus likewise was foretold what hatred and spite the
Jews would bear against them that professed this religion, and what grievous
persecutions the professors thereof should undergo: Also what a great siege
and destruction there should be both of Jerusalem that great City, and of the
Temple, together with a miserable calamity among the Jews.

SECT. IX.
As also from Gods care in preserving his people from false writings.

BEsides this, if it be granted that God out of his providence carefully
respects and governes humane affairs, specially such as belong to his honor
and worship; then it cannot be that he should suffer so great a multitude to
be cheated and deceived with lying books; those men I mean, whose full
intent and purpose was to worship God after a holy manner. And forasmuch as
among so many sects that have sprung up in Christianity there has not been
one that received not either all or the most of those books, excepting some
few that contain no singular matter above the rest; this me thinks may be a
great argument that no material thing could be objected against these
writings; specially since the said sects were so partial and spitefully bent
against another, that what one approved of, another commonly would be
displeased therewith, even because the same was liked of by others.

SECT. X.
Answer to the objection that diverse books were not received by all.

INdeed there were some that desired to be Christians, who notwithstanding
refused to admit of such books as they did perceive contained any thing that
made against their doctrine. And these were either such as out of hatred
against the Jews spoke ill of their law, and rev^led the God of the Jews who
was the makes and framer of the whole world; or else they were such as feared
the great afflictions and persecutions that Christians suffered; And thereupon
thought it the safest way to ^urke under the name of Jews, who had free
liberty for the exercise of their Religion. Howbeit these lurkers were rejected
and forsaken by all the open professed Christians that lived in those times,
when as all that any way disagreed in opinion (if they kept unity of affection
and piety) might have been suffered with great patience according to the
Apostles commandment. As for the former kind of these bastard or counterfeit
Christians, I think they have been sufficiently confuted both by that which
we have said before when we proved that there was but one only true God, the
sole framer of the whole world: As also by those very books, which that they
might have some semblance of Christians they did admit of, specially the
Gospel of Luke; wherein is evidently shown that the same God whom Moses and
the Hebrews worshipped was preached by Christ. And the other sort we shall
more fitly confute when we speak against those that both are and would be
called Jews. For the present only this I say, that it is great impudency in
them to fleight and extenuate the authority of Paul, seeing verily there was
not one of all the Apostles, that expounded and taught more Charches than he
did: who was reported at that time to have wrought many miracles, when (as ere
while we said) there might easily have been trial, and inquiry made of the
truth of the matter. If then it be true that he wrought wenders, why may we
not believe him concerning his heavenly visions and instruction received from
Christ himself, to whom since he was so deately beloved, it cannot be that he
should teach any thing inglorious or ungrateful unto Christ, as falsities or
untruths would have been. And as touching that particular whereof they accuse
him, namely his doctrine of the liberty and freedom which was purchased for
the Hebrews from those rites and ceremonies that were formerly commanded them
by Moses there was not any cause in regard of himself why he should speak any
thing but truth therein: For both he was circumcised and of his own accord
he did observe the most part of the law: But for Christian Religions sake, he
was both to do and suffer more difficult matters, than either was commanded by
the law, or could happen by occasion of the Law. He taught also that his
Disciples should do and suffer the like: whence it appears that he uttered
no flattering or enricing speeches unto his auditors; who were taught in stead
of the Sabbeth, to keep every day holy for divine worship, and in stead of the
little expenses which the law required to suffer the loss of all their goods,
and in stead of the blood beasts to consecrate their own blood unto God. And
further Paul himself plainly affirms that Peter, John, and James, in token of
their consent with him, gave him the right hands of fellowship: which he never
durst have spoken, if it had not been true, because the same men being then
alive might have convicted him for a liar.

But to leave these men that searce deserve the name of Christians, besides
this which we have now said concerning the miracles, wrought by the sacred pen
men aforesaid, and concerning the singular providence of God about affairs of
this kind; the manifest consent and agreement of all other Christian
congregations in the receiving of these books may induce any inidifferent men
to give credit thereunto: specially considering that they are wont commonly to
credit other books of history, without any such testimonies, unless they see
some plain reason to the contrary, which cannot be said of any of those
books whereof we have spoken.

SECT. XI.
Answer to an objection that these books seem to contain things impossible.

FOr if any do object saying that diverse things are there in related which
seem to be impossible ever to have come to pass: we answer as before has
been intimated that there are some things impossible for man to do, which not
withstanding are possible unto God, such as include in them no contradiction or
contrariety. And of this sort are those wonderful effects which we most of
all admire, as the raising of the dead unto life again, and therefore that
objection is of no force.

SECT. XII.
Or things contrary to reason.

NEither are they to be regarded and assented unto who say that some doctrines
are comprised in these books which are disagreeing to right reason: For such
are confuted first by the practice of so many learned, grave, judicious and
wise nien as have allowed and admitted of these books for authentical ever
since the primitive times: Then by that which we have before declared in the
first book to be consonant to right reason; as namely, that there is a God,
who alone is absolutely perfect and infinite in virtue, life, wisdom, and
goodness, of whom all things that have any being were made: whose care and
providence reaches over all his works, especially unto men; and who can after
this life bountifully reward all them that obey him.

Besides there is shown how that all the lusts of the flesh are to be bridled
and subdued: that amongst men there is kindred and alliance, and therefore they
ought to love one another with sincere affection: All which are most plainly
set down in the said books of the new covenant. Now we know how unsafe it is
for any to affirm any thing beside this, peremptorily to be true, either
concerning the nature of God or his will; specially if it be grounded only
upon humane reason: And further we may guesle how uncertain it would be both
by the jarring opinions of the schoolmen among themselves, as also by the
contrary conclusions of the Philosophers. And it is no marvel: for if men do
so farte disagree in their opinions touching their own soul, then they must
needs much more dissent when they go about to determine any thing not revealed
concerning the highest mind, and the most supreme Spirit which so far
transcends our weak appiehension. Or if (as prudent men do think) the inquiry
into the Councels of Kings be dangerous and not to, be attempted or attained
by us; who then is there so wise and prudent that hopes he shall ever be able
to understand the will of God concerning those things which he has reserved in
his own freedom and secret council: Wherefore Plato said very well, that
none of these hidden mysteries could be known without an Oracle. Now there
can no Oracle be proved to be an Oracle indeed by any clearer testimonies than
those that are contained in the said books of the new covenant. Contrary to
which books it is neither proved, nor so much as affirmed by any that God ever
published any thing concerning his nature and essence Neither is there extant
any letter Revelation or other signification of his will that can be believed
for true. For if there were any thing otherwise commanded or permitted before
Christ's time, which in it self was indifferent, that is neither due nor
dishonest, yet the same is not repugnant to the said writings fince that in
such matters of indifferency the last law or commandment that is given does
abolish and annull the former.

SECT. XIII.
Answer to an objection that some of these books are repugnant to the other.

SOme do further object that in these books there is some diversity of senses
and interpretations. But for answer whosoever will but duly ponder this matter
he shall find the same to be another argument besides the some to justify the
authority of the said books, namely because they do most manifestly and
apparently agree about such things as concern any point of doctrine or
history: Which consent and accord cannot elsewhere be found among any other
writers that are of one and the same sect or profession, whether we consider
the Jews or the Greek Philosophess, the Physicians or the Roman Lawyers. All
which do not only differ much among themselves, yea even those that are of the
same sect as Plato and Xenophon; but oftentimes one shall find the same writer
to affirm now one thing, then another, as if he were forgetful of himself, or
knew not what to resolve upon. But these other writers, to wit, the holy
penmen, of whom we speak, do inculcate and express the same points of
faith: they deliver the same commandments; and as for their narration of the
life, and death, and resurrection of Christ, the Sum and substance in them
all is the very same.

As touching some particular circumstances, such as are of small or no moment,
happily they might be well reconciled, though perhaps the manner how be
unknown; namely, because of the similitude of things that were done at diverse
times, or for the doubtful signification of some words, or by reason of the
several names and appellations of this man or that place and the like. Nay
this (me thinks) may bees motive to vindicate and free these writers from all
suspicion of falsehood, it being usual with those that would have lies and
untruths credited, to relate all circumstances so straight and trimly as there
shall not appear any color or show of difference. Or if it be so, that for any
small difference which cannot easily be reconciled a whole book shall lose its
credit; then I trow we must believe no books at all, specially those os
history: yet we see that Polibius, Halicarnassensis, Levy and Plutarch, for
the substance o^ them are esteemed authentical and true, though in some
circumstances they seem to be faulty: Therefore it were unequal that sacred
writers should lose then credit for one or two seeming slips, (if there were
any in their writings) who so seriously desired and earnestly indevoured to
express both truth and piety therein.

SECT. XIIII.
Answer to an objection taken from outward testimonies, which make more for
these books.

ANother way of confirming what we have said; Some think may be by alleging
the contrary testimonies of those that were strangers to the covenant of
promise.

But I dare boldly say that there are no such testimonies to be found, unless
a man will produce the sayings of them that were borne a long time after, who
did openly prosesse emnity against Christianity, and therefore could be no fit
witnesses for this matter.

Nay, on the contrary, if need were, we could allege many testimonies to
confirm diverse parts of the history which is delivered in the said books.
Thus both Hebrews and Pagans report that Jesus was crucified, and that sundry
miracles were done by him and his Disciples. Those known books of Josephus,
which were written about forty years after Christ's ascension, do make mention
of Herod, Pilat, Festus, Felix, John the Baptist, Gamliel, and of the
destruction of Jerusalem at large. Herewith all agree that which the Authors
of the Talmud have recorded concerning those times. Tacitus relates how cruelly
Nero used the Christians. And anciently there were certain books extant, not
only of private men, as of Phlegon and others; but also some public Acts,
whereunto the Christians appealed, namely, for that in them there was mention
made of the star that appeared at Christ's birth and manifested his nativity
unto the wise ^en, also of the Earthquake and Eclipse of the Sun, when it was
full Moon at the time of Christ's passion upon the Cross.

SECT. XV.
Answer to the objection that the scriptures were changed.

NOw what can be said more against these books? Surely I see nothing that can
be objected, unless it be said that they remained not altogether the same
that they were from the beginning. And indeed it may be granted that what is
common to other books might happen to those, namely that by the carelessness
or corupt dealing of the transcribers, some letters, sillables or words might
be changed, left out o^ added. But it is an unjust thing to bring in question
the truth of such a book or evidence only because in so many ages there could
^^e but he great variety of Copies, since both custom and reason tells us that
what is agreed upon by the greater number and most ancient copies, the same is
to be prefer before the contrary. Now that all the copies of these books
were corrupted by guile or otherwise, either in points of doctrine or matter of
history it will never be proved, there being no evidences or testimonies of
former times ever to evince the same. But if (as we said before) there be any
thing urged by those that bare so great hatred against the writers or followers
and maintainers of these books the same is to be held for a reproach or
calumny, and not for any good proof or sufficient testimony against them. And
this which we have said might suffice in answer to those that tell us the
scripture has been changed; which whosoever affirm, ought to make good their
assertion against the scripture so long time received in the Church.

But that the vanity of this objection may more plainly appear, we will show
that what they imagine to be true, neither did nor ever could come to pass.
We have proved before that the books which have any titles were written by the
Authors whose names they bear, which being granted, it will follow that one
book was not forged or put into the place of another: neither is there any
notable or noted part changed therein.

For in such a mutation there would have been some aim or intent whereby that
part might have easily been distinguished from other parts and books not
changed or altered, which cannot now any where be discerued Nay (as we said)
there is every where a consent and harmony of the sease and meaning herein, as
it admirable to consider.

Again no doubt so soon at any thing by or concerning the Apostles or
apostolical men was published, ^ghtway the Christians with great diligence (is
it was meet.) and o^t of a zealous desire to preserve and propagate pity and
truth unto posterity did get themselves many copies thereof, which they
dispersed through all places in Europe, Asia, and Egypt where Christ anity was
spread and the Greek tongue spoken: Yea (as before we showed) there were some
Original Copies kept for the space of two hundred years after Christ, It Is
not then possible or probable that those books received any such forgery, they
being so well known and carefully preserved not only by particular men, but
by the common care and diligence of whole Churches. Add further that these
books in the following ^ges were translated into the Sy^^cke, Ethiopicke,
Arabicke, and Latin tongues: which translations are yet extant; and do not
differ in ought to speak of from the Greek Copies themselves.

Besides we have the writings of those men who were taught by the Apostles
themselves, or by their Disciples, wherein many places of scripture are cited
out of these books to the same sense and meaning, which now we read the^.
Neither was there any in the Church of so great authority at those times who
could have bin suffered to falsify or change any thing if he would, as is
plain by the open dissent of Iraeneus, Tertullian, and Cyprian from those that
were most eminent in the Church. After these times there succeeded many (...)
men, of great learning and judgment, who having first made diligent inquiry
thereof, received these books as retaining their original purity. Hitherto
also may be referred what but now we said of diverse sects of Cr^s; all which
at least such as acknowledged God to be the maker of the world and Christ to be
the author of the new covenant, did receive and use these books accordingly as
we do the same. And if any had attempted to alter or p^ any part thereof they
should have been accused by the rest for forgery and false-dealing men
therein. Neither was there ever any sect that had the liberty at their pleasure
alter any of these books for their own turns, in as much as it is manifest
that all of them did ground and assume arguments one against another out of the
same. And as for that which we touched concerning divine providence, the same
belongs no less unto the chiefest parts than unto the whole books; namely,
that it cannot conveniently be said that God would suffer so many men which
sincerely desired to be godly and earnestly sought after eternal life, to be
led head long into that error which they could no way avoid. And thus much
shall suffice to be spoken for the authority of the books of the new
covenant, whence alone if there were no other helps, we might be sufficiently
instructed concerning the true Religion.

SECT. XVI.
For the authority of the books of the old Testament.

NOw forasmuch as it has pleased God to leave us the writings and evidences of
the Jewish Religion, which was anciently the truest, and affoards diverse
testimontes for Christianity; Therefore it will not be amiss, in the next
place, to justify the authority of the same. First then that these books were
written by the same men, whose names they bear is manifest in like manner as
we have proved of ours before, of the new covenant.

These authors were either Prophets, or other very faithful and credible men,
such as was Esdras, who compiled the books of the old Testament into one
volume, during the life time of the Prophet Haggai, Malachy, and Zachary. I
will not here repeat again what is said before in the commendation of Moses.
Both that part of history which at first was delivered by him, as we have
shown in the first book: and that also which was collected after his time is
witnessed even by many of the heathen. Thus the Annals of the Ph^nitian's have
recorded the names of David and Solomon and their leagues with the men of ^yre.
As Well Berosus as the Hebrew writers, makes mention of Nabuchadonosor and of
other Chaldean Kings. He whom Jeremy calls Vaphres King of Egypt, is termed
Apries by Herodotus. In like manner the books of the Grecians are replenished
with narrations concerning Cyrus and his successors until the times of Darius.
And many other things concerning the na^^on of the Jews are related by
Josephus in his books against Appio^: whereunto we may add what before we
have touched out of Strabo and Trogus. But as for us Christians we are not to
question the truth of those books, out of which we borow many testimonies.
Neither do we find when Christ reprehended many things in the Doctors of the
Law and Pharisees of his time that ever he accused them of falsehood committed
against the writings of Moses or the Prophets; or that they had altered or used
any forged books.

Then after Christ's time, it cannot be proved, neither is it credible that the
scripture was corrupted in matters of any moment; specially if we consider
that the same books were preserved safely by the Jews, which people was
dispersed far and wide over the face of the earth. For first of all the ten
tribes were led a way captive by the Assyrians into Media then afterward the
two other tribes: And after that Cyrus granted the^ leave to return, many of
them went and dwelt in foreign Countries. The Macedoni^^s invited them with
great promises to come into Alexandria. The cruelty of Antiochus, the civil
wars of the Asmonaans, together with those of Po^pey and Sossius from without,
did stragle and scatter abroad many of them. Cyrenaica a part of Africa was
full of the Jews: so were the Cities of Asia Macedonia, Licaonia; and likewise
the Isles of Cypr^^, Crete, and others. Also what a number of them there was at
Rome, may be learned out of Horace, Iuvenal and Mar^^al. Now it is not possible
that such multitudes so far distant one from another, should be cozened in this
kind; neither could they ever accord all in the coining of an untruth. Add
moreover that almost three hundred years before Christ at the appointment and
care of the Kings of Egypt, those books of the Hebrews were translated into
the Greek tongue by those that are called the Seventy interpreters So as then
the Grecians had the sense and substance of them, though in another language;
whereby it appears to be more unlikely that they were any where changed. Nay
more these books were translated both into the Chalde^ tongue, as also into
the language spoken by them of Jerusalem, to wit, a little before and a little
after the time of Christ Other Greek translations afterward there were, as
namely by Aquila, Symachus and Theodo i on; all which Origin compared with that
of the seventy In^erpreters; and after him others also, who could find no
diversity of history, or of any matter worth speaking of.

Phil^ lived in the reign of Caligula, and Iosephi^ survived the times of both
the vespas^ans: which two writers allege out of the Hebrew books the same
things that we read at this day.

Then began Christian Religion to be more and more propagated, being professed
by many of the Hebrews, and by sundry persons that had learned the Hebrew
tongue; who if the Jews had used any Legerdemaine in any notable part, could
thereupon quickly discover the same by comparing more ancient Copies* and so
have made it publicly known. But they are so far from doing this that on
the other side they allege many testimonies out of the old covenant to the
same sense and meaning that they are used by the Hebrews: which Hebrews may
sooner be accused of any other fault, then falsehood or negligence about these
books, which they have so religiously and exactly described and compared that
they know how often any one letter is sound therein.

The last though not the least argument to prove that the Jews did not
purposely corrupt or alter the scripture, may be because the Christians out of
the very books which are read by the Jews do evince, and as they imagine,
strongly prove, that their Lord and Master, Jesus is that same very Messiah
which was anciently promised to the Jews their forefathers: which doubtless
they would have been careful might not have been done; specially when the
controversy arose between them and the Christians, if ever it had been in
their power to have changed what they listed.

The fourth Book OF THE TRVNESSE OF Christian Religion.
SECT. I.
A particular confutation of the Religions opposite to Christianity.

MAny men there are, who beholding the great peril and jeoperdy that other
people are in, do much joy and hug themselves if they be out of gunshot and
free from all such danger.

But Christianity teaches another lesson, specially in points of doctrine; and
therefore in this fourth book it shall appear, that one chief duty of a
Christian in this life is, not only to rejoice and content himself with the
finding out of truth; but also to lend his helping hand to others that wander
in the labyrinths of errors, and make them partakers of so good a benefit. This
after some sort we have indevoured to do in the former books; for the
demonstration of truth implies the confutation of error. Yet in regard all
kinds of Religions that are opposite to Christianity, to wit, Paganism,
Iudaisme, and Mahumeta^isme, besides their common consent have their proper
errors, and certain peculiar arg^me is which are wont to be objected against
us. Therefore it is our purpose particularly to dispute against each of these,
first, desiring our readers to purge their minds from partiality and all
impediments of judging aright that so they may the better conceive the truth we
are to speak.

SECT. II.
And first of Paganism, that there is but one God. Created Spirits are good or
bad: the good not to be honored, but in reference to God.

TO begin then against Pagans If they say that there are diverse eternal and
coequall Gods, we have consuted this opinion before in the first book, where
we taught that there is but only one God, who is the cause of all things. Or
if they by the name of Gods, do understand the created Spirits which are
superior to men they then either mean the good or the bad: if they say the
good, first they ought to be well assured that such are so indeed, otherwise
they commit a dangerous ertor in receiving enemies instead of friends and
traitors for Ambassadors. Then it were but reason they put an evident
difference between the worship of God and these Spirits: As likewise to know
what hierarchy and order there is among them; what benefit may be expected from
any of them; and what honor by Gods permission or appointment is to be
exhibited to them. All which, since they have not positively set down in their
Religion it is plain how uncertain the same Religion is, and how it were a
safer course for them to betake themselves to the worship of one Almighty God,
which even Plat^ confessed was the duty of every wise man, specially for that
to whomsoever God is propitious and favorable, to them these Angels must be
serviceable and gracious, being indeed ministering Spirits of the Almighty.

SECT. III.
Evi^ Spirits adored by Pagans, and how impious a thing it is.

But it was the bad not the good Spirits which the Pagans did worship, as may
be proved by sundry reasons: first because these adored Angels did not refer
their worshippers unto the service of the true God, but as much as in them lay
they labored to abolish the same, or at least in every respect they required
equal honor with the Almighty. Secondly, because they wrought all the harm
they could against the worshippers of the true God by provoking both
Magistrates and people to molest them. For when it was lawful for Poets to
sing of the murders and adulteries committed by the Gods, and for the Epicures
to take away all divine Providence, and for any other Religion (though never so
different in ceremonies) to be allowed as was the Egyptian, the Phrygian the
Grecian, and the Thuscan at Rome; Even then generally the Jews were only made
ridiculous as appears by Satyrs and Epigrames written upon them; who sometimes
also suffered hanishment. And as for Christians they were afflicted with most
bitter punishments: no other cause whereof can be given than that both these
sects did worship one true God, whose honor was impeached by the multitude of
such Gods as the heathen adored.

Thirdly, this was manifest by the manner of their worship, which no way escemed
any good and honest ghost; namely by humane blood, by the running of naked men
in the Temples, by games and dancing sull of uncleanenesse such as may be
seen at this day among some people of America and Africa, who yet sit in the
darkness of gentilisme.

Nay, which is more, both anciently there were and now there are some people
that know and profess* that these are wicked ghosts whom they worship. Thus
the Persians adored Pluto, the Grecians honored devils, the Romans worshipped
a hurtful God that he might do them no harm: diverse of the Ethiopians and
Indians do the like; then the which nothing can be invented more impious and
abominable. For what is true religious worship but a testimony of an infinite
goodness, that a man does acknowledge to be in him whom he worshippeth? which
if it be exhibited unto a bad Spirit, it is false and counter feit, implying
in it no less crime than high treason for as much as the honor due unto the
King is not only de^ogated from him, but is conferd upon his enemy, a
traitorous rebel. Moreover, vain is that perswasi on which they conceive of
God, that he is good, and therefore will not punish this offense, because they
think so to do were contrary to his goodness. For mercy or clemency that it
may be just, is bounded with limit: and where wickedness abounds there
justice does as it were necessarily require the infliction of punishment
Neither are they excused for saying they are induced to obey such wicked
Spirits out of a certain fear or awe of them, seeing that God, as he is the
chief good, so is he communicative and imparts his goodness in the production
of other natures: which if it be true, then i^ follows that he has absolute
power and dominion over all those other creatures as over his workmanship, so
that nothing can be, done by any of them, which he has a desire to hinder.
All which being granted, (as it is most certain,) then we may easily collect
that whosoever is in the special favor of God can be subject to no further
harm by evil Spirits, then the Almighty will suffer shall turn to his good.

And lastly there can nothing be obtained of bad Angels which is worth the
accepting of, but rather worthy to be abhorred and despised: For when a devil
dissembles and plays the hypocrite, then is he the worst of all; and the
gifts of an enemy are usually nothing but crafty fetches and mere deceit.

SECT. IIII.
Against the worship which in Paganism is exhibited to men after their death.

MOreover there were diver among the Pagans, and there are yet some of them
tha^ tell us, they give honor and worship to the souls of men departed But
first they should make some manifest distinction between this honor and that
which is due unto God: Then again, all prayers made to them are but vain and
^ruitlesse, unless those Spirits were able some way to reward or requite them
which none of these worshippers can confidently sar or certainly prove they
are. But anther thing is worst of all, to wit, that many of them to whom such
glory is given by the heathen in their life time were notoriously wicked and
addicted to one filthy vice or other: Thus Bacchus was a drunkard, and Hercules
effeminate; Romulus proved a very ^illaine to his brother, and Jupiter a
traitor to his own father. So that the praise and honor gi^en to such mortal
impious mengods redounds to the disgrace of the true God and of honesty it
self since it adds the commendation of Religion to vices that are flattering
and alluring enough of themselves.

SECT. V.
Against worshipping of stars and elements.

OF more antiquity than this was the worshipping of stars and of the
elements, as fire water, air, and earth; wherein great ignorance and folly was
committed. For prayers are the greatest part of religious worship, which cannot
without folly be directed to any object save (...) intelligent natures: but
sense te^ us that the elements are no such things. And as for the stars, if
any affirm the contrary, yet he will never be able to prove it since that no
such matter can be collected from their operations and influences which
demonstrate their nature; but rather we may gather the contrary by their
m^tion, which is not variable like (...) that in things endued with liberty of
will, but constant and unalterable. Besides we have shown before that the
course and motion of the stars is appointed for the use of men, whence man
ought to acknowledge himself to be the more like unto God in his better part,
as also more dear unto him: And therefore much injury should he do to his
own worth and dignity, if he did inslave and submit himself to such things
as God has given to be ^viceable unto him: whereas (...) the contrary he
ought rather ^render thanks for them which cannot do so much for them^^lves.

SECT. VI.
Against worshipping of bruit beasts.

But of all other it is the greatest al surdur for men to worship the bruit
beasts, as do the Egyptians. For although these creatures seem to have some
shadow o^ semblance of reason or understanding, yet it is nothing incom^arison
of man, seeing they cannot express any inward thoughts either by words or
writing; neither can they do any action but of the same kind and after the
same manner: much less can they ever attain to the knowledge of numbers,
dimensions or heavenly motions. On the other side man by his i^geny understands
the nature of the most puissant beasts wild or tame; of fish, foul, and the
like: all which after a sort he has under his dominion; whether they be
Elephants, lions, horses, or Oxen: yea those beasts which are most hurtful he
can make some benefit of, as of serpents for medicines.

And this general use he may make of them all, which is unknown to them,
namely to observe the proportion of the bodies and the situation of their
parts, comparing also their forms and several kinds; whence he may learn
his own excellency, and be instructed how fair the frame of humane bodies
surpasses other creatures for perfection and nobility: which if any one
rightly consider, he will be so far from worshipping these beastly ^ds that he
will rather think ^mselfe to be a kind of God or ^roy placed over them by
(...) Supreme God of all.

SECT. VII.
Against worshipping of things that are no substances.

WE find among the Grecians, Romans, and others ^t some there were who did ^t
worship any substances, but ^rtaine accidents.

For to omit those uncouth dei^s, the Fever, dame Impudence ^d the like, let us
name the bet^r sort, such were health, which (...) nothing but a right
tempera^ure of the parts of the body: ^od fortune, being the fitness of ^n
event that is correspondent to (...) man's desire: The affections also ^s love,
fear, anger, hope and the ^est, which proceed from the consideration of some
thing that is good or evil, easy or difficult; and these are certain motions
o^ passions in that part of the mind which is united to the body by blood, not
having any absolute power of themselves, but are subordinate handmaids to the
commands of the well, their Mistress at least in their continuance and
direction. Then for virtues they have diverse names, as prudence consisting in
the election or choice of that which is honestly profitable: For itude in
attempting fearful dangers: Justice in righting them that are injured:
Temperance in the moderation of sensual pleasures; and so of the rest, all
being certain inclinations and propensions unto that which is honest and
right, be got in the mind by long custom and exercise; which as they may be
increased, so by negligence they may be diminished, and quite abolished. Next
succeeds honor whereunto some Temples were dedicated, and this is nothing but
a good opinion of some men concerning such persons as they imagine are endued
with virtue: And herein men may easily err in honoring bad men in stead of
good. Since then none of all these are substances, and consequently not
comparable to the dignity of such things as have subsistence, neither can they
be said to have any notice of our prayers or worship; therefore to reverence
them for Gods is a thing most absurd and unreasonable, seeing that for these
things he is to be worshipped who can both give and preserve the same.

SECT. VIII.
Answer to the argument of the Gentiles taken from miracles done among them.

THe Pagans for the commendation of their Religion are wont to allege
miracles, but such only as in many things may be excepted against.

For diverse of them were rejected by the wiser sort of the heathen themselves
as counterfeit and fabulous. Some of their marvels are said to have been done
in secret, in the night, in the presence of one or two, whose eyes might easily
be deluded by the juggling of the Pr^ests. Other things were wonders only to
those that were ignorant of natural causes, specially of occult qualities: as
when a man could draw iron with a lodestone in the presence of such as knew
not the property of that stone. In such ^eats Simon and Apollonius Tya^us were
skilful, as it is recorded by many. I deny not but that greater things than
these might be seen, which though they transcended natural causes, and man's
power and ability, yet needed they not any divine omnipotent hand* but the
Spirits placed between God and man might suffice for the production thereof:
Which Spirits by their agility and subtilty might easily convey from one place
to another, things dispersed, and work such strange effects upon them, as
would affect men with astonishment and wonder. But the ghosts whereby any such
matter is effected, are no good Spirits, and consequently this Religion cannot
be good, as is manifest by that which has been said before, and likewise in
that which they tell us of certain charms and enchanting verses, whereby they
are compelled thereunto where as not withstanding the wiser sort of the heathen
themselves coufesse that there can be no such efficacy in the bare words; which
have only some power of persuasion, and that no otherwise than by way of
signification. Besides this is a sign of their wickedness, that by some vain
promise or villainous act, they did undertake to entice one contrarily affected
to love and like another, which thing is prohibited by humane laws as being a
kind of sorcery. Neither need any man wonder why God suffered some marvels to
be wrought by evil Spirits among the Gentiles, seeing they deserved to be
cheated with such illusions, which so long time had forsaken the worship of the
true God.

Moreover this is an argument of their weakness and impotency that their
works were never accompanied with any good thing: For if any were seen or
seemed to be revived, yet they did not continue alive, neither could they
exercise the functions of living creatures. Or if it happened that any thing
proceeding happily from a divine power, did appear to the Pagans; yet the same
was not fore told should come to pass for the confirmation of their Religion,
and therefore there might be other causes, best known to God, of the event
thereof. As for example, if it was true that Vespasian restored sight to one
blind; this was done that he being thereby made more honorable, might the more
easily obtain the Roman Empire. For he was appointed by God to be a Minister
of his judgments in the behalf of the Jews: more such like causes there may
be of other wonders, which had no relation at all to their Religion.

SECT. IX.
And from Oracles.

THe very same likewise in a manner may serve for answer to that which they
object concerning Oracles, particularly we may re-say, that these men did
worthily deserve to be deluded for contempt of that knowledge which reason or
ancient tradition suggested to each of them Then again the words of the
Oracles for the most part were ambiguous, and according to diverse events might
admit of diverse interpretations. Or if there was any thing more expressly
foretold by them, yet it is not necessary that the same should proceed from an
all-knowing mind: For it was either such a thing as might be foreseen by
natural causes then existing, as Physicians can foretell some future diseases:
or else some probable and true conjecture might be made by that which commonly
falls out and usually comes to pass, as we read of some persons we^-sk^^d
(...) civilaffaires, that can have a notable guess of future events. Again
suppose that amongst the Pagans God sometimes used the ministry of some
Prophets to foretell those things which could have no certain cause besides
the will of God: yet this did not approve or confirm their heathen^sh
Religion, but rather overthrew it: As namely that prophecy in the fourth
Eclogu^ of Virg^^, taken out of the Sibyls verses; where unwittingly the Poet
sets out unto us the coming of Christ and his benefits. So in the same Sibyls
it is said that he was to be acknowledged for a King, who should be our King
indeed, and should come out of the East, and have dominion over all. We read
in Porphyry of the Oracle of Apollo, which says that other Gods are only Aerie
Spirits, but the God of the Hebrews is only to be worshipped: which saying if
the worshippers of Apollo had obeyed, then they had left off being his
Disciples: If they did not, then they made their God a liar. Add further, if
those Spirits had respected or intended the good of mankind, above all they
would have prescribed some course of life to be observed, and also promised
some assurance of reward to them that live accordingly; neither of which was
ever done by them.

On the other side oftentimes in their verses we find some Kings commonded
which were wicked men, some champions extold and dignified with divine honor,
others allured to immodest and unlawful love, or to the receiving of filthy
lucre, and committing of murder, as might be shown by many examples.

SECT. X.
Paganism decayed of its own accord so soon as humane aid ceased.

BEsides all that has hitherto been said, Paganism it self ministers to us
a notable argument against it self; namely because that wheresoever the same
becomes destitute of humane help, there straight way it comes to ruin, as if
the foundation thereof were quite overthrown. For if we behold all the
Kingdoms and states that are among Christians or Mahumetans, we shall find
no mention of Paganism, but in books. Nay the histories of former times do
show that when the Emperors went about to uphold their Religion either by
violence and persecution, as did the first of them; or by learning and
subtilty, as did Julian; yet notwithstanding it decayed daily, not by any
violent opposition, nor by the brightness and splendour of Christianity, (for
Jesus was accounted by the common sort only a Carpenters son;) nor by the
flourish of learning, which they that taught the law of Christ used not; nor by
gifts and rewards, for they were poor; nor by any soothing and slattering
speeches, for on the contrary they taught that all worldly commodity must be
despised, and that all kind of adversity must be undergone for the Gospels
sake. See then how weak and impotent Paganism was, which by such means came
to ruin.

Neither did the doctrine of Christ only make the credulity of the Gentiles to
vanish, but even bad Spirits came out of diverse bodies at the name of Christ:
they became dumb also, and being demanded the reason of their silence, they
were compelled to say, that they were able to do nothing where the name of
Christ was called upon.

SECT. XI.
Answer to the opinion of some that think the beginning and decay of Religions
depend upon the efficacy of the stars.

THere were some Philosophers that did ascribe the beginning and decay of every
Religion unto the stars: But that which they profess themselves to know
there in is taught with such variety and diversity in their Star-gazing
science, that a man can collect nothing from thence for certainty, but only
this that there is no certainty at all therein.

I do not here speak of such effects as have a necessary dependence upon
natural causes, but of those that proceed from the will of man, which of it
self has such liberty and freedom that no necessity or violence can be
incident thereunto from without. For if the assent or consent of the will did
necessarily follow any outward impression, then the power in our soul which
we may perceive it has to consult and deliberate, were given in vain: Also
the equity of all laws, of all rewards and punishments would be abolished,
seeing there can be neither fault nor merit in that which is altogether
necessary and inevitable.

Again, there are diverse evil acts or effects of the will, which if they
proceeded of any necessity from the heavens, then the same heavens and
celestial bodies must needs receive such efficacy from God, and so it would
follow, that God, who is most perfectly good, were the prime cause of that
which is morally evil; And seeing that in his law he prosesseth himself to
abhor wickedness, which if he implanted in the things themselves by such
inevi^able power, then he might be said to will two contraries, to wit, that
the same thing should be done and not be done: also a man should offend in
any action he did, by divine instigation.

They speak more probably that say the influences of the stars do first
affect the air, then our bodies, with such qualities as often times do excite
and stir up in the mind some desires or affections answerable thereunto: and
the will being allured or enticed by these motions does oftentimes yield
thereunto: which though it be granted, as it is credible, for truth, yet it
makes nothing for the question we havein hand. For seeing that Christian
Religion most of all with draws men from those things which are pleasing unto
the body, it cannot therefore have its beginning from the assections of the
body, and consequently not from the influence of the stars; which (as but now
we said) have no power over the mind, otherwise than by the med^ation of those
affections. The most prudent among Astrologers do grant that wi^e and upright
men are not under the dominion of the stars: And such verily were they that
first professed Christianity, as their lives do show. Or if there be any
efficacy in learning and knowledge against the infection of the body, even
among Christians there were ever some that were excellent in this particular.

Besides, as the most learned do confess, the effects of the S^arres
appertain to certain Climates of the world, and are only for a season, but
this Religion has now continued above the space of one thousand six hundred
years, and that not in one part only, but in the most remote places of the
whole world, such as are of a far different situation in respect of the stars.

SECT. XII.
The chief po^nts of Christianity are approved of by the heathen: and if there
he any thing h^t scarce seems crediblos herein, the like or worse is found
among the Pagans.

LAstly, this is an evidence which makes much against the Pagans, so that they
have little or nothing to object against Christian Religion: namely, because
all the parts thereof are of such honesty and integrity, that by their
plainness and perspicuity they do as it were convince the minds of the
heathens themselves, among whom diverse did teach the same truths which
generally our Religion admits of for sound and orthodox: As to give some
instances; true Religion consists not in rites and ceremonies, but in the
worship of the mind and Spirit: he is an adulterer that has but only a
desire to commit adultery: we ought not to revenge injuries: A man may be the
husband of one wife only: And the league or bond of Matrimony ought to be
constant and perpetual: man is bound to do good unto all, specially to them
that are in want: we must refrain from Swearing as much as may be: And as for
our food and apparel we ought to content our selves with so much as will
suffice nature, and the like. Or if happily there be some points in
Christianity not altogether so credible, yet the like also is found amongst the
wisest of the heathen themselves, as before we have shown concerning the
immortality of souls, and of the resurrection of bodies. Thus Plate as he
learned from the Chaldeans, distinguished the divine nature into the Father,
and the mind of the Father; which he calls both the Council and branch of
God, who is the maker of the world; as also the Soul or Spirit which
preserves all things.

I^lian so great an enemy of Christians, thought that the assumption of humane
nature was possible for God, as he gave instance in Aesculapius, whom he
imagined to have descended from heaven, to the end he might teach men the art
of Physic. The Cross of Christ offends many: yet is there not worse
related by the heathen writers concerning their God^, who tell us that some of
them were attendants unto Kings and Princes, others slain with lightening,
others cut in sunder. And the wisest of them say that any honest thing is the
more joyous and delightsome, by how much it cost them the dearer.

To conclude, Plato in the second book of his common wealth as if he had been
a Prophet, says for a man to become truly just and upright, it is requisite
that his virtue be bereaved of all outward ornaments, and that he be by
others accounted a wicked wretch, and scoffed at, and last of all hanged. And
indeed that Christ might be the pattern of greatest patience, it could no
otherwise come to pass.

The fifth Book OF THE TRVNESSE OF Christian Religion.
SECT. I.
A refutation of the Jews, beginning with a speech unto them or prayer for
them.

AS those that come out of a dark dungeon by little and little perceive some
brightness and glimmering between light and darkness: So having done with
the think mist of Paganism, and entering upon Iudaisme, we behold some beams
and light of truth: wherefore I request the Jews that they would hear us
patiently.

We are not ignorant how that they are the of spring of holy men, whom God was
wont to visit both by his holy Prophets, and blessed Angels. Of this nation
sprang our Messiah, and the first Doctors of Christianity: they are the tree
wherinto we are ingraffed: they are the keepers of Gods Oracles, which we do
revere^ce as much as they, even making sighs unto God for them, and praying that
the day may quickly come, when the veil being taken away which hangs over
their faces, they with us shall see the fulfilling of the law; And when (as it
is in their Prophecies) every one of us shall lay hold on the Cloak of the
Hebrew man, desiring that we may together with a holy consent worship the only
true God, who is the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob.

SECT. II.
The Jews ought to account the miracles of Christ sufficiently proved.

FIrst of all then, we must intre at them not to think that to be unjust in
another man's ^ase, which they judge to be just and equitable in their own. If
any Pagan demand of them why they belceve that miracles were wrought by Moses,
they can give no other answer save that there was always so constant a report
thereof among their nation, that it could not but proceed from the testimony of
such as had seen the same.

Thus that the widows oil was increased by Elisaus: that Naam^d the Syrian
was suddenly cured of the leprosy: that the hostesses daughter was restored to
life, and other such like, are believed by the Jews for no other reason than
because witnesses of good credit have recorded to posterity that such things
were done. And they believe Elias hi^ taking up into heaven only for the
testimony of Elizaeus, a man beyond all exception. But we can produce twelve
witnesses o^ honest report to testify that Christ ascended up into heaven
after he had been seen upon earth after his death by many more persons.
Which things i^ they be true, then necessarily Christ's doctrine is true also;
and indeed nothing at all can be alleged by the Jews for themselves, which
by equal right or more just title belongs not unto us. But to omit further
testimonies, it is the confession of the authors of the Talmud, and other Jews
themselves, that strange unders were wrought by Christ, which may suffice for
this particular. Neither could God any way more effectually gain authority
unto his doctrine which was published by man, than by the working of miracles.

SECT. III.
And not believe that they were done by the help of Devils.

THese miracles of Christ, some say, were done by the help of Devils. But this
calumny has been confuted before, when we showed that wheresoever the
doctrine of Christ was taught and known, there all power of the Devils
vanished away. Others reply that Jesus learned Magic arts in Egypt: but this
slander has no more, nay not so much color of truth then the like accusation
by the Pagans framed against Moses, whereof we read in Pliny and Apuleius.

For, that ever Jesus was in Egypt cannot be proved save only out of the
writings of his Disciples: who add further that he was an Infant when he
returned thence. But it is certain by other proofs that Moses lived the most
part of his youth in Egypt. Howbeit the law as well of Moses, as of Christ
frees them both from this crime, plainly forbidding such arts as being
abominable in the sight of God. And without all question, if in the time of
Christ and his Disciples, there had been either in Egypt, or any where else
any such Magical art, whereby men might have been enabled to do the like
marvels as are related of Christ; to wit, the curing of the speechless, the
healing of the lame, the giving sight to the blind, then would Tyberius, Nero,
and other Emperors have had notice thereof, who spared no costs and charges in
the inquiry after such like things.

Nay, if it were true which the Jews relate, how that the Se^ of the great
Council were child in Magic arts that they might convince them that were
guilty of that iniquity; then surely, they being so mightily incensed against
Jesus, as they were, and envying the honor and respect which he obtained by
his miracles, would either themselves have done the like works by the same
art, or by sufficient reasons would have made it appear, that the works of
Christ proceeded from no other cause.

SECT. IIII.
Or by the power of words and sillables.

MOreover that is but a mere fable or impuden^lye, which certain of the Jews
have invented concerning the miracles done by Christ, namely in that they
ascribe the same unto a mystical unknown name, which (as they say) being
placed in the Temple by Solomon, was to be preserved safe by two lions, during
the space of one thousand years and more, afterward was stolen away by Jesus.
For there is no mention made of those lions either in the books of Kings and
Chronicles, or by Josephus: nor was there any such thing found by the Romans,
who accompanying Pompey, entered into that Temple, before the times of Jesus.

SECT. V.
The miracles of Jesus were divine, because he taught the worship of one God
the maker of the world.

IT being then granted as the Jews cannot deny, that wonders were wrought by
Christ, by the very law of Moses it will follow that he must be believed. F^r
God says, Deuteron 18. that (...) Prophets after the time of Moses should be
raised up of God, to whom the people should be obedient, or otherwise become
liable to grievous punishments. Now miracles are the most infallible marks of
the Prophets, than the which, more certain notes cannot be imagined. But in
Deuteron. 13. it is said, that if any professing himself to be a Prophet and
does work wonders, yet the same must not be believed if he go about to
entice the people to a new worship of the Gods. For, though such miracles be
done by him, yet this is only by Gods permission for trial, whether the
people would persist constantly in the worship of the true God. From which
places compared together the Hebrew interpreters do rightly collect that every
one must be believed that works miracles, unless thereby he entice men from
the worship of the true God; and in that case only miracles are not to be
credited, though in show most glorious. Now Jesus did not only prohibit the
worshipping of false Gods, but also expressly condemned it as a most grievous
crime, and taught us to reverence the writings both of Moses and the Prophets
that succeeded him. Wherefore there is nothing that can be objected against
the miracles that were wrought by Christ.

SECT. VI.
Answer to the objection taken from the difference between the Law of Moses
and of Christ, where is shown that a more perfect law than that of Moses might
be given.

AS touching that which some allege concerning the difference between the law
of Moses and the law of Christ, it seems but of small moment. For the Hebrew
Doctors themselves make this rule, namely, that by the authority of a Prophet
who works miracles, any precept whatsoever may be violated and transgressed,
except that only which concerns the worship of the true God. And surely that
power of making laws, which belonged unto God when he gave the commandments
by the hand of Moses, went not from him: Neither can any man that of his own
power makes laws be thereby hundred from making the contrary.

That which they object of Gods immutability is nothing: for we speak not
here of Gods nature and essence, but of his works. Light is changed into
darkness, youth into old age, summer into winter, and all by the work of God.
This God at the beginning gave Adam leave in Paradise to eat of other apples,
but he forbad him to eat of the fruit of one tree: Why? even because it so
pleased him. Generally he prohibited men to commit murder, yet he commanded
Abraham to kill his son. One while he forbad to offer sacrifices apart from
the Tabernacle, another while he admitted of them. Neither will it follow,
because the Law which was given by Moses was good, therefore no better could
be given. Parents are wont to babble and prattle with infants, to wink at the
vices of their childhood, and entice them to learn with an apple or a
butter-lep: But so soon as they come to riper age, their speech is amended,
the precepts of virtue are taught them by degrees, and they learn what is the
goodness and benefit of honesty. Now it is plain that the precepts of that
law of Moses were not exactly perfect, because many* holy men of those times,
lod a more holy life than those commandments required. Thus Moses who suffered
the revenge of a wrong to be exacted partly by blows, and partly by sentence,
himself being vexed with most bitter injuries, became an intercessor for his
enemies. So David willing to have his rebellious Son to be spared, did
patiently endure reproachful speeches cast upon himself. We find not that
any good men left their wives, which notwithstanding was permitted by the law.
The reason of all this chiefly is, because those laws were accommodated to the
greater part of that people: therefore in the state and condition they were in,
it was meet something should be kept had and reserved, which afterward might
be perfected, when God by a greater efficacy of the Spirit was to choose unto
himself a peculiar people out of all nations. Yea, all the rewards which are
expressly promised by the law of Moses, belong only to this mortal life:
wherefore it must be granted, that there might some better law be given,
whereby the reward of eternal happiness should be promised, not under any
shadows, but in plain and express terms: which we see is done by the law of
Christ.

SECT. VII.
The law of Moses was observed by Jesus, who abolished ^o commandments that
were essentially good.

ANd here by the way, for the conviction of the Jews it must be noted, that
those Jews who lived in Christ's time, used him most basely, and punished him
most severely; when as yet there could no just accusation be laid against him
for transgressing the law. He was circumcised; he used the same food and
apparel that the Jews used: those that were healed of lepers he sent unto the
Priests: The Passover and other festival days he religiously observed:
Though he did cure some upon the Sabbath day: yet he showed both by the law
and by the common received opinions that such works were not unlawful to be
done upon the Sabbath day; And then chiefly began he to publish the abrogation
of some laws, when after his triumphover death he ascended into heaven,
adorning his Disciples upon earth with gracious gifts of the holy Spirit,
whereby he made it evident that he had obtained a regal power, which includes
the authority of making a law: And that according to Daniels prophecy, chapter 3.
and 7. compared with chap. 8. and 11. where he foretold, how that a little
after the destruction of the Kingdoms of Syria and Egypt (the latter whereof
happened in the reign of Augustus,) God would give the kingdom to a man,
which should seem but simple and necessitous, to a people chosen out of all
nations and languages, which Kingdom should never have an end.

Now that part of the law, the necessity whereof was taken away by, Christ,
contained nothing that was honest in ^^s own nature: but consisted of things
that were indifferent in themselves, and consequently not immutable. For i^ the
same things had had in them any necessary ground why they should have been
done; then would God have prescribed them not to one, but to all the people;
and not after that mankind had lived above the space of two thousand years,
but even from the beginning of all. Neither Abel, Enoch, Noah, Me'ch^sedeck
Job, Abxuham, Isaac, or Jacob, (though all of them were godly men, and dearly
be loved of God) knew this part of the Law, but were altogether ignorant or
very little acquainted there with; yet notwithstanding for all that, they
received the testimony of their confidence in God, and of Gods love unto them.
Besides, neither did Moses exhort Iethro his father in law to the receiving of
these rites, nor did Jonah, the Ninivites, neither did any other Prophets
reprehend the Chaldeans, Egyptians, Sydonians, Tyrians, Idumeans, and
M^abites, for not admitting those ceremonies, though when they writ unto them,
they reckoned up their sins exactly enough. These then were peculiar precepts
given either for the eschewing of some evil, which the Jews were prone unto,
or for the trial of their obedience, or for the signification of some future
things.

Wherefore it is no more to be wondered that these are abolished, than if any
King should abrogate some Municipall statutes, to the end he might establish
one law within his dominions. Neither can there any reason be alleged, to
prove that God did so bind himself, as that he would change nothing of the
same.

For if it be said, that these precepts are perpetual, the same word men
oftentimes use, when they would signify that that which they command is not
yearly or for a certain time, suppose in the time of war, peace or famine.
Yet they are not thereby hindered from making new constitutions of the same
things, specially when the public good requires the same. Thus in like manner
some laws given to the Hebrews were only temporary, during the peoples abode
in the wilderness: others were proper and peculiarly appointed for their
habitation in the land of Canaan: therefore for distinction sake of these from
the other, he calls them perpetual, whereby may be understood, that they ought
not any where to be changed, or ever intermitted, unless God signify that it
is his will so to be. Which manner of speaking, since it is commonly used by
all people, they ought not to wonder at; considering that in their law the same
is called a perpetual statute, and a perpetual bondage, which continues only
from one Iubily to another: And the coming of the Messiah is called the
accomplishment of the Iubily, or the greatest Iubily of all. Thus in the Hebrew
Prophets there was anciently a promise of making a new covenant, as in Ierem.
31. where God promises that he will make a new covenant which shall be put
into their inward parts, and written in their hearts; neither shall men have
annoed that one shall learn Religion of another for the same shall be manifest
unto all, and they shall all know. Yea further the Lord will forgive them their
former iniquities, and will remember their ^in^t no more: which is as if a King
after great enmity and discord had amongst his citizens and subjects, should
for the establishment of peace and tranquillity among them, abolish diverse
laws, and make a perfect^ (...), common to them all, promising forgivenes of
faults bypast, if afterward they doeamend. And this which has been said
might suffice to be spoken for the abrogation of the law, the parts whereof
we will i^ the next place show were neither such as in themselves could be
well pleasing unto God, nor ought they to continue for ever.

SECT. VIII.
As the sacrifices which of themselves were never wel-pleasing unto God.

THe first and chief thing to be considered, are the sacrifices, which many of
the Hebrews think were invented by man, before that they were commanded by
God. And true it is indeed, the Hebrews, were desirous of many rites and
ceremonies, which might be the reason why God enjoined them so many; Or else
because he would not have them return unto the worship of fulse Gods, by the
remembrance of their sojourning in Egypt.

Howbeit when their posterity made so great reckoning of them, as though of
themselves they had been acceptable unto God, and a part of true piety; then
did the Prophets reprehend them for it: I will not reprove thee, says God by
David, in the fiftieth Psalm, for thy sacrifices, or thy burnt offerings to
have been continually before me. I will take no bullock out of thy house,
nor he goats out of thy folds.

For every beast of the forest is mine, and so are the cattle upon a thousand
hills. I know all the fowls of the mountains: and the wild beasts of the
field are mine. If I were hungry, I would not tell thee, for the world is mine
and the fullness there of: think thou that I ^ill^^t the flesh of Bulls, or
drink the blood of goats? Offer unto God thankesgiving, and pay thy vows unto
the most high.

Some there are among the Hebrews, who think that this is spoken because they
that offered those sacrifices, were of an impure mind, and dishonest
conversation. But the words now alleged show another matter, to wit, that the
thing in it self was no whit receptable unto God. For if we consider the
whole s^ries and order of the Psalm, we shall find that God in these words
speaks unto the godly: for he had said, Gather my Saints together unto me,
and hear my people: which are the words of a teacher and one that instructs.
Then having ended the saying unto the godly, as his manner is, he speaks unto
the wicked: But unto the wicked God says. To the same sense we may cite other
places, as in the 51. Psalm. Thou desire not sacrifice, else would I give it
thee, but thou delightest not in burnt offerings. The sacrifice of God is a
broken Spirit: a broken and contrite heart O God thou will not despise. So
likewise in the fortieth Psalm; Sacrifice and offering thou did not defire,
mine ears have thou opened; burnt offering and sin offering have thou not
required. Then said I, lo, I come: In the volume of the book it is written of
me: I delight to do thy will, O my God: yea thy law is within my heart. I have
preached righteousness in the great congregation: Lo, I have not refrained my
lips O Lord, thou know. I have not hid thy righteousness within my heart, I
have declared thy faithfulness and thy salvation: I have not concealed thy
loving kindness, and thy truth from the great congregation. The like we read
in the Prophet Isaiah, chap. (...). To what purpose is the multitude of your
sacrifices unto me, says the Lord? I am full of the burnt offerings of rams,
and the sat of sed beasts, and I delight not in the blood of bullockes, or of
lambs, or of begoats. When ye come to appear before me, who has required
this at your hand to tread my courts? Answerable to this place is that in Ier.
(...). Thus says the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel; Put your burnt
offerings unto your sacrifices, and eat flesh: For I spoke not unto your
fathers, nor commanded them in the day that I brought them out of the land of
Egypt, concerning burnt offerings and sacrifices. But this thing commanded I
them, saying, Obey my voice, and I will be your God, and ye shall be my
people: and walk ye in all the ways that I have commanded you, that it may
be well unto you. Agreeing with this is that in Hosea. 6. I desired mercy and
not sacrifice, and the knowledge of God more than burnt offerings. Lastly, in
the sixth o^ Micah when the question wa^ made, how a man might reconcile God
unto himself best? whether by coming before him with a great number of rams
or with a great quantity of oil or with calves of a year old? to this God
answers and says, I will tell thee what is truly good and acceptable unto me;
namely, to do^ justly, and to love mercy, and t^ walk humbly with thy God.

By all which places seeing i^ is evident that sacrifices are no^ put in the
number of such things* as God primarily and chiefly requires, but that the
people by little and little, as commonly they do, out of a wicked superstition
placed the greatest part o^ godliness therein; what wonder is it then if at
length God took away that which being indifferent in its own nature, yet by
(...) was abused, like as when ^ing Hezekiah demolished the (...) serpent which
was set up by Moses, when the people began to worship the same with re^igious
worship.

Moreover there are diverse Prophecies, that foretold these sa^rifices, whereof
we speak, should come to an end: which any one may easily conceive, considering
that according to the law of Moses, only the posterity of Aa^ was to do
sacrifice, and that only in their fathers country. Thus in the 110 Psalm
there is a King promised, whose dominion should be most ample, the beginning
whereof should be out of Si^ and this same King was to be (...) Priest for
ever after the order of Melchisedeck. So Isai^ says, ^hap. 19. That there
shall be an al^ar to the Lord in the midst of the land of Egypt, where not only
the Egyptians, but the Assyrians also, and the Israelites shall worship God.
And in the ^6. chapter, he^ says that the people of all nations and languages
which are far and widely distant, shall come as well as the Israelites, and
offer gifts unto God, and of them also there shall be ordained Priests and
Levites: All which could not come to pass so long as the law of Moses remained
in force* Add unto these that which in the first of Malachy God foretells of
the Hebrews, saying, I have no pleasure in you, ne^^her will I accept an
offering at your hand. For from the rising of the Sun even unto the going
down of the same, my name shall be great among the Gentiles, and in every
place in^e^se shall be offered unto my name, and a pure offering, for my name
shall be great among the heathen, says the Lord of hosts.

Lastly, Daniel in his 9. chapter rehearsing the Prophecy of the Angel Gabriel
concerning Christ, ^ith that he shall cause the sacrifice and the oblation to
cease. And ^ot by words only, but really and indeed God plainly shows that
he likes not of those sacrifices which were prescribed by Moses, seeing that
he has suffered the jews for the space of one thousand six hundred years and
more to be without Temple, without Altar, and without any certain distinction
of their Tribes or ly^age; whence it might appear who they were that should
lawfully offer sacrifice.

SECT. IX.
The difference of meats.

NOw what we have declared concerning the law of sacrifices, the same may be
proved of that law which forbids the use of some kinds of meats. For it is
plain that after Noah's great flood God gave license unto his posterity to use
any sort of victual: This law or license passed not only to Iaphet and Cham,
but also unto Sem and his posterity, to wit, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. But
afterward when the people being in Egypt were addicted to vain superstitions
of that Country; then began God to forbid them the eating of some kind of
living creatures; either because the Egyptians offered the same creatures unto
their Gods and made d^vination by them; or because in that ceremonial law men,
sundry ^es were shadowed out by diverse kind of living creatures.

Again that these precepts were not universal it is manifest by that stature
which was made touching the flesh of a beast that ^ied of it self, Deuteronomy. 14.
which to ^^t was not lawful for the Israelites, but it was lawful for the
^^rangers unto whom the Jews by divine command were to perform all offices of
courtesy, as being inhabitants after a sort commended by God. Likewise the
ancient Hebrew Doctors do plainly teach that in the time of the Messiah, the
law concerning forbidden meats should cease: when the Sow should be as clean
and pure as the Ox. And verily in as much as God out of all nations would
collect unto himself ^^e Church, it was more just and equitable to have a
common liberty than a bondage in such things.

SECT. X.
And of days.

IT follows that we consider of festival days: all which were instituted and
ordained in remembrance of that benefit received of God, to wit, when they were
freed from Egyptian calamity, and afterward brought into the promised land. Now
the Prophet Jeremy in the 16. and 2^ chapters says, that the time wou^^ come
when more new and great^ benefits should so obscure there membrance of that
benefit, as the afterward there should scarce b^ any mention thereof. Besides,
tha^ which but now was said concerning sacrifices is true also of festival
days, the people began to put confidence in them, thinking that if they kept
and observe^ them well, it were no matte^ though they transgressed in other
matters: whereupon in the fir^ chapter of Isaiah, God says that his soul
hated their new Moon and appointed feasts, and that they were such a trouble
unto him (...) that he was weary to bear them* More particularly it is
objected concerning the Sabbath, that the law thereof is universal and
perpetual because it was not given (...) one peculiar people only, but (...)
Adam the Parent of all man^ at the very beginning of the world. I answer with
the most learned of the Hebrews, that there is a two fold precept concerning
the Sabbath, the first is a precept for commemoration, Exodus ^0. 8. and the
second is a precept for observation, Exodus 31. 31. The former is fulfilled by a
holy remembrance of the worlds creation: and the latter consists in (...) exact
refraining from all kinds of worke-a-day labor. The former was giv^^ (...)
gi^ning, which d^ godly men before the law did obey, to wit, Enoch, Noah,
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob: during the time of the many travels which these last
performed, we read (...) any where that they ceased or intermitted their
journey for the Sabbath, which after they (...) out of Egypt thou shall always
find. For after that the people were brought out of Egypt, and had happily
passed over the red Sea, the first day was celebrated a Sabbath of rest and
safety; wherein they sang a Song of triumph and rejoicing: from which time that
exact rest upon the Sabbath was commanded, which is first mentioned upon
occasion of gathering the Manna, Exodus 16. 23. Exodus 35. 2. Levit. 23. 3. And
in this sense the deliverance from Egypt is rendered to be a reason for the law
of the Sabbath, Deuteronomy. 5. 15. By which law it was provided also for servants
against the severity of those masters that would not permit them to coase from
daily labor, as may be seen in the places aforesaid. It is true indeed,
strangers were bound to observe this law because it was meet there should be
one form of rest among all the people, but this law of so exact resting upon
the Sabbath was not given to other people, as may appear for that in many
places it is called a s^g^e, and a special covenant between God and the
Israelites, as in Exodus 31. 13. and 16. Now we have proved before by the
promise of far greater benefits that the ordinances which were instituted for
a memorial of the coming out from Egypt were not such as ought never to
cease. Add moreover, if the law concerning the rest upon the Sabbath had been
given from the beginning, and in that sense that it never might be abolished;
then surely the same had overswayed in coping with other laws; which now makes
against it. For it is evident that infant, may be rightly circumcised upon the
Sabbath; like as during the time that the Temple stood there were beasts killed
for sacrifice as well upon the Sabbath as upon other days. Yea the Hebrew
Masters themselves show the mutability of this law, when they say, that by the
Prophets appointment and command a work may be rightly done upon the Sabbath
day: And this they prove by the taking of Ierico upon the Sabbath according to
the commandment of Ioshuah. And some of them not unfitly show that the
distinction of days shall be taken away in the time of the Messiah, namely
from that place in Isaiah, chap. 66. (...) it is (...), it shall come to pass
that from one new Moon to another, from one Sabbath to another, all flesh
shall come to worship before the Lord.

SECT. XI.
Also of outward Circumcision.

IN the next place let us come to circumcision, which certainly is Elder than
Moses: For it was given in command to Abraham and his posterity.

Howbeit the commandment thereof was the introduction o^ beginning of the
covenant published by Moses: For thus we read that God spoke unto Abraham* Genesis
17. saying, I will give unto thee, and to thy seed after thee, the land wherein
thou art a stranger, all the land of Canaan, for an everlasting possession, and
I will be their God. And God said unto, Abraham, Thou shall keep my covenant
therefore, thou and thy seed after thee: every man-child among you shall be
circumcise^. But now we know by what has bin already said, that in the place
of this covenant, a new covenant was to succeed which should be common to all
people: Wherefore the necessity thereof, which is the note of distinction, ought
to cease. Besides, in the precept of circumcision there was a mystical and
more excellent significations contained, which the Prophets do plainly show
in that they command the circumcision of the heart, which all the commandments
of Jesus aim at.

Wherefore the promises annexed to the circumcision are in like manner to be
referred to some greater thing; As namely that of earthly possessions is
referred to the possession of eteruity in the heavens; which was never made
more manifest than by Jesus: So that promise of making Abraham a father of many
nations, has reference to that time, when not a few only but an infinite
number of people dispersed thorowout the whole world should imitate Abraham's
faith and confidence in God, which is so often mentioned in seripture; and this
can only be in the time of ^^e Gospel. Now it, is no marvel if the shadows
of an intended matter be taken away, when the matter it self is accomplish.
Lastly, that the grace of God was not tied to this sign we may casily
discern, because not only the ancients, but Abraham himself having not as
yet received circumcision, pleased God: The Hebrews also dining all the time
of their journey through the deserts of Arabia, omitted circumcision, and yet
God found no fault with them for it.

SECT. XII.
And yet the Apostles of Jesus were gentle in the toleration of these things.

NO doubt but the Hebrews had cause to yield many thanks to Jesus and his
disciples or Ambassadors, for that by Christ they might be freed from that
heavy yoke of ceremonies, and should be assured of this their freedom both by
gifts and miracles, such as were not inferior to those that were wrought by
Moses aforesaid.

Neither did the first publishers of our Christian doctrine exact so much of
them as to acknowledge this their happiness: But if they would admit of the
Commandments of Christ, which were full of all, honesty; they freely and*
willingly suffered them to follow what course of life they pleased in matters
of indifferency. Thus neither were the strangers (to whom this law of rites was
never given) bound of necessity to observe the same. Which one thing is
sufficient to make it plainly appear that the Jews do unjustly reject the
doctrine of Christ under that pretense of the ceremonial law. Having then
answered this objection which chiefly is alleged against the miracles of
Jesus: we will now come to other arguments, which may fitly serve for the
consutation of the Jews.

SECT. XIII.
A proof against the Jews from, the promised Messiah.

IT is agreed upon between us and the Jews about the predictions of the
Prophets, that amongst the many authors and donors of great good things to the
Hebrews, there was one man promised far more excellent than the rest, whom
by a common name they call a Messiah; which appellation is proper unto him
after a singular manner. This Messiah we say is come long ago, but they expect
him as yet for to come. It remains then that that we enquire the truth hereof
out of those books, the authority whereof we both do jointly acknowledge.

SECT. XIIII.
Who is proved to be already come, by the limited time of his coming which
was fore told.

THe Prophet Daniel, whose singular piety is commended by Ezekiel, neither
would willingly deceive us, nor was he himself deceived by the Angel
Gabriel: yet being taught by the same Angel, in the ninth chapter of his
Prophecy he has left it recorded, that before the space of five hundred
years should be expired, after the promulgation of the de^ree touching the
restoring of the City Jerusalem, the Messiah should come. But now since that
time above two thousand years have passed; and yet he, whom the Jews expect,
is not come; neither can they name any other person to whom that space or time
can be rightly applied; which notwithstanding agrees so fitly unto Jesus as
that Neh^mias, a Rabbi Doctor, who lived about fifty years before Christ,
plainly said then, that the time of the Messiah foretold by Daniel could not
be protracted beyond those fifty years then next ensuing. And with this note
of time, agrees another note which we have touched before, to wit, concerning
the dominion over all nations by divine power, after that the posterity of
Seleueus and Lagu^ had ceased to reign; the latter whereof ended in Cleopatra,
a little before Jesus was borne. The third note is set down in the foresaid
Chapter of Daniel; namely, that after the coming of the Messiah, the City of
Jerusalem should be overthrown: which Prophecy of the cities destruction
Josephus himself refers unto his time; whence it follows that the time
appointed for the coming of the Messiah, was then already past. Hereunto
likewise belongs that in the second chapter of the Prophet Haggai, where God by
the Prophet incourageth Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel governor of Judah, and
Ioshuah the son of Iosedech the high Priest, comforting them with this
promise, that the glory of the latter house should be greater than the former:
which certainly can neither be meant of the greatness of the work, nor of the
matter of the building, nor of the fabric and artificial structure, nor of
the beauty of that Temple, as may appear by the history of those times both in
the holy scriptures and in Josephus, compared with that of the Temple of
Solomon. But God shows wherein the latter Temple should excel the former,
when he promises (as it were by a certain covenant) to establish his peace,
that is, his mercy and loving kindness in that Temple: whereof the Prophet
Malachy speaks more fully in his third Chapter, Behold I will send my
Messenger and he shall prepare the way before me; (now Malachy lived when the
latter Temple was built,) And the Lord whom ye seek shall suddenly come to
his Temple: even the Messenger of the covenant whom ye delight in. Wherefore
the Messiah ought to come while the second Temple stood, which as the Hebrews
note, was during the space between Zerubbabel and Vespasian: for in the time
of Herod the great the Temple was not reedified out of its old r^ines, but by
little and little it was repaired, bearing still the name of the same Temple.
And indeed there was so firm an opinion amongst the Hebrews and the
neighboring people that the Messiah was surely to come in those times, that
many took Herod, others Judas Gaulonites, and a third sort some that lived
about the times of Jesus to be the Messiah.

SECT. XV.
Answer to that which some conceive touching the deforring of his coming for
the sins of the people.

SOme of the Jews perceiving themselves to be hard put to it by these
arguments concerning the coming of the Messiah, do go about to shift off the
same by telling us that their fins were the cause why he did not come at the
promised time. But for answer, to omit what is shown in the Prophecies
aforesaid touching the determination of the decree without all exception or
uncertainty, how is it possible that this coming should be deferred by reason
of their sins, seeing also it was foretold that because of the many and
heinous transgressions of the people, the great City should be laid waste a
little after the times of the Messiah? Moreover the reason why the Messiah
should come was, that he might both administer a medicine to the wicked world,
and procure pardon for offenses, withal giving good rules for reformation of
life. Whereupon in the thirteenth chapter of Zachary, it is meant of his times
when it is said that there shall be a fountain opened to the house of David,
and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, for sin and for uncleanness. And it is
affirmed by the Hebrews themselves shall be called Ish Copher, that is, a
reconciler or peacemaker. But it is against all reason to say that any thing
was deferred for that disease, to which it was precisely destinated and
appointed.

SECT. XVI.
Also from the present state of the Jews compared with those things which the
Law promises.

TOuching this which we affirm of the coming of the Messiah long since into
the world, the Jews are convinced by very sense. God made a covenant with
Moses, and promised to them the happy possession of the land of Palestina, so
long as they should lead their life according to the commandments of the law:
But contrarily he threatened banishment and such like calamity to come upon
them if they did grievously transgress the same. Yet if at any time they were
afflicted with miseries, and repenting of their sins returned unto obedience;
then would he be moved to have mercy upon the people, and cause that though
they were scattered to the uttermost parts of the earth, yet should they
return again into their own countrey^ as we may read in Deuteronomy. 30 and
Nehem. 1. and elsewhere. But now for the space of one thousand five hundred
years and more, the Jews have wanted a Country and a Temple, which when they
would have built anew, they were always hindered by some empediment or other.
When this people in times past had defiled themselves with abominable
wickednesses, every where sacrificing even their children unto Saturn,
accounting adultery to be no sin, oppressing and spoiling the fatherless and
widows, and shedding the innocent blood in great abundance, all which the
Prophets did upbraid them with; then did they sufferexile, yet only for the
space of seventy years, during which time God did not neglect to speak unto
them by his Prophets and to comfort them with the hope of a return, pointing
also at the very time thereof. But now ever since they were expelled out of
their Country, they continue banished and contemptible: No Prophet comes unto
them: there is no sign or token of their return. Their Masters and ring-^ers
(as if they were blasted with the spirit of giddinesse^) are fallen away to
filthy fables and doctrines very ridiculous, where with the books of the
Talmud do abound: which they are bold to call the law given by word of mouth,
and are wont to equal or prefer the same to that which was delivered by
Moses. For such things as are therein to be read concerning Gods weeping and
lamenting because he had suffered the city to be destroyed; of his daily care
and diligence in reading the law; of Behemoth and Leviathan, and many other
matters, are so absurd that it would be tedious and irksome to repeat them.
Howbeit the Jews in all this time have neither turned to the worship of false
Gods, as they did in times past; neither have they defiled themselves with
cruelty, nor are they accused of fornication and adultery: But by prayers and
fastings they labor to appease Gods wrath, and yet are not heard. Which things
being so, one of these two must needs be granted, namely, that either the
covenant that was given by Moses is quite abolished; or the Jews are guilty of
some notorious crime, which has continued for so many ages together: which
what it is let themselves speak: or if they cannot tell, then let them believe
us that this sin is no other but the contempt of the Messiah, who was come
before that these evils began to fall upon them.

SECT. XVII.
Jesus is proved to be the Messiah by those Prophecies which were foretold
concerning the Messiah.

BY this which has been spoken it is manifest that the Messiah came many ages
ago: we add further that the same is no other but Jesus. For what other
persons soever either were or would have been accounted the Messiah, the same
left no sect behind them to uphold and maintain that opinion. There are not any
at this day that profess themselves to be followers either of Herod, or of
Judas Gaulonita, or of that great impostor Barchochebas, who living in the
times of Adrian said that he was the Messiah, and deceived some even of the
more learned. But those that profess the name of Jesus, have continued from
the time that he lived upon earth, even until this day being not a few only
in this or that country, but very many dispersed as far as the world
extends. I could allege many other testimonies anciently foretold concerning
the Messiah, which we believe were accomplished in Ies^, since they cannot be
affirmed of any other: as namely that he came of the posterity of David, and
was borne of a Virgin; which was divinely revealed to him that married that
Virgin; whom he would have put away, supposing she had been got with child by
another; Also that this Messiah was borne at Bethlehem, and began first to
publish his doctrine in Galilee, healing all kinds of diseases, giving sight
to the blind, and making the lame to walk: but this one may suffice for many,
that his doctrine continues entire unto this day. It is most manifest by the
Prophecies of David, Isaiah, Zachariah, and Hosea, that the Messiah was to be
an instructor not only of the Jews but also of the Gentile: by whom all
worshippings of false Gods should come to ruin, and a huge multitude of aliens
and strangers should be brought to the worship of the only true God. Before
this Jesus his coming almost the whole world was confounded with false
worships and religions: which afterward by little and little began to vanish
away, and many men both of the common sort and of higher rank, as Kings and
Princes were converted unto the worship and service of one God. This was no
grammercy to the Jewish Rabbis; but to the Disciples of Jesus and their
successors. Thus they were made the people of God, that before were not the
people of God; and the saying o^ old Jacob, Genesis 49. was fulfilled* The scopter
shall not depart from Judah until Sh^lo come. Which words the Chaldee and other
interpreters expound of the Messiah, to whom the foreign nations should be
obedient.

SECT. XVIII.
Answer to that which is objected of some things that are not fulfilled.

THe Jews usually object that same things were foretold concerning the times
of the Messiah, which are not yet fulfilled. But for answer, those matters
which they allege are obscure and admit of diverse significations: wherefore
they are not to be received before such things as are more manifest; as namely
the holiness of the commandments of Jesus; the excellency of the reward, and
the perspicuous language, wherein it is propounded: to which if we add the
testimony of his miracles, there need no other motive for inducement to the
receiving of his doctrine. As for those Prophecies which g^ under the name of a
she o^ ^sped book, oftentimes for the right understanding thereof, there is
requisite some divine helps and assistance; which they are worthily deprived
of, that neglect manifest truths. The place, of scripture which they allege
are divers^y expounded, as themselves cannot deny. And if any man please to
compare either the ancient interpreters which lived when the people were led
captive into Babylon, or such as lived about Christ's time, with those that writ
after that Christianity began to be hateful and odious unto the Jews, he
shall find no expositions purposely invented, to cross those former that well
agreed with Christian interpretations. They know well enough that there are
many things in the holy scriptures which must be understood by a trope, and
not in property of speech; as when God is said to have descended; and to have a
mouth, ears, eyes and nostrils. And why may not we likewise expound diverse
things that are spoken of the times of the Messiah after the same manner; as
that the wolf shall dwell with the lamb, and the Leopard shall lie down with
the k^d, and the c^lfe and the young lion, and the failing together; and the
sucking child shall play with the Serpents: and the mountain of gold shall
be exalted above other mountains, whither strangers shall come and worship.

There are some things promised which by antecedent and consequent words, or by
the very sense imply a secret condition in them. Thus God promised many things
unto the Hebrews upon condition they would receive the Messiah that was sent,
and obey him: which same things if they come not to pass accordingly, then may
they blame themselves that are the cause thereof.

Again, other matters were promised expressly and without all condition, which
if they be not already accomplished, yet may be hoped for hereafter. For it
is ^vident even among the Jews, that the time or Kingdom of the Messiah must
endure unto the end of the world.

SECT. XIX.
And to that which is objected of the mean condition and death of Jesus.

MAny do take exception at the meek and mean condition of Jesus: but
unjustly, because in sacred writ it is often said that God will exalt the
humble and meek, but cast down the proud. Jacob when be passed over Jordan
carried nothing with him save his staff only; and yet was enriched with a
great slocke of sheep.

Moses was a poor exile, and feeding the slockes, when God appeared to him in
the bush, and gave him commission for the conduct of his people. David also was
called to his Kingdom when he was feeding (...), and with many other such
like examples does the sacred story abound. Now concerning the Messiah, we
read, that he should be a gladsome Messenger unto the poor, that he should
make no noise in public, or use any strife and contention, but deal gently,
forbearing to break the shaken reed, and unwilling to quench the smoking ^l^x.

Neither can any of his afflictions, no not his ig^ death, make him desp^cable
to any. For God oftentimes suffers the godly, not only to be vexed and
disquieted by the wicked, as righteous Lot was by the citizens of Sodom: but
also even to be destroyed and slain, as is plain by the example of Abel who
was cruelly murdered; of Isa^ who was saw^n in pieces; and of the saven
brethren in the Machabees, who together with their mother were miserably
^o^mented and put to death. The very Jews themselves sing the Se^h Psalm,
wherein are these words, The dead bodies of thy servants have they given to be
mea^ unto the fowls of the heaven: the flesh of thy Saints unto the beasts of
the earth. Their blood have they shed like water round about Jerusalem: and
there was none to (...) them. And whosoever considers the words of Isaiah in
the 53. chapter, cannot deny that the Messiah himself ought to have passed
through much aff^ion and death, to come into his Kingdom, and obtain power to
adorn his household or Church with excellent gifts.

The words in the Prophet are these; Who has believed our report, and to whom
is the arm of the Lord revealed. For he shall grow up before him as a tender
plant, and as a root out of the dry ground: He has no form or comeliness,
and when we shall see him, there is no beauty that we should desire him. He
is despised and rejected of men; a man of sorrows, and acquainted with
griefs: And we hide as it were our faces from him. He was despised, and we
esteemed him not. Surely he has borne our griefs, and carried our sorrows,
yet we did esteem him stricken, s^itten of God and afflicted. But he was
wounded for our tr^s he was bruised for our ^^quities: the ^hastifement of our
peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed. All we like sheep have
gone astray, we have turned every one to his own way: And the Lord has laid
on him the iniquity of ^ll. He was oppressed, and he was afflicted; yet he
opened not his mouth. He is brought as a lamb to the slaughter, and as a
sheeps before ^^^shearers is dumb, so he opens not his mouth. He^ was taken
from pris^, and from judgment, and who shall declare his generation. For he
was out off out of the land of the living; for the transgression of my people
he was stricken; and he made his gravwith the wicked, and with the rich in his
death: because he had done no violence, neither was any deceit in his mouth.
Yet i^ has pl^^sed the Lord to bruise him: ^ee ^ath put him to grief. When
thou (...) make his soil an offering for (...) he shall see his seed, he shall
pr^ his days; and the pleasure of ^e Lord shall prosper in his hand; Her shall
^ee of the travel of his soil, and shall be satisfied: by his knowledge shall
my righteous servant justify many. For he shall bear their iniquities,
therefore will I divide him a portion with the great, and he shall divide the
(...) with the strong: because he has powered out his soul unto death. And
he was numbered with the transgressors, and he bare the sin of many, and made
intercession for the transgressors. Who is there either among the Kings or
Prophets, to whom these things can be applied? Surely none. As touching that
shift which some later Jews have invented, telling us that the Prophet speaks
here of the Hebrews dispersed through all nations, that by his own example and
manner of speech he might every where gain the more Proselytes; this sense
first of all is repugnant to many testimonies of holy writ which say, that no
harm is befalne the Jews, which they by their evil deeds have not deserved,
and a great deal more. Then again the very form of the Prophetical speech
bears not that interpretation For either the Prophet, (which seems more
proper to that place) or God says: This evil happened unto him for the
iniquities of my people. Now the people of Isaiah, or the peculiar people of
God, are the people of the Hebrews, therefore he who is said by Isaiah to
have suffered for grievous things, cannot be that people.

But the ancient Doctors of the Hebrews more inge^iously confess that these
things were spoken of the Messiah; whereupon some later among them have fained
two Messiases; the one they call the son of Joseph, who was to suffer many
miseries and a bloody death: the other is the son of David, to whom all
things should succeed prosperously. Howbeit better it were, and more consonant
with the writings of the Prophets, to acknowledge but one Messiah, who was to
pass unto his Kingdom through many difficulties and death it self, which we
believe of Jesus, as the matter it self declares to be most true.

SECT. XX.
As though they were honest men that put him to death.

MAny of the Jews are kept back from the discipline and profession of Jesus
by a certain preconceived opinion of the virtue and honesty of their ancestors,
and specially of the Priests, who out of prejudice condemned Jesus and rejected
his doctrine. But concerning the quality of their Ancestors, (that they may see
I do them no wrong) let them hear the words of their own law and Prophets,
wherein they are often called uncircumcis^d in heart and ears, a people that
honored God with their lips, and with the garnish of ceremonies; but their
hearts were far from him. It was their Ancestors that went about and were
very near to have killed their brother Joseph; and in very deed sold him into
bondage. It was their ancestors that by their continual mutinies and seditions
made Moses weary of his life, who was their leader and redeemer, to whom the
earth, the sea, and the A^e obeyed. These were they that loathed the bread that
was sent from heaven; complaining as though they had been in greatest want and
scarcity, even when they belched up again the foul and food that they had
eaten. It was their Ancestors that forsaking David so excellent and good a
King, followed Absolon his rebellious son. It was their Ancesters that slew
Zachariah the son of ^eh^iada in the most holy place, so making their Priest
himself an oblation of their cruelty in the very Court of the house of the
Lord. Now concerning the Priests, they were such as conspired the death of
Jeremy by a false accusation, and had killed him indeed, unless they had been
hindered by the authority of the governors: notwithstanding which, they
prevailed so far as to have him imprisoned until the very moment that the
City was taken. If any man imagine those were any thing better that lived in
the times of Jesus, then Josephus will show him his error, who describes their
villainous acts and grievous torments, the like were never heard of, and yet as
he thinks, below desert. Neither may we conceive more favorably of their
great Councellor Senate; specially because at that time the Senators were not
chosen after the old custom by laying on of hands, but by the favor, beck,
or sway of great men. Neither were the Priests elected for term of life, but
obtained the dignity of Priesthood only from year to year, and that
oftentimes for money. We need not then wonder if men that were puffed up with
pride, being boundless in their ambition and covetousness, did break out
into fury and madness, when they beheld a man that by his holy precepts and
upright behavior, reproved their far different life and vicious
conversation. Neither did it happen otherwise to him in point of reproach and
mis-usage, than to the best of the Prophets that lived long before. Thus that
Micaiah, that lived in the time of Iehosaphat, was cast into prison, because he
boldly spoke the truth against the opinion and sentence of four hundred lying
Prophets. Ahab upbraided Eli^ah, just as the Priests did Jesus, saying, that he
was the man that troubled the peace of Israel. So likewise Jeremy was accused
as well as Jesus for prophesying against the Temple. Add moreover what the
ancient Doctors of the Hebrews foretold, namely how that in the times of the
Messiah, there should be men like to bruit beasts in their cur^ish churlish
dispositions, in their asse-like stubbornness and inhumane cruelty. God
himself, foreseeing long before how most of the Jews would stand affected in
the time of the Messiah, said it would come to pass that they should become
his people, who were not his people; and of all the Cities and Towns of the
Jews scarce one or two would go to the holy mountain: Howbeit that which was
defective in their number should be supplied by strangers: Also that the
Messiah should be a downfall to the Hebrews: and this stone which the
builders refused, should be put in the chief place for the accomplishment of
the work.

SECT. XXI.
Answer to the objection, that many Gods are worshipped by the Christians.

THere remain yet two objections to be answered which the Jews allege both
against our Christian doctrine and worship. The first is in that they say we
Christians do worship many Gods.

But we answer that this is nothing but a forced exposition of another opinion
out of hatred. For why should this be more objected against us Christians, than
against Philo the Jew, who oftentimes makes three powers or virtues to be in
God, and calls the reason or the word of God, the name of God, the maker of the
wo^ld; neither uncreate as is God the father of all, nor so begotten as other
men are. Or against the Cabalists, who distinguish God into three lights, by
the same names that Christians do; to wit, of the Father, of the Son or the
word, and of the holy Ghost. And not to omit what is agreed upon by all the
Hebrews, the same Spirit wherewith the Prophets were moved and inspired is not
any created thing, and yet it is distinguished from the sender thereof: as also
that which they commonly call schecina: others the name of God, as Philo; and
others his visage or countenance: Moses the son of Nehema^s, as also Philo
calls it the Archangell or chief Ambassador that regards the world, and
sometimes God. Now many of the Hebrews have taught that that divine power
which they term wisdom, shall dwell in the Messiah; whence by the Chaldee
Paraphrast the Messiah is called the word of God: So like wise the Messiah by
David, Isaiah, and others is styled by those renowned names of God and Lord.

SECT. XXII.
And that a humane nature is worshipped.

WIth like facility may we answer the other objection which they allege
against us, saying that we exhibit unto the creature that worship and honor,
which is due unto God the creator. For we say that no other honor or worship
is given by us unto the Messiah than is required by the eleventh and the
hundred and tenth Psalms. The former whereof after a sort was fulfilled in
David, but after a more excellent manner belongs unto the Messiah, as David
Kimhi himself a great adversary of Christians does acknowledge. And the latter
can be expounded of no other but of the Messiah. For that which some later
Jews have fained and imagined of Abraham, David, and Hezekiah, is but vain
and ^ous. ^he said Psalm is David's, as the Hebrew ^scription does show: That
then which David says, The Lord said unto my Lord, can neither be applied to
David himself, nor to Hezekiah, who amongst David's posterity did excel David
in nothing. And Abraham had no singular Priesthood, but was blessed of
Melchisedeck, as the less of the greater. Likewise that which follows
concerning the scepter that should go out of Sion and come to the uttermost
coasts, does plainly appertain unto the Messiah, as is manifest by other like
places which doubtless are meant of the Messiah; being no otherwise received
by the more ancient Hebrews and Paraphrasts. Now I may as well believe that it
is Jesus of Nazareth in whom properly these things are fulfilled, being induced
thereunto by the singular integrity and honesty of his Disciples, who
constantly affirm the same; as the Jews believe Moses in those matters which
without any other witness, himself affirmed were delivered to him of God. But
besides this there are many forcible argumen^s of that most excellent power,
which we say Jesus has obtained; As namely in that he was seen of many
after he was risen from the dead: And many beheld him when he was taken up into
heaven: Devils also were cast out, and diseases were cured only by his name.
So were the gift of tongues given to his Disciples, which Jesus himself
promised should be signs of his Kingdom. Add unto these, that his Scepter,
that is, the word of the Gospel is gone out of Sion, being spread abroad to
the utmost parts of the earth, not by man's might, but only by divine power: The
nations also and Kings are subdued unto him, as the said Psalms did plainly
foretell. The Jewish Cabalists place a certain son of E^^ch, as a Mediator
between God and men; yet with no token or evident mark of such power: how much
more reason have we to horor him, that gave such proof and demonstration of
his power and might?

Neither does this tend to lessen or diminish the dignity of God the Father,
from whom this power of Jesus does proceed, to whom also it must return, and
to whose honor the same does appertain.

SECT. XXIII.
The conclusion of this part with prayer for the Jews.

But it is not our purpose in this work to make any further curions inquiry
into these matters: neither had we spoken hereof, but only to show that there
is no wicked of absurd point in our Christian doctrine, which any one can
pretend why he may not embrace our Religion, which is beautified and confirmed
with so many wonders, having so many honest and holy c^andements, and promising
such excellent reward. For he that has once received and embraced the same,
must for further instruction in special and particular qu^stions, read and
meditate those books wherein, as we have formerly declared, the points of
Christian Religion are contained; which that it may come to pass, we beseech
the Almighty to illuminate the hearts and minds of the Jews with the
brightness of his truth, and to make those prayers effectual which Christ
himself uttered for them, even while he was hanging upon the Cross.

The sixth Book OF THE TRVNESSE OF Christian Religion.
SECT. 1.
A confutation of Mahumetanisme: the beginning of it.

IN this sixth book made for consutation of Turks, by way of preface the
consideration of the judgments of God against Christians, leads us to the very
beginning of Mahumetanism^ namely, how that true and sincere godliness, which
flourished even amongst the Christians that were grievously tormented and
oppressed, afterward began by little and little to wax cold, to wit, from that
time that by the means of Constantine and other Emperors, the same profession
became not only safe, but also honorable, the world being as it were thrust
into the Church. For first of all when Christian Princes might have enjoyed
peace and quietness, then would they needs be fighting and still up in arms.

Amongst the Bishops also there was hot and bitter contention about the
chiefest Sees: And as at the beginning very much hurt ensued upon the
preferring of the tree of knowledge before the ^re^ of life, so did there great
harm follow in these times when curiosity of knowledge was more regarded than
a godly life, when piety and Religion was made a deceitful or cunning art. For
afterward so it happened, as to them that built the Tower of Babylon, the
indiscreet affectation of high matters above their reach, bred nothing but
jarring and confused speeches, together with disagreement in opinion: which the
common sort observing, they were driven into a quandary, often doubting what to
think or which way to turn themselves, laying all the blame upon the holy
scriptures, and began to eschew them as hurtful and dangerous.

Then began Religion, (as if Iudaisme had been revived again,) generally to
consist more in ^ites and ceremonies than in the purity and sanctity of the
mind: rather in bodily services than spiritual devotions: some siding one
way, and some another; still obstinately persisting in that opinion which they
had once embraced, till at length it came to that pass, that in each place
there were many Christians by name, but really and indeed very few.

God did not wink at these transgressions of his people: but from the utmost
parts of S^ythia and Germany powered out like a flood, and dispersed great
troops into the Christian world; which made great slaughter among the
Christians.

Howbeit this judgment of God upon them prevailed not to work those
Christians that survived to amendment; whereupon by his just permission,
Mahumet began to plant a new Religion in Arabia, such as was manifestly
opposite to Christian Religion: yet after a sort in words it did express the
life of a great part of Christians.

This Religion was first received by the Saracens, who revolted from Heraclius
the Emperor, and in a short space by their martial enterprises won Arabia,
Syria, Palestina, Egypt, Persia, Africa and Spain. But the power and might of
^hefe- Saracens was assuaged, chiefly among others by the Turks, a people very
li^igious: who after long wars held against the said Saracens, being, invited
to peace, did easily entertain their Religion, which suited well with their
conditions; and transferred the Majesty of the Empire unto themselves. Then
having taken the cities of Asia and Greece, with success in their Martial
attempts, they entered upon Hangary and the borders of Germany.

SECT. II.
The overthrow of the foundation of Mahumetanisme in denying inquiry into
Religion.

THis Religion being fully framed for the shedding of blood, abounds with rites
and ceremonies, and must be believed without all liberty of enquiry there
into; whence the vulgar are prohibited to read the books that are accounted
holy. Which thing seems a manifest argument of the iniquity thereof; For
justly may that Merchandise be suspected, which is vendible only upon
condition it may not be seen.

It is true indeed, there is not in all men a like capacity or knowledge, and
quick in-sight into all things; many being led into error by pride; others by
inordinate passion or affection; and some by custom. But the divine goodness
forbids us to think that those men may not know and find the way to eternal
salvation, who seek the same, not for any by-respect of profit or honor, but
with submission of themselves and all they have unto God, imploring his
assistance for the obtaining of the same. And since that God has implanted in
the mind of man the power and faculty of understanding, there is no part of
truth that better deserves the employment thereof than that which cannot be
unknown without the danger of losing eternal salvation.

SECT. III.
A proof against the Mahumetanes taken out of the books of the Hebrews and
Christians which are not corrupted.

IT is granted by Mahumet and his followers, that Moses was sent of Gods So
like wise was Jesus and those holy men which first of all published the
doctri^^ of Jesus. But in the Alcoran, which is Mahumets law, many things are
recorded plain contrary to what was taught by Moses and by the Disciples of
Jesus. Thu^ to give one example for many, all the Apostles and Disciples of
Christ with one consent do testify that Jesus was crucified; that the third
day he was restored to life again, and after that was seen of many. But
Mahumet teaches quite contrary* (...) namely, that Jesus was privily taken up
into heaven: not himself, but some thing in his likeness was nailed to the
Cross; and consequently; he did not die; but the sight of the Jews was
deluded and deceived.

This objection cannot be put off, unless Mahumet say, (as he does) that the
books of Moses and of Christ's disciples have not remained as they were at
first; but have been corrupted. Howbeit we have-confuted this fiction before
in the third book.

Certes, if any man should say that the Alchoran is corrupted, the Mahumetans
would deny it; and that were enough to say for an answer sufficient to those
that could not prove the contrary. But they, for the integrity of their book,
cannot allege such arguments, as we do produce, concerning the several
copies that were in a short space dispersed thorowout the world, and that, not
as the Alchoran, in one language; which copies were preserved by the faithful
dealing of so many sects, that varied much about other matters.

The Mahumetans are persuaded that in the fourteenth chapter of John, where
mention is made of sending the comforter, there had been something registered
concerning Mahumet, which the Christians have razed out. But here let me ask
of them, whether they think this depravation of scripture was committed since
the time of Mahumet, or before.

That it happened not after the coming of Mahumet is plain, because ever
since that time there have been in the world very many Copies, not only in the
Greek language, but in the Syriacke, Arabicke, Ethiopicke and Latin tongues
of diverse translations: all which do so agree in that same place, as there
cannot be showen any diversity at all. Next before the time of Mahumet there
was no cause of alteration: For no man could know before his coming what
Mahumet would teach. Yea, if the doctrine o^ Mahumet had contained nothing
contrary to the doctrine of Jesus, the Christians would have made no more a-doe
to receive his books than they did to receive the books of Moses and the
Hebrew Prophets. Or suppose there was nothing written either of the doctrine of
Jesus or of Mahumet, yet it is but equity that that should be received for the
doctrine of Jesus which all Christians generally agree upon; and that for the
doctrine of Mahumet which all Mahumetans do allow of.

SECT. IIII.
By comparing Mahumet with Christ in their persons.

IN the next place let us compare the adjuncts and quality of both their
doctrines, to the end we may see whether of the two is to be preferred before
the other: And first we may consider the dignity and worth of the authors. As
for Jesus, Mahumet himself confesses, that he was the Messiah, which was
promised in the law and in the Prophets; whom the same Mahumet call, the word,
the mind and the wisdom of God; saying also that he had no father by mankind.

But Mahumet (as his own followers believe) was generated and begot according
to the ordinary course of nature. The life of Jesus was altogether unblameable,
there being no crime that could be objected against him: But Mahumet a long
time was a rob^er, and always eff^inate. Jesus ascended into heaven as Mahumet
confesses; but Mahumet lies yet in^ombed in his s^pulchre. Who then sees not
whether of them is to be followed?

SECT. V.
And in their deeds.

NExt the dignity of their persons consider we their acts. Jesus gave sight to
the blind, health to them that were sick, and made the lame to walk; yea by
Mahumets own confession, he raised some from the dead. But Mahumet-saith of
himself that he was sent, not with miracles, but with feats and instruments
of war. Howbeit some of his followers grace him with miracles: But what kind
I pray? Only such as may be done by humane are; as that of a Dove that came
flying to his ear: or such as had no eyewitnesses, as that of a Camel, which
is said to have had some conference with him by night: or lastly such as for
their absurdity are incredible, and so need no further confutation; as that a
great part of the Moon fell into his lap, or into his sleeve; and he, to
preserve the roundnesse of that star, threw the same part up agoine. Now who
will not say that in a doubtful case we must yield rather to that law, which
has the more certain testimonies of divine approbation*

SECT. VI.
Also such as first embraced both Religions.

NExt, let us see who and what manner of persons they were that first received
these several laws. They that first embraced the law of Jesus, were such as
feared God, men of an innocent life: Now it stands not with the goodness of
God to suffer such men to be guld and ^hea^^d, either through the de^ of
cu^ing speeches, or by any other imposture. But those that first professed
Mahumetanisme were stark thieves and robbers, estranged from all humanity and
godliness.

SECT. VII.
The manner how both their laws were propagated.

IN the next place follows the manner how both their several Religions were
propagated and spread abroad. As for Christianity we have shown before by what
means it was enlarged and amplified, to wit, by the miracles, not only of
Christ, but also of his Disciples, and those that succeeded them: as like wise
by the very patient enduring of the torment, and punishments that Christians
suffered. But the Doctors of Mahumetisme wrought no miracles at all: neither
did they suffer any grievous persecutions, or bitter kinds of death for their
profession: But as their Religion was bred, so has it been maintained by
war; they having no better argument for the truth thereof, than their good
success in their martial enterprises, and the largeness of their Empire;
than the which nothing in this point is more deceitful and uncertain.

They condemn the worship and services of the Pagan: and yet we know what
great victories the Pagans have had, as is plain of the Persians, Maced^ni^^s
and Romans; and how ample their dominions were. Neither have the Mahumetans
themselves had always good success with their armies. The slaughters and
great overthrowes that they have received in many places both by Sea and by
Land, are not unknown. They are now banished quite out of all Spain.

There is nothing that suffers such alterations and changing, nothing that may
be common both to good and bad, which can be a certain note of true
Religion: much less can their warrings, which are so unjust that oftentimes
they quarrel and contend with some people that do not any way molest or
offend them, and they are wont to set upon such as offer them no injury at all;
in so much that all the pretense they have for contending, is only the cause
of Religion, which is a most ungodly thing.

For there is no true worship of God, but what proceeds from a willing mind.
And the will may be well wrought upon by good instruction and gentle
persuasion, but not so well by rigorous threats or violence. He that is
compelled to believe, does not believe at all, but plays the hypocrite, and
faines himself to believe that he may escape and avoid some danger or
punishment. And he that by awe or sense of punishment will force another man's
assent, gives just occasion thereby to suspect that he distrusts his other
arguments. Again they destroy the very pretense of their Religion, in that
they suffer any people that live under their dominion, to use what Religion
they please: yea, and sometimes they will openly acknowledge, that Christians
may be saved by their own law.

SECT. VIII.
The precepts of both Religions compared.

FVrthermore let us compare the several commandments of both Religions: the
one whereof commands patience, yea and love even to them that are hateful:
But in the other revenge is allowed of. In the one the bond of matrimony is
kept firm and inviolable between the married parties, by a mutual bearing
with one another conditions: But in the other there is license granted to
depart and be divorced. Here the Husband performs himself what he requires of
his wife, and by his own example teaches her to fallen her affection upon him
alone: But there they may have wives after wives, there being still new
incentives and fresh provocations to lust. Here, Religion is planted within,
and rooted in the very heart and soul, to the end the same may bring forth
fruit profitable for mankind: but there Religion consists for the most part in
Circumcision, and in some other things that of themselves are neither good nor
bad. Finally here, in Christianity a moderate use of meats and wine is allowed
of: but there in Mahumetisme men are forbidden to eat swines flesh and to drink
wine: which notwithstanding is a great gift of God, beneficial both for body
and mind, if it be soberly taken.

And it is no wonder if some childish rudiments were taught before so perfect a
law as that of Christ is: But after the promulgation thereof, to return again
to types and figures were prepostetous. Neither can any just reason be given
why after Christian Religion, which is clearly the best, there should any
other be propounded and taught.

SECT. IX.
Answer to the Mahumetans objection concerning the Son of God.

THE Mahumetans tell us they are not a little displeased with us for saying
that God has a son, seeing he uses not a wife: As though the word son
could not have a more divine signification in God. But Mahumet himself
attributes many things as dishonorable and ill-beseeming God, as if he should
be said to have a wife:

Thus he says that God had a cold hand, which himself knew by experience:
that God was carried in a chair and the like.

Howbeit when we say that Jesus is the son of God, we do but signify the
same thing that he means when he calls him the word of God: For the word is
after a sort generated of the mind. Add further that he was borne of a
Virgin only by the operation of God, supplying the virtue or esticacy of a
Father: that by the power of God, he was carried up into heaven; all which
being confessed even by Mahumet himself, do show that Jesus by a singular
pre^ogative and peculiar right may and ought to be called the son of God.

SECT. X.
Many absurd things in the books of Mahumetans.

But on the other side it would be long to relate how many things there are,
contrary to the truth of history; and many things very ridiculous in the
writings of the Mahumetans. Such is that fable of a fair and beautiful woman
that learned a solemn thar^^e or enchanting verse of some Angels that were
merry with wine, whereby she was wont to ascend into the sky, and likewise
descend again; and ascending once a great height into heaven, she was caught
of God and there made fast; and so was called the star of Venus.

Like to this is that of a mouse in Noah's Arc that was bred of an Elephants
dung: and a cat of the breath of a lion.

More specially the most notorious fiction of all is that concerning death
which should be changed into a Ram that must remain in the middle space
between heaven and hell. Such also is the fable of their delicate meats, which
they say shall be purged out by sweat in the other life which is to come: When
likewise (they imagine) there shall be whole troops of women assigned to
every man for pleasure of carnal copulation. All which are so very egregious
absurdities that whosoever believes them, deserves to be stupefied and given
over to a reprobate sense for his iniquity; specially such a one as lives where
the light of the Gospel shines.

SECT. XI.
A conclusion directed unto Christians, admonishing them of their duty upon
their occasion of what has formerly been handled.

ANd thus having ended this last disputation against the Mahumetans, there
remains only a conclusion or exhortation, not to aliens or strangers, but to
all sorts of Christians of what name, nation, or quality soever they be:
Wherein we shall very briefly show the use or application of what has
hitherto been delivered, to the end those things may be followed and sought
after which are good; and on the contrary the evil eschewed.

First of all then let Christians be exhorted to lift up prire hands and
hearts unto that God which of nothing made all visible and invisible things;
having sure confidence in him, that his providence and care watches over us;
seeing that without his permission, not so much as a Sparrow falls to the
ground. And let them not fear those which can only ki^l the body, but rather
let then fear him that has like power both over soul and body. And let them
not only trust in God the Father, but also in Jesus Christ his son, since
there is no other name upon earth by which we can be saved: And this they may
rightly do if they can be verily persuaded that eternal life is prepared,
not for such as in word only call God their Father, and Jesus their Lord, but
for such as frame their life according to the will of Jesus, and their Father
which is in heaven.

Furthermore Christians may hereby be admonished faithfully and with due care
to preserve the doctrine of Christ as a most precious treasure: And for this
cause let them often read and meditate the books of the holy scripture,
whereby no man can be deceived, unless first he deceive himself. For the
authors and penmen of those writings were more just and full of divine
inspiration, than that they would cozen us of necessary truths, or cover and
conceal the same with any clouds.

Howbeit for the right understanding hereof, we must bring humble minds,
together with obedient hearts and wills: which if we do, then nothing shall
be hid from us which ought to be believed, hoped for, or done by us: And by
this means that holy Spirit may be cherished and excited in us, which is
given us for a pledge of our future happiness.

Moreover let Christians hereby learn not to immitate the customs of the
Pagans, specially in their worship of false Gods, which are nothing but idle
names that the damned spirits do use, to alienate our minds and affections
from the worship of the true God. Wherefore we cannot possibly participate
with them in their services, and expect to receive benefit by the sacrifice of
Christ. Secondly, neither may Christians imitate the heathen in their
licentious and dissolute manner os life; having no other law than what is
suggested by lust and prompted by concupiscence. For it is requisite and meet
that in holy conversation they should not only far excel the vicious and
profane Pagans, but likewise the lawyers and Pharisees among the Jews; whose
righteousness consisting only in some outward performances, could never bring
them to the heavenly Kingdom. Circumcision that is made with hands is now
nothing worth, but it is the inward Circumcision of the heart, the keeping of
Gods commandments, the new creature, faith that is perfected in love, which
make men known to be true Israelites and mystical Jews, that is, praisers of
God, and commendable in his sight. The distinction of meats, the Sabbathes and
feastdayes were but types and shadows of things in Christ and in Christians.

In like manner, by occasion of Mahumetisme we may be admonished of that
which our Lord Jesus foretold, namely that after his time there should arise
false Christ's and false Prophets. which should lie, and say they were sent of
God. But suppose that an Angel should come from heaven, yet we may not
receive or entertain any other doctrine than that which Christ has left us,
confirmed by so many testimonies. For God, who at sundry times and in diverse
manners spoke unto the godly that lived in times past, has in these last days
spoken unto us by his son, whom he has appointed heir of all things, who
is the brightness of his Fathers glory, and the express image of his
substance, by whom all things are created that ever were or shall be, who
upholdeth and governs all things by his power, and having purged our sins, is
now set at the right hand of God, being made so much better than the Angels, as
he has by inheritance obtained a more excellent name than they, there being
now no hope of any thing more noble and glorious than this lawgiver.

Upon the same occasion Christians may remember that the weapons of Christ and
of their Christian warfare, are not such as Mahumet used, but spiritual, able
to cast down strong holds, and every thing that exasteth it self against the
knowledge of God. For our bukler, we have the shield of faith, whereby we may
withstand the fiery darts of the devil: For a breast plate we must have
righteousness or integrity of life: The hope of eternal salvation is a
helmet, which may cover the weakest part: And the word of God is a sword, that
pierces into the most inward parts of the soul.

After all this follows the exhortation to mutual concord, which Christ at
his departure so solemnly, and with such earnestness commended unto his
Disciples. There ought not to be many Masters and Doctors amongst us, but we
must have one Master, even Jesus Christ. All Christians are baptized unto one
name, wherefore it is expedient that there be no se^ls or divisions among
them: for the cure and remedy of which evils, if any such arise, we have
diverse Apostolical sayings worthy to be observed and practiced; as, let no
man think more highly of himself than he ought to think; but let men be
wise with sobriety, according as God has dealt to every man the measure of
faith. If any do not so well conceive and rightly understand all things as
they ought, then their weak^esse must be born with, that so with out all
jarring asperi^y they may be united and knit together with us after a most
sweet, calm and mild manner. If any do excel the rest in understanding; it
is but meet also that they surpass them in love, in holy affection and good
endeavors. And as for those that in some points are of different opinion from
such as hold the truth, Gods leisure must be waited for, until it please him
to reveal the same truth, that yet lies hid from them: and in the mean while
those things which are agreed upon, must be steadfastly kept and duly practiced.

We know now in part only, but the time shall come when all things shall be
known most plainly and after a perspicuous manner. For the present let every
one be entreated and persuaded unto this; namely, that they do not
unprofitably occupy or hoord up the talent committed to them upon trust, but
that they endeavor by all means possible to win others unto Christ. For which
purpose we must not only use good languages and wholesome speeches, but also
the example of good life; that so the goodness of our master may appear by us
his servants, and the integrity of the law by our laudable actions,

Lastly, our speech returning unto valgar readers, entreats them, that if
hereby they reap any good, they would give thanks to God for it. But if
otherwise any thing seem distastefull, let them impute it partly to the common
infirmity of man's nature, that is prone to error; and partly to the time and
place wherein this work was rather hastily composed than diligently plied.

FINIS.

