GREEVOVS GROANS FOR THE POOR.

Done by a Well-willer, who wishes, That the poor of ENGLAND might be so
provided for, as none should need to go a begging within this Realm.

The Poor afflicted are,
So that they perish fast:
If now no order taken be,
Then Ruin comes at last.
^ HEB^D^^^^HEB^D^^^^^


LONDON Printed for MICHAELL SPARK. 1621.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable, Right Worshipful, and worthy Company of the
Virginian and Sommer-Iland Plantations.
RIGHT Honorable, Worshipful, and Worthy: It is an old, and yet a true
Proverb, Vis vnita fortior, United force is most vigorous: I could have
commended this poor Fatherless Volumne to the simple perfection of some one
man in eminence, under whose shade it might obtain a quiet rest. But knowing
your conjoined Society, does extend the branches of Charity, to a farther limit
then some one particular person, I am bold to present this Orphane to your
tuition: assuring my self, that although scandals may derogate from the worth
in this our home bred Nation, your affection will find it shipping to
transport it to the Land of security, where no biting Satyr dares assail it
with his envious teeth, or censuring Critic, carpe to catch it with his
AEnigmaticke brain. The reasons why this long obscured Offspring of Charity
claims your worthy particular Patronage, divide themselves into a Tricotomie.
The first Reason is drawn from the supposed parent, whose industrious seduline
to the vast womb of the Ocean, describes these two Lands, now Cities of refuge
for poor impouerished persons. For his sake therefore, whose wisdom lives
crowned with the Garland of Fame, though his body be buried in the Sepulcher
of Oblivion, protect this his poor extant issue.

The second Reason, proceeds from the remarkable note of Christianity, which
is Charity: For, by this (says our Savior) shall all men know that ye are my
Disciples. As therefore you prize the segregation of your selves from woluish
Worldlings, in Charity entertain this submissiue petulent, prostrate at the
Altar of your acceptance.

The third Reason, yssues from your continued and daily exercise in the relapse
of mean and decayed persons, by transporting of them to a Land, where they have
Corn which they sowed not, Vines which they planted not, and plenty which some
of them deserved not.

Since therefore, so many have felt the reviving heat of the Sunne-beames of
your Charity, whose very intrals bless you: amongst the multitude of these,
let this tonguelesse Orphant be one, that by its birth into the World, though
it cannot speak, it may prove your praise. Thus with my service, as appointed
to speak for this infant, in the hehalfe of it, I rest a Well-willer to your
Business.

M. S.
A Division of the estate of the Poor.
THE poor of this Commonwealth are of two sorts, viz The impotent persons not
able to relieve themselves with their labor, and the idle Rogues, able to
mintaine the selves, and do their Country good, if they were set on work, as
the Statute Laws of this Land prescribes.

The impotent is the blind, lame, wounded soldier, fatherless child, aged
person, or diseased by Leprosy, Dropsy, or else visited with other grievous
sickness, not able to labor, to relieve themselves sufficiently.

The Idle poor is the Thief, the Rogue, the Rogue, the Strumpet, the sturdy
Beggar, the Filcher, the Couzener, Cutpurse, and such like.

The Misery of the Poor, with the danger of their souls.
GREAT is the misery that the Carcasses of the poor sustain, as extreme
hunger, pinching cold, pitiful nakedness, great disdain, strange surfeits,
grievous sores, deadly diseases, and painful deaths: but greater and much
more lamentable, is the dangerous distress of their silly souls. For, they
are the slaves of Satan, in the Galley of Idleness, fastened to the seat of
Poverty, with the Chain of Slothfulness, where extreme Cruelty, with his
Whip of Necessity (whose biting Cords are Hunger and Cold) forces them to
haste the fearful Voyage, unto the doleful Haven of Hell, by greedy rowing
with the Oars of Injurious Wrongs, as Theft, Cozenage, Witchcraft, and such
like: but I hope to see, that Serpent so encountered with that goodly Ship,
called, The good Government of England, and that Love that good Gunner therein
(with the Powder of Zeal) will so thunder forth those Bullets of Judgment out
of the battering pieces of the Law, that Satan shall be enforced to deliver
those silly slaves out of his thraldom, and yield his huge Vessel, to
remain a famous monument, until the end of the World.

Excellently was that onset given in the making of sundry Statutes* for the
releese of the Impotent, and setting the idle on Work: but if we consider how
Negligence has overthrown that Famous Work; we shall find, how Self-love
is settled far into every man's heart, and that we so hotly hunt after private
Gain, that we freezing coldly, seek not any Public Profit. We play the
sloathfull hand, loath to come out of a warm pocket, to heal and help to
cover the whole body from pinching cold.

But come, come, dear Christians, let every man now be more moved with
pity. And according unto their several Callinges, so charitably to further
some good provision, that the poor hereafter may be otherwise relieved, and
not be forced to beg or steal for maintenance. And the idle so set on Work,
that they be not compelled to run about the Country, haunting of Alehouses,
and using all bad and wanton exercises, to drive away the time withal. And let
not Parishioners do still (as some do now) bear out thieves in their theeuerie,
for that they take their prey with the Fox, far from his home, which
otherwise should charge the town. Let them not wink at the matter, when they
find the Thief, and so the thing stolen, nor make the Host of the Alehouse
their Constable, that diligent Setter for all misorder, and Master of
mis-rule, their chief Officer, to see good Order kept. Let them not suffer
suspected persons, to be playing in Alehouses, especially in the time of
Divine Service, nor play there for more (at any time) then they have honestly
gotten.

And, whereas many poor Parents be so foolish, to plant their Children on the
root of idleness, which will yield no other fruit, but the Berries of
Iniquity; whereby our Country is pitifully and grievously pestered, with
such as for want of other Trade or means to live by, do practice Robbing,
Filching, Stealing, Cozening, and such like. Now therefore, I would heartily
wish, that every Christian (as his Calling serves for that purpose) should be
some means, that those youthful plants, may be trained up in some honest
course of life; whereby they may hereafter get their livings by some good and
lawful means: so shall they greatly glorify God, by their dutiful
diligence in doing of his will, overthrow the power of Satan by the confusion
of Idleness: rescue those silly souls out of that Tyrants thraldom: and
work a public profit to the whole Land, by freeing it from that extreme
charge, to maintain so many thousands of people without their labor.

The Evil of Idleness, and what men do for want of Exercise, and Maintenance.
Idleness makes men's bodies the Demeanes of the Devil: for the body of an
Idle person is the Devils home, Viz: Empty of Grace, swept of all Goodness;
and so garnished with Natural Evils, that it may well entertain Satan, and
seven more as bad as himself.

The Evil of Idleness.
Idleness, is the head of that Serpent Satan, which where it enters, windeth
in his whole body, with all the poison of Iniquity. For first, for want of
exercise, we see idle people hunt and run after evil Company: seek out
disordered Alehouses, where they swear and forswear, Banne, Curse, Blaspheme
God, disdain good things, slander and backe-bite their Neighbors, use all
unlawful Exercises; tell Tales, that are taken for Tales, and lies of others
that are taken for truth, so setting much variance, yea often among Friends,
and driving away the time with the wretched works of Wantonness, and
disfiguring themselves with the loathsome sin of Drunkenness. Then, for want
of maintenance, they practice Pilling, Polling, Promooting, Wrangling,
Defrauding, Robbing, Begging, Filching, Stealing, Iuggling, Connicatching,
Cosening, False Dicing, and with such like shifting: like Caterpillars, Waspes,
and Droanes, they eat and devour up the Fruits and sweet Commodities of
this Commonwealth.

But how might I enlarge this Volume (if I so intended) with painting forth
the deformity, which Idleness has bred in these Roguish Traveling people,
which in their Common Whoredom, resemble lawless Beasts; in their Cousening,
Filching, Stealing, and Devouring, imitate vilde Vermin; in their
Drunkenness; do show themselves loathsome Swine; and in Banning, Cursing,
Forswearing, Lying, Out-facing, and egregious Dissembling, both with GOD and
the World, painted forth, the very perfect pictures of Satan: O that
Christian hearts can abide the sights of these most grievous and monstrous
Euilles.

Come then therefore, O ye painful Judges, and careful Justices of this
Land: Ye watchful Magistrates, and diligent Laborers in the Lords Vineyard:
cutting of the branches will not suffice, but strike at the Root (which is
Idleness) with the Axe of Judgment, and the flourishing Tree of all Iniquity,
will quickly fade away.

Reasons to relieve the Impotent, and to reform the Idle.
IF the body have a lame and withered foot, whereof it can have small use, yet
if it be whole and sound, and the blood of the body has the course therein;
we see every member is helping the same with necessaries, and assisting the
same from hurt: but being infected with a running or rotting sore or Thistela,
that sharp Corsies cannot eat out the filthy corruption thereof: then all the
members (not regarding the present pain) give their consents, that the same
shall be cut off with the Saw of the Surgeon, least it be the decay of the
whole body: Even so the Impotent with the lame foot, is to be defended and
sustained by every member of the body of this Commonwelth; having a will
(although it want power) to requite the same. But the idle persons, infected
with that running and rotting sore of Whoredom, Theft, Cozenage, and such
like; must be cut off with the sword of Judgment, if the sharp Corsies of
Correction, cannot eat out the filthy Corruption thereof, least it runs up
so near the heart, that it overthrow and bring unto ruin the whole body of
this Commonwealth.

This Rotting sore has run far of late, if we consider how many of these
people the Wars has swallowed up: How many of them are shipped to that
famous Plantation of Virginia and Summer Islands: How many the Judgment of the
Law has turned over: How many of them grievous diseases have ended their days:
How many have perished in the fields: And how the realm is yet pitifully
pestered with them: so that it is more then time for the Eye, with
steadfastness to visit the same; the Head with carfulness to devise a help,
and the Hand with maruailous diligence to minister it thereunto.

The Husbandman covers close his Hiues of Bees from cold storms, and
sets watchmen to preserve them from the stinging Waspe and the idle Drone:
Even so our Soueraign Prince, whose Highness Hiue is this Land, covers the
same from the storms of Oppression; and sets his Watchmen to take away
Waspish Theft, and Dronish Begging: which if it were effected (according to his
Highness intention) then no doubt, the laboring Bees would work with
Comfort, Courage, and Strength, filling their Hiue full of Honey, his Highness
Country full of sweet Commodities.

The wise Housholding Husbandman, will suffer no idle persons in his house,
only for two causes. First, he knows, it is a charge to maintain them that
doenothing: And then, that those idle people, with their Wanton and vain
Exercises, bring his whole household out of Order. Even so, let the Wise
Husbandmen of this Commonwealth, consider; That it is not only a charge to
the Land, to mainetaine so many thousands of those idle people without their
labor, but also it brings the whole Commonwealth so out of Order, that every
man wants now, that service at his Servants hands, that heretofore they have
had. For our yonglings heads, are always occupied with those wanton Exercises,
which they see idle people daily devise and practice.

THE POOR WITHout Relief.
LOOK with hearts of Charity, and eyes of pity, unto the distressed estate
of the poor (good Christians) for first, although the Commons with common
Commodities in some Town be worth an hundred, or two hundred pounds a year,
or more; yet the poor of the same Town, unto the third part of the Town in
number, shall not be thereby relieved, to the value of forty shillings in a
year: So are the Commons surcharged by the Rich: and the profit of their
Towne-lands* employed to bear other common Charges withal.

And how may I complain therewith of the decay of Hospitality in our Land,
whereby many poor souls are deprived of that relief which they have had
heretofore. The time has been, that men have hunted after Worship and
Credit by good Housekeeping, and therein spent great part of their
Reuennewes: but now commonly, the greater part of their Livings, is too little
to maintain us and our Children in the pomp of Pride: yea, and yet all is
well if we may maintain that, though no Hospitallitie be maintained there
withal.

And thus, though the number of the poor do daily increase, all things yet
works for the worst in their behalf. For, there has been no Collection for
them, no not these seven years, in many Parishes of this Land, especially in
Country towns; but many of those Parishes turns forth their poor, yea and
their lusty Laborers that will not work, or for any misdemeanor want work,
to beg, filtch, and steal for their maintenance, so that the Country is
pitifully pestered with them: yea, and the maimed Soldiers, that have
ventured their lives, and lost their limbs in our behalf, are also thus
requited: For when they return home, to live by some labor in their natural
Country, though they can work well in some kind of labor, every man
says, We will not be troubled with their Service, but make other shifte for
our business So are they turned forth to Travail, in Idleness (the highway
to Hell) and seek their meat upon Meares (as the Proverb goes,) with
Begging, Filching, and Stealing for their maintenance, until the law bring
them unto the fearful end of hanging.

But our Savior Christ has taught us Christians to do good unto our Ene mies,
and shall we then do nothing for our Friends? If we ought to love them that
hatevs, shall we thus recompense them that have ventured life and limb for us?
No, no, for their good Service, let us see their bodies hereafter better
relieved, and some good and godly means used, to save their souls from the
Torments of Hell, that GOD may be better pleased, and those poor Souls that
fight for us, much more animated.

And I would wish all men to consider, that the Lord of Heaven, has retained
those poor Souls, with the hyring-penie of Life, that they might Labor in
this his Vineyard or Commonwealth, and make it flow with all kind of
Commodities. Then may not we which are Stewards, turn them forth of his
service, to Cozen, Beg, Filch, Steal, and such like; excusing our selves,
that it is a trouble to us to keep them in order, and so put up the Lords
allowance in our own purses: For then, he having tried and found us
unfaithful with the dust of the earth, will never trust us with the heritage
of heaven.

But no doubt some will say, the fault is in those poor people, that they are
not set on work; they are either untrue, froward, unruly, slothful, or some
such matter, which indeed I cannot deny: but if there be not the like, or
worse in us, let us be thankful to God; who thorough Grace has made us
Conquerors, of those natural euilles. And let not us, because they of
weakness, go over the shoes in sin, show so much unchristian Cruelty to
them, to thrust them over head and ears into Hell, by forcing them to live by
unlawful means.

Can we not content our selves with the Priest and Leuite to see their misery
being thus robbed, bound, and wounded by that Theeuish Satan, but we must
much more cruelly, with our swords of extremity, smite them unto death? O when
and where shall they then find, the Neighborhood of the good Samaritanes, to
bind up their wounds with compassion, carry them home with troble, move
others to take care of them, and provide for them sufficiently with charge.

What fills this Land with Poor.
THree kinds of Oppressions much pestereth the same with poverty, Viz. The
taking in to the Lords hands of Coppy-hold Lands: whereby many Householders are
utterly decayed.

Secondly, the surcharging of Commons, so that the poor cannot have any
benefit of them.

And lastly, the purchasing of Land unto Land, until rich men get whole Towns
into their hands: and then dispeopling the same, by letting down of Houses,
and turning forth of Tenants, they recover the Commons from the poor, and make
them their own seuerals* And therewithal, they take the chief Commodities
with ten or twelve Husbandmen, omitting the rest: whereas before that time upon
that Ground, were set on work and maintained, not less then a hundredth men,
women, and children: yet the Landlords had their rents duly paid them, and the
poor amongst those Farmers otherwise provided for. This is the Incroachment,
that will bring the woe of the Prophet upon the Land.

Even thus as you see, the poor man with that which heretofore he had, and of
right should now have, is swallowed up into the rich man's possession: but let
me show those people their folly, by a simple simile.

The subtle Fisherman hides his Angling hooks in the backs of little
Roaches, and draws the same too and fro in the sight of devouring Pikes
(within the Water) which after long dalliance, unadvisedly swalloweth the same
up with greedines into their hungry bellies, and thinking themselves fully
possessed thereof, the Fisherman draws the hooks, pulls them from their
Fellows, carries them unto his home, fryeth them upon the Coals, and with
sharp Vinegar makes them dishes fit for his own diet. Even so, that subtle
Fisherman the Devil, has Hooks in the backs of all those Rochlike
Little-loues, being here upon earth, drawn too and fro in sight of those
devouring people, which swalloweth them up with all greediness into their
insatiable possessions.

But let them know, that when they think themselves fully possessed of this
their prey, and say with the Rich man, Now soul take thy rest, the
Fisherman-like Devil by the strength of the strings of Gods vengeance and
Justice, will draw the Hooks of death, pull them from their fellows, carry
them to his homely Hell, dress them after a devilish fashion, fry them with
unquenchable Coals: and so sowsed and soaked in the sharp sauce of Gods
everlasting wrath, he will make them a dish whereon he will feed, world without
end.

Yet I hope the LORD of his mercy, will breath now upon the body, the
blessed quickening spirit of life, that all the members having their senses so
restored, may perform their several duties: to the help, succor, and
sustentation one of another: which GOD grant for his own clorie, the peace of
his Church, the Joy and pleasure of our Sovereign Prince, the relief of the
needy, and the public Honor and profit of this Christian Commonwealth.

FINIS.
THe Fig Tree without fruit,
yet flourishing Leaves did bear:
Our Savior Christ did Curse,
which may make us fear
That bear the Leaves of Light,
professing much his Name:
And yet small Love do show
to them that need the same*

