A Sermon, at the Funeral solemnity of the most high and mighty Prince
Ferdinandus, the late Emperor of most famous memory, holden in the Cathedral
Church of saint Paul in London, the third of October.1564. Made by the
reverend father in God, Edmund Grindall, bishop of London.

Imprinted at London by John Day, dwelling over Aldersgate, beneath saint
Martins.

Cum gratia and priuilegio Regiae; Maiestatis.

These books are to be sold at his shop under the Gate.

A sermon, at the Funeral solemnity of the most high and mighty Prince
Ferdinandus, the late Emperor of most famous memory, holden in the Cathedral
church of saint Paul in London, the third of October. 1564. Made by the
reverend father in God Edmund Grindal, bishop of London.
The prayer for the universal church, the Church of England and Ireland, the
Queen's Majesty, the states of the realm* etc as is ordinarily accustomed, were
first made.
Matthew. 24. Ideo et vos estote parati, quia qua hora no^ putatis, ea filius
hominis ve^turus est.

Therefore be ye also ready, for the Lord will come at the hour which ye think
not on.


EMonge many evil, and naughty affections which follow the nature of man,
corrupted by sin (right honorable and beloved in Christ) few or none bring
greater inconveniences with them, the^ does the inordinate hope and expectation
of long life. And this affection is so much the more hurtful and perilous,
for that it is grounded so depely, and sticks so firmly in our nature, that
it cannot easily be remedied or removed: which thing, beside common experience,
has of old time been noted, by diverse and sundry proverbs, as this for one.
Nemo est tam senex, qui non putet annum se posse viuere. There is no man so
old, but that be thinks he may live yet one year longer, and when that is
done, yet an other, and an other yet after that, and so in infinitum, until all
years and days be clean past and expired. The like hope of long life is
expressed by this proverb, Aegroto anima dum est, spes est. The sick man, as
long as he has life and breath, so long has he hope: signifieng yt even in
the greatest and most dangerous diseases, the sick parties ever hope to live,
and to escape, so that neither old age, which by natural course foresheweth
death at hand, neither yet extremity of sickness, be it never so grievous, ca^
remove from us this inordinate expectation, and vain hope of long life, so long
as this body has any breath abiding or life left in it.

Out of this evil root spring many branches of great inconveniences: For
when men be in expectacion of long life, and promise unto them selves
continuance of many years: they fall by little and little into carnal
security, they grow remiss in all godly exercises, delight altogether in
pleasures of this world, little or nothing thinking of the world to come, or
of any amendment or correction of life, but deferring it to a longer time, and
so often times prevented with unlooked for death, and found a sleep in their
wicked security, they tumble headlong or they beware, into the pit of
damnacion. For the curing therefore of this dangerous disease in our sick
nature, the holy ghost has provided in the scriptures two special remedies:
The one is, the setting forth before our eyes the severity of Gods terrible
judgment, at the last day, when the Lord him self shall come, with the voice
and sommoning of the Archangell, 1. These. 4
with the sound of the trumpet from heaven in judgment, to render to every
man, according to that he has done in the flesh, 2. Cori. 5.
be it good or evil, and therewith also the sodainnes of the same judgment,
which shall come as a thief in the night, Math. 24. Luc. 21.
without giving any forewarning, as a snare that catches the bird, and as the
lightening which most suddenly in one moment, flasheth from East to the West
over al heaven. The other remedy is the often warnyng, which the scriptures do
give us, to put us in remembrance of our forgetfulness of the frailty of our
nature, co^tinuallie subject unto death, who will not suffer us long to
continue here upon this earth, but shortly, and very often, suddenly also,
brings us most certainly to an end of this uncertain life. The text which I
have chosen ministers just occasion to think of both these matters, being a
percel and the very conclusion of a sermon, made by Christ him self, sittyng
on mount Oliuet, upon occasion that his disciples asked him of the signs of
his coming, and of the end of the world. The words are these: Ideo et vos.
etc. Therefore be ye also ready, Mat. 2^
for the Lord will come at the hour which you think not on, which sentence as
most notable and worthy to be regarded, our savior in that sermon does sundry
times repeat, vigilate ergo. etc. Therefore, wherefore? It is the conclusion of
a similitude going before, which is this. If the good man of the house had
known what hour the thief would have come, he would surely have watched, and
not have suffered his house to have been broken up. And therefore be you ready. As
if he should say: The good man of an house would be diligent to save and
preserve his house and worldly goods, being things corruptible, how much more
ought you to be continuallye vigilant, least the day of judgment which
comes sodaynlye, as a thief in the night, find you sleeping in sin and
wickedness, and so you loose a far more excellent treasure, redeemed not with
gold and silver, but with the precious blood of the immaculate Lamb Christ
our Savior. i. Pet. ^^


Alhough therefore this text most properlye pertains to put us in remembrance
of making preparacion against y^ general judgment: yet notwithstanding I
entend presently to apply it to the preparation toward death, partly by
reason of this present occasion, and partlye for that both tend to one
effect. For S. Augustine says, look in what state the last day of our life
does find us, August. ad Helych. Epist. 80.
in the same state will the last day of the world judge us. I purpose therefore
by occasion of this text, to put you in remembrance of.3. things. First, of
the exhortacion in the scripture, moving us to prepare to die. Secondarely, of
the causes that ought to move us to this preparation. And thirdlye, of the true
ways and means how to prepare to die. And by the way I entend somewhat to
speak of the cause of this solemn assembly. For the first, as it is said
here: Be in readiness. etc, so are there very many places in the scriptures,
tending to the same effect. In the.xij. of Luke Christ says thus: Sint lu^bi
vestri praecincti, and lucernae ardentes in manibus vestris. Let your loins be
girded, and your candels burning in your hands. By girding of the loins is
signified the brideling, or rather mortifieng of our carnal and corrupt
affections, and by burning candels is signified the light of faith, and
Christian conversation, the very fruit of true faith, and so in su^me that we
should be altogether in a readiness. Saint Peter also, when he makes mention of
the end of al things to be at hand, uses much like exhortacion: Be ye sober
(says he) and vigilant in prayer, signifieng thereby that temperaunce in
meats and drinks, i. Pet. 4.
sobriety of conversation in all the parts of our life, vigilancie and
continuau^ce in prayer, and other godly exercises, are sure signs that we make
preparation for death, and for the coming of Christ. Of such like exhortacio^
to prepare against death, the scriptures are most full, and so plain, that
this part needs no long prosecution.

Now for the second part, there be two causes that ought (if we be not
altogether insensible) to move us to prepare for death. The one is, the
necessity of death. The other is, the uncertainty thereof. The inevitable
necessity of death is very well expressed by saint Paul in these words. Heb.
9.
Statutum est, omnibus hominibus semel mori, and post hoc iudic^um. It is
ordained, or it is a statute, concluded and enacted in the high court of the
heavenly Parliament, and such a statute as never shall be repealed, yt al men, of
what estate o^ condition so ever they be, shall once die, and after that
follows the judgment. The wise man says: Ecclesi. ^*
Moritur doctus simul et indoctus. The learned and unlearned both die. The
Ethnickes also did very well express this necessity of death. For Horace says
thus: Pallida mors aequo pulsat pede pauperum tabernas, regumque turres. Pale
death, or death that makes the most beutyfull and best colored faces pale,
does knock as indifferently at princes palaces, as at poor men's cottages. An
other Poet has these words: Mors sceptra ligonibus aequat. Death makes
scepters and mattockes equal, and as soon arresteth he the Prince that carries
the scepter, as the poor man that diggeth with the mattocke. David calls
death, Viam vniuersae carnis, ^ Regu^. ^*
the way^ of all flesh. But what needs many testimonies in so plain a matter,
so universally known by daily experience in all places and times? Now as
concerning the uncertainty of death, which is the second and greatest cause to
move us to be in redines: This may be truly affirmed, that as nothing is more
certain, then that death will come: so is there nothing more uncertain, then
the hour when it will come. And therefore is our life in the scriptures
compared to things that upon light and sudden causes are alterable: as grass,
Esaias. 40. Job. 8. Jacob. (...)
a flower, shadow, smoke, vapor, and death, resembled to the stealing in of a
thief, to a snare intangling the (...), and the hook catching the fish
unawares. This (...) is also touched in my text: Quia qua hora no^ putatis. etc,
For the Lord will come at the hour which ye think not. But both these things
shall appear more clearly by examples. And to begin first with thexamples of
the latter part. Nothing does more evidently declare the uncertainty of death,
the^ the sudden deaths of persons of all ages and degrees, of which we find
plenty both in profane histories, and in the Scriptures. Plin. not. hist, lib.
7. cap. 52*
Pliny in the seventh book of his natural history has a whole Chapter
entitled De mortibus repentinis. And the like Chapter has Valerius Maximus,
where they write that many upon most light causes suddenly have died. One at
Rome, as he went forth at his chamber door, did but stricke his finger a little
on the door cheke, and immediately fell down dead. An other did but stumble as
he went forth, and died forthwith. An Ambassador of the Rhodians, after he had
declared his message to the Senate, departing forth of the Counsel chamber,
fell down by the way suddenly, and there died. Aeschilus the Poet lieng on
sleep bare headed nere the Sea, a great seafowle, thinkyng his head to be a
stone, whereon he might break the shelfishr which he carried, let it fall on
his head, wherewith he was killed out of hand. Luciane, a man in deed
learned and eloquent, but a derider of all religion, and namely a blasphemer of
Christian religion, travailing by the way, was sodeinlye set upon and wurried
with dogs, a death worthy such a blasphemer, and a terrible example to all
co^temners and deriders of religion and piety. ^. Reg. 25
The Scriptures also want not like examples. The churlish rich man Nabal, who
at his sheepeshearing held a feast in his house like a king, but denied to
relieve David, the^ persecuted and in distres, within ten days after was
smitten of the Lord, and so di^d. Ananias and Sapphira, Act. 5.
prete^ding yt they gave their whole patrimony to ye relief of the poor in
the primitive Church, but in deed reserving a portion to them selves, and so
lieng to the holy Ghost, were immediately stricken of God, and so ended their
lives, to the fearful example of all hypocrites and dissemblers, namely in
matters pertaining to Gods religion. Act. 1^.
Herodes Agrippa being in his most glorious magnificencie, contented to hear
him self magnified and extolled as a God, and not a man, was sodenlie smitten
by the Angel of the Lord, and dyed a most miserable death. Luke. 12
The rich man of whom mention is made in the xii. of Luke, that intended to
pull down his barnes and granaries, and to build larger, said to his soul:
Soul, thou have provision laid up in store for many years, and therefore take
thine ease: Eat, drink, and be merry. But what became of him? God said unto
him: Thou fool, even this very night shall thy soul be taken from thee, and
then who shall have that thou have provided? Dani. 4.
Thexample of Nabuchodonosor is very terrible, who walkyng in his palace, and
glorieng in his strong and stately City Babylon: whiles the words were yet in
his mouth, was suddenly stricken with a plague worse then death: for the use of
reason was taken from him, and he him self turned forth among beasts, became
as a beast, eating hay like an ox: to teach al posterities ensuing not to
glory in things of this world, which are but vain: but that he which glories,
should glory in the Lord. It shall not be amiss if I add one example of mine
own knowledge. For Gods Judgments exercised in our days are also to be
observed and marked. I knew a Priest, who had rapped together four, or five
benefices, but was resident upon never a one of them. All this sufficed him
not, and therefore he longed for a prebend also, there to spend at ease the
milk and the fleese of the flocks, which he had never fed. At length by
mediation of money he obtained a Prebende: and when his man brought him home
the seal thereof, cast into a marvelous joy, he brust forth into these
words of the Psalm, taken out of his Portesse, which was all his study. Hec
requies mea. This is my rest (says the Priest) this is my place of quiet, here
entend I to make merry so long as I live. What followed hereof? Assuredly, nulla
requies, no rest, but within a few days after he was stricken with a paulsie
yt he could not stir him self, and besides, bereft of al his wits and
understanding, that where before he was accoumpted a worldly wise man,
afterward he was altogether foolish, and not long after died. And who is there
yt has lived any number of years, but they have known or heard of many that
have died suddenly? some sitting in their chaires, some sleping in their beds:
some have fallen down dead going in ye streets, some have fallen of from their
horses: besides many other like cases, coming by fraud, force, ^ violence,
wrought by one man against an other, whereof be infinite and to many examples.
Wherefore to conclude this part, let al those whom God has blessed with
prosperity in this world, learn further out of these examples, that when they
are in the highest and best state of wealth, favor, honor, and dignity: then
have they most cause to be vigilant, and in a redynes, for then most commonly
Gods stroke is nerest at hand, and sudden destruction lights upon such, as
in the midst of worldly prosperity have not God before their eyes, but cast
him clean out of their remembrance. Now to come to necessity, a few
examples in that shall suffice. Daily experience shows that al are subject to
death. Some note that it is not without an Emphasis, Gene. 5.
and to be marked, that in the fifte of Genesis where mention is made of the
old fathers that lived some seven, some eight, some nine hundredth years: ever
in the end Moses adds these words: Et mortuus est, and he died: to give us
to understand, that live we never so long, yet at length comes death and
makes an end of all. If strength could have preserved from death, Sampson had
yet lived, if wisdom, Solomon: if valeauncye, David: if beauty, Absolon: if
riches, Croesus: if largenes of dominion, Alexander the great had yet remained
a ly^e. But what need we to seek far examples? Behold this present assembly
and solemnity, most lively expresses to al our senses, the britlenes of our
nature, and the necessity of death. For if the most noble and mighty prince
Ferdina^dus the Romayne Emperor, for whose Funeral this preparation and
concourse is here made, has entered the way of all flesh, and though he were
the greatest and honourablest of all earthly kings, has as a subject obeyed
the irreuocable Statute of the heavenly Emperor spoken of before: Let us in
respect far inferior persons, assure our selves we shall follow, and that
how soon we cannot tell. And because it is commonly used that some thing
should be spoken at ye Funerals of great and notable personages in their praise
and commendation agreeable to their conditions: I will also agreablie to the
said custom speak something in commendation of the virtues of this most noble
prince. In which doing I shall do no new thing, but therein follow the steps
of the most godly, ancient, and best learned fathers of the Church. Gregory
Nazianzene, who for his excellent knowledge was called Theologus, that is, the
divine, In oration^ habita in funere pa^tris.
wrote diverse and sundry Funeral Orations or Sermons, and in them hyghely
commended the parties discessed: as Basilius Magnus, Cypriane, Athanasius, his
own father, (for his father was a married Bishop) and diverse other. S. Ambrose
in like Sermons hyghly commended Uale^tinianus, and Theodosius the Emperors.
Which was not done of these learned fathers, either for vain ostentatio^ of
eloquence, or for flattery of their friends remaining a live: but partly to
continue a reverent and honorable memory of ye parties discessed, and partly to
excite and stir up others by rehearsal of their virtues, to the imitation of
the same. And here I must crave pardon, if I shall not so largely and
particularly speak in the comme^dation of this noble Emperor, as did Ambrose
of Ualentinian and Theodosius. For this prince was to me personally unknown:
Ambrose was much conuersaunt with both the other. And therefore of this prince,
I can report only those things which either are credibly written of him in
the histories of our time, or that are notoriouse by common fame, or that I my
self have heard by very certain report of men of good credit. And here I
will briefly pass over those things, which Orators could prosecute with much
eloquence at great length. As first of all his high parentage, and nobility
of birth, being in deed very notable, descendyng in direct line from sundry
Emperors. Fridericke The Emperor of that name the third was his great
graundfather. Maximilian the Emperor son to the said Fridericke was his
graundfather. Phillip king of Spain father to Charles the last Emperor, and
to him: his mother was the daughter and heir of the king of Spain: his
fathers mother was the only daughter and heir to Carolus Audax, Charles ye
bold, Duke of Burgundy, and Lord of all the low countries, in deed a Duke by
style, but when he lived, terrible to the mightiest kings of his time, he him
self also descending lyneally from the kings of France. So that there was
compacted in this princes person, as it were a bundell of the principal
nobility of the christian world: out of the compass of the which world there is
no true nobility, but al Barbary. I will likewise pass over the dignity and
honor of his estate, which was the highest tipe of all worldly preeminencie,
to the which he ascended by all steps and degrees of honor. As first of all,
after the death of Maximilian the Emperor his graundfather, besides other his
titles and styles, he was created not a Duke, which is a place of great honor,
and namely in those countries, but an Archduke, I mean Archduke of Austria,
and (that more is) the only Archduke of the world, so far as I have read or
heard. Other there were Archdukes in style, but he only so long as he lived,
was Archduke in possession. Soon after he was crowned king of Boheme, then
elected king of Romans, after that king of Hungarye, and last of al Emperor
of Rome: which is the highest step and degree of honor that any man in
Christianity can attain unto. When I say highest, I do not here except the
pretensed supereminencie of the Popes holiness: for I take his holiness, in
chalenging to be above the Emperor, to be an usurper, and in this point I
have Tertuliane to make with me, who writes plainly thus: Imperator omnibus
hominibus mayor, solo deo minor. The Emperor (says he) is greater then al
men, and yet less then God alone.

Thus much concerning the royal progeny, and imperial state of Ferdinandus,
which things I have briefly passed over, as matters more meet for them that
write Panegyrical Orations, then for the Pulpet. For although they be the
gifts of God, and therefore to be esteemed in their kind, yet be they the
things that rather make a great man, then a good and a Christen man. For the
like has often happened, as well to evil men and to Heathen men, as to good
and Christen men.

I will therefore commend unto you the gifts of the mind, and the godly virtues
which were in this noble Emperor: in the which for ye causes before aledged, I
must be more brief, the^ otherwise the matter requires For surely, I have
herd yt he abou^ded in all kinds of virtue, yt he was a lover of justice, a
lover of truth, and a hater of the contraries, that he was full of clemency,
full of humblenes of mind, no proud man, no haultie man, but humble, myld, and
full of affability. He was also notvnlearned, and both in latin and al other
vulgar toungs so skilful, that he was well able to treat in the same with the
most part of the nations of Christiandome.

But out of al his virtues, I will at this time especially commend unto you
three, whereof two are notoriously known throughout all Christendom: The
third I my self have heard by report of them that were of good credit and
excellent learning. And the first is his fortitude, traueils and continuance
in wars against infidels, and sworen enemies of the Christian name and
religion, I mean the Turks. The principal office required of a Christian
Prince, over and above the duty of an other Christian, is the right use of the
sword, put by God into his hand, for the defense of the godly and innocent, and
for the repressing and punishing of the wicked. This sword is never so well
occupied, as when it is drawn in wars to defend christians, against infidels
and enemies of Christian religion. For these wars have a privilege or
prerogative above al other kind of wars, for they are called in ye scriptures,
Bella domini, the lords wars. In these kind of wars against Turks and
Mahumetistes, this noble Prince spent a great piece of his young and middle age,
not sparing therein neither his treasure, or his trauayl eue^ in his own person.
And therefore in ye point may very well be compared to the most godly and
valiant Prince king David, of whom for his valeancie against the Philistines
and other infidels, ii. Reg. 25.
it is written that he fought the lords batels.

But here me thinks I hear some man, making unto me this objection, and
saying: Sir, ye commend this man highly for his wars against the Turks: But
I beseech you what success had his wars? Had not the Turk the upper hand?
Have we not lost for all his wars, the better part of the kingdom of Hungary?
How then is he worthy commendacion that loses and not wins by his wars? To
that I answer, that counsels, wars, aad other actions are not to be judged by
the success, but by the purpose, intent, and prudent disposicion toward the
same. One Poet wishes that he should never have good success, Ovid.
which measures doings by success. Careat successibus opto, quisquis ab
euentu facta notanda putat. To direct wars and other actions to some good
end, and to prosecute the same by prudent advise, industry, and actiuitie,
pertains (as Gods gift) to the praise of a man, but the success of things
is reserved to God alone, who disposes them according to his divine wisdom.

And therefore, if God had determined at that time (as appears manifestly he
had) to plague Christiandome by the Turk, as he did the Jews by
Nabuchodonosor: (for god can use both evil men and wicked spirits for his
executioners) and that for the sins of the Christian Princes, and people, and
namelye for contemning and persecuting the doctrine of the Gospel, then
offered unto the^: What could all the kings of Christendom have done to the
contrary? But if we will judge this matter after the manner of men, and by
common reason: The fault of the losses in Hungary is rather, yea justly to be
imputed to other Christian Princes (who at that that time for old rustie
private titles, were at mortal and deadly war one against an other, and so
opened the way to the Turk) then to king Ferdinand, who continually labored
for aid against the Turk, but could obtain none: and was left alone to match
with a most mighty Tyranne, who has alone a dominion in greatness, equal
almost to all Christendom, besides the conspiracy of diverse Hungarian
Princes, (for Uauoida his quarrel with the Turk against him) which troubled
him more then all the Turks force. And I beseech you, in this case who could
hope to have good success?

And yet his wars against ye Turk did not always lack succes. For proof
whereof I shall desire you to call to remembrance how nobly and valiantly the
City of Uienna in Austria was defended against the Turk, chieflye by his
means. They that write the histories of our time, make report, that the City
of Uienna, then being a weak town, and not fortified, the great Turk having
passed through Hungarye, with an huge army, showing by the way infinite
examples of barbarous tirannie and cruelty, sparing neither age nor sex, no,
not forbearing to ryp the bodies of Christian women, great with child: was by
him besieged round about, with five great camps, the multitude of thenemies
being so great, that a man standing in the Tower of the great church there,
should for eight miles compass round about the town, see nothing but tents
and pauilions. The Turk so approached the town, that he procured ye walls to
be undermined, and great breaches being made in three several places, three
terrible assaults were given, three sundry days, and yet through Gods good
protection, the town of it self weak and newly fortified, was defended by a
wall of Christian men's bodies, and the Turkish Tiranne repelled with shame and
loss of great numbers of his Soldiers, to the notable benefit of al
Christendom. For if the Turk had then surprised Uienna, not only al
Germany, but al Italy, France, yea and England also would have before this
time trembled and quaked. And surely, I think we of England, that think our
selves in most safety, as we have a proverb of the Pope, to come to our own
doors, so should we have had the Turk or this day, to have come to our own
doors, if Uienna had not been so stoutly and valiantly defended, and that
chiefly by the good means of this noble Emperor Ferdinandus. For although the
Emperor Ferdinande, then king of the Romans, was not there in person, yet is
his commendation never the less. For the war was his, the town was his, the
army was collected by his providence, and as they use to speak in the latin
phrase: Ferdinandi auspiciis totum bellum gerebatur. So that I conclude, if the
Emperoux Ferdinande had never done any other notable act in all his life (as he
has done many) besides the defense of Uienna, yet were he for that alone,
worthy of perpetual memory, and of eternal fame and renown.

The second thing worthy high commendacion in this Prince, in my judgment,
was his peaceable government, after he attained the Imperial crown. And
although to some it may seem strange to commend in one man two contrary
things, war, and peace, yet in deed the varieties of times and other
circumstances considered, it is no strange thing at al. His wars were
against Gods enemies, his peace was with gods people. Ever since he was
created Emperor (his wars with the Turks once co^pounded) he has only studied
to maintain public peace: he has not attempted (as other men have) to enlarge
his dominion with theffusion of Christian blood: he has not stirred up any
civil wars, under color and pretense of religion, or for any other titles:
but rather peaceably governed, nourishing concord and amity among all the
states of the Empire: so that by means thereof, Germany before afflicted,
both by civil and foreine wars, is at this present by many men's judgment,
more floorishing both for men and wealth, then it was any one time this
hundredth years, that this man might well have used like words with Augustus
the Emperor when he died: Germaniam lateritiam accepi, marmoream relinquo. I
received a Germany of brick, I leave it of Marble.

Therefore, as in his wars I compared him to valiant king David: so in this
latter time for his peaceful government, he may be very well compared to
Solomon, who is termed by the interpretacion of his name, pacificus, peaceable,
or a Prince of peace. And so he alone has matched.2. most worthy Princes in
two several and most princelye qualities. The third thing that I commend
specially in this Prince, which I must speak, not of knowledge, but of most
credible report: is his chastity, he was a chaste Prince, a Prince that did
truly, and (as they say) preciselye keep his wedlock. A notable virtue in
any man, but more notable in a Prince, and most notable in so great a Prince,
specially in this loose and licentious age. For in these days it is to be
feared, that not only Princes, but others, of far meaner estate, think
unchaste life, and the breach of Matrimony, a thing not only in them selves
worthy of no reprehe^sion, but also account others of like state in power and
authority, very fools and dastardes, if they of conscience forbear to do the
same. Like in that to the Ethnickes, of whom S. Peter writes these words:
Atque hoc absurdum illis videtur, quod non accuratis vnae cum illis in ea^dem
luxus refusionem. ^. Pet. 4.
And it seems to them a strange or fond thing, that ye run not with them
in to the same excess of riot, or loosnesse.

But let these men assure them selves of that which follows in the same place.
Idem.
These men (says saint Peter) shall give account to him that is prepared to
judge the quick and the dead. God has not given a particular, but a general
law: neither has he given his commandments to poor men only, or to men
of mean estate, but to all men, and to al estates, high and low, Emperors,
kings, Queen's, Lords, Ladies, rich, poor. Yea, the greatest Prince of the
world, shall as well tremble at the judgment seat of Jesus Christ, and pass as
hard an account, as the poorest man of the earth, and an harder to, for that he
has a greater charge co^mited unto him, according as it is written: Cui multu^
creditum, Luc. 12. Sapi. 6.
multu^ requiretur ab eo: et potentes potenter tormenta patientur. To whom much
is committed, of him much shall be required: and the mighty shall suffer mighty
torments. Let no man think therefore, that high estate in this world, gives
him a license to live wickedlye and vnchastely: but rather follow this prince,
who virtuously, godly, and Christianly lived in honorable matrimony. And may
therefore herein iustlye be compared to the virtuous Emperor Gratianus, one of
his predecessors. To whom saint Ambrose gives this laudable testimony: Fuit
Gratianus castus corpore, In orat. de obit. Vale^tinia.
vt praeter coniugium nescierit alterius foeminae consuetudinem. Gratianus was
a chaste man of his body, who, out of wedlock or besides his wife, knew not
the company of any other woman

And behold (I beseech you) how wonderfully God blessed him for his chaste
obseruacion of Matrimony. For where other Princes living heretofore
incontinently, have been plaged of God with sterilitie and want of roial issue
of their bodies, and so the direct line of succession has been cut of after
them: God has not only given unto this Prince plenty of honorable
children, both Sons and Daughters, but also according to the verse of the
Psalm, caused him see Filios filiorum, his childers children, to a very great
number.

The honorable marriages of his daughters in sundry places of Christendom, I
omit: but one thing I cannot but note unto you, that he received at Gods
hand the same blessing which God granted unto David, 3. Reg. 1.
whereof he him self makes mention in the third book of the Kings, the
first chapter in these words.

Benedictus dominus deus Israel, qui dedit hodie sedentem in solio meo
videntibus oculis meis. Praised be God (says David, when Solomon his son was
proclaimed king before his death) which has given me one of mine own to sit
this day on my seat, mine eyes looking on. Like occasion to praise God had
Ferdinandus the Emperor, of whom we speak: for he before he died, saw the
most excellent and noble Prince Maximilian, his eldest son (now Emperor)
crowned king of Romans, and thereby in most sure certentie (if he lived) to
succeed him. A great blessing to a Prince, and a great blessing to a country,
where the case stands so. God for his mercies sake, at his good appointed
time, send such a blessing to England. Amen, Amen,

Thus much I have thought good to speak in the co^mendacion of this noble
Emperor, both to continue an honorable memory of the virtues that were in
him, as the occasion of this time and place justly requires, and also to styr
up those that be present of all estates, to follow these good things that
were commendable in him. And here I might cease to speak any more of him, were
it not yt there remains yet one scruple to be removed. For it will be
objected peradventure, that this Prince thus commended, dissented from us in
religion: and an answer therein required. I answer, that the matter of religion
is a matter of great weight in deed, and such a matter as we must commend unto
God only. Let us, whom God in his mercy has lightened with the bright beams
of his Gospel, render unto him most hearty thanks for the same. Let us
thankfully embrace it, and Christianly use it, to the glory of God, and our own
health. And let us pray instantly to god, the geuer of al good gifts, that he
will in his good appointed time, Jacob. 1.
so lighten the eyes, and direct the hearts of all Christian Princes, that
they may see the light of the truth, and walk thereafter in the right way, to
the extirpacion of al supersticion and error, and to the true setttng forth and
maintenance of sincere religion, and to the glory of God, who is to be blessed
for ever. And yet somethyng to answer them as concerning this prince: diverse
matters may be alleged, whereof I will rehearse some, which argue that he was
not so much addicted to the Romish religion, as some men would have ye world
to believe. And herein I will not deal subtilie or craftly, as to affirm
before this auditorie for a more strength to our cause, yt the Emperor before
his death thought in all points of religion as we do (for I do not think so
my self of him) only I will allege a few things, which either by the
evidence of the matter, or else by good record are manifest to all ye world. And
first of al it cannot be denied, but that he was contented to be crowned
Emperor without a Mass, which no Emperor did before him a great many of
years. And if any man would deny this: there be diverse persons here present
that were then at Frankford, and saw the whole sole^nitie of his coronation,
which was done for more surety in this case, at afternone, not before none as
was accustomed. Now if the Emperor had so much esteemed the Mass, as other
have done before him: he would not have suffered it to have been left of at his
Coronation. And if any for excuse hereof should affirm that he was contented
at that time to disse^ble the matter, till he had obtained ye imperial crown:
those under color of friendship should be his enemies, as diffaming him, that
for ambition sake he would do a thing contrary to his conscience: which, who
soever does affirm, thinks not honorably, nor as he ought to think of so
good and so worthy a prince. Furthermore I have heard for a truth, that before
his Coronation he faithful promised the princes Electours, that he would never
be crowned of the Pope, and the sequel declared the same very manifestly to
be true, for he was never crowned of him in deed, remaining so long in the
Empire without the Popes approbation, which before time was used. Let it then
be indifferently considered, whether this was not much derogatorie to the holy
sea, and whether Saint Peter's Prerogative was not much touched herein? What a
schismatic matter would this have been made, and what stirs would have
ensued, if the Emperor Ferdinande had lived in the days of Pope Gregory the
seventh, who procured the deposing, yea and death also of the Emperor Henry
the.iiii? Or in the days of Pope Alexander, who set his foot in the neck of
the Emperor Fridericus Barbarossa? But the Pope is a wise man, for although he
retain the same mind that the other his predecessors had, yet because the
times do not serve his purpose, he dissembleth the matter, and is contented
rather to take a piece, then loose all. And surely this one act is a plain
demonstration, that this Emperor did not think him self bound in conscience
so much to tender the Popes supremacy, as the Canonistes would have it
esteemed, Extra. de mayor. and obed. capi. vna^ sancta^.
who make it a matter De necessitate salutis, of necessity to salvation. For
otherwise he would not have done as he did, to have gained ten Empires.
Besides all this, there is extant abroad in printe, an Oration pronounced in the
late Tridentine Counsel, by the Emperor Ferdinandes Ambassador, in which
Oration there is request made by the Emperor, that liberty may be granted to
have the Communion ministered in both kinds. Whereupon may very well be
gathered, that the Emperor was not ignorant of the sacrilege of the Romish
Church in depriving the people of God of the one half of the Sacrament, where
Christ him self instituted both. Or else if he had thought the one to be as
sufficient as both (which is the Popish doctrine) what neded he to make any
further suit? And for further declaration of his earnestnes in this point, I
will add that which I saw written in Auguste last past, by a man of good
credit and estimation, that Ferdinandus the Emperor, not long before his
death, gave license to al his own countries, to have the use of ye Sacrament in
both kinds. I do not affirm this but of report: But surely if it be true, I
do not doubt, but that God reveled unto him other parts of religion also,
which we have not yet heard of. But (as I have said) we will commend that
matter unto God: And what soever his religion was, this solemn action for
memorial of him, may very well be used notwithstanding. And being fallen into
ye mention of this public action and solemnity, it shall not be amiss
somewhat to say of the true use, meaning, and purpose of the same, for the
better satisfaction of doubtful minds. For there is no doubt but there will
be two contrary judgments concerning the same. The one part will say,
there is to little done, the other will say, there is to much. The first part
will allege, that although they cannot but confess the action to be done
very honorablye, and with much magnificencie, yet the principal matter of all
is wantyng (will they say): for here is an honorable memorial of the Emperor
Ferdinandus, but here is (say they) no prayer for the soul of Ferdinandus. To
those I answer that the holy Scriptures, the word of God, is the candell
and the lantern for our steps. By it we ought to direct our steps, if we
will please God, without it, we walk in darkness, Psalm. 119.
and know not whether we go. But first of all in the Scriptures we find no
commandment to pray for the souls departed, 2. Match. 12.
unless they will cite the place of the book of Machabees: And then Saint
Jerome shall make them answer, Hieron. in prefat. in lib Solomo.
who permits in deed these books of Machabaees to be read (...) but
because they be not of the Canon of the Scriptures, they be not (says Saint
Jerome) sufficient of the^ selves to establishe any doctrines in the Church of
God. Secondarily we have no example in ye canonical Scripture of any invocation
for the dead: for we read in the old Testament that the fathers, as Jacob and
others, were buried with mourning, and with much honor, for a testimony of the
resurrection, which is here also meant: but that any prayers was used for them,
we read not. Likewise we read in the new Testament of Stephen and other, but of
no prayer for the^ or any others after their death, read we any where in the
old Testament or in the new. Thirdly where in the old Testament be Sacrifices,
and expiatio^s appointed for many and sundry things, whereof some seemed small
offenses: yet was there never any Sacrifices appointed for any purgation or
expiation of ye dead. And therefore if Judas Machabaeus offered a Sacrifice for
the dead, seeing none such is prescribed in the law of Moses, in that doing he
added to ye law, and so offended God: and is no more in this point to be
followed, then Loath and David being otherwise godly men, are to be followed in
their evil acts: nor the author of that book more to be credited in this
sentence without the Scripture, 1. Match. 14. Vide Aug. cont. Gaudent.
then in his commendyng of one in the same story who did kill him self,
contrary to the Scriptures. Besides that, diverse of the oldest written copies
of the story of the Machabaees in Greek, have no mention at al of the prayeng
for the dead: So that that place is suspected to have been corrupted of purpose
by some addition, put to many years after. For most certain it is if prayer
for the dead had been so necessary, as many now a days would have it seem, it
had not lacked all authority and example of the Canonical Scriptures as it
does.

Now if they shall allege that the ancient doctors make for them (for
Scripture, other then before is alleged, they have none that makes any thing
for the purpose) first it is to be said that men's writings alone are not
sufficient in matters of faith and religion. It cannot be denied, but from
Gregory's time when the corruption of religion increased very much: the
doctrine of purgatory and praying for the dead has gone with full sail,
being maintained principally by feigned apparitions, visions of spirits, and
other like fables, contrary to the Scriptures. But the the eldest writers and
doctors of the Church (for Dionysius, even by the Judgment of Erasmus, is
not so old as they make him,) speak not at all of praying for the dead. And
although in Chrysostom and Saint Ambrose sometime there is mention of praying
for the dead, yet it is in a far other meaning with them, then the scoolemen
and other of the latter time, being men ignorant in the tounges and other good
learnyngs, have collected and gathered of them. For it is manifest, that those
holy fathers meant nothing less then by praying for those yt were departed, to
establish Purgatory or third place: without the which, neither the Pope him
self nor any of his clergy would any thing at al contend for praying for the
dead. For ye terror of Purgatory being taken away, their gain would cease:
and withal their prayer for the dead, invented for filthy lucre, were at an
end. For it is confessed of all men, that if there be no third place, prayer
for the dead is in vain, for those that be in heaven need it not: those that
be in hell, cannot be helped by it: so that it needs not or boteth not, as the
old proverb goes. If the ancient fathers therefore when they pray for the
dead, mean of the dead which are already in heaven and not else where: then
must we needs by their prayer understand either thanckesgeuyng, or else take
such petitions for the dead (as they be in deed in some places) for figures of
eloquence and exornation of their style and Oration, rather then necessary
grounds of reason of any doctrine. But I will make this matter more plain by
an example or twain, not entending at this time to make any longer discourse
or disputation concerning this matter. S. Ambrose in his funeral oration or
Sermon concerning the death of Theodosius the Emperor, does much co^me^d his
virtues, and especially he comme^deth him for his great lowlines and hu^blenes
of spirit: for that he being an Emperor submitted him self to the discipline
of the Church, and did publicque penance for the murder committed at
Thessalonica by his commandment, lame^tyng his oversight therein with
abundau^ce of tears: which few private me^ in these days would be contented
to do. In the process of this oration, Saint Ambrose labors to persuade all
men that Theodosius, who had lived so godly, was undoubtedly saved: and at
length pronounces thereof plainly, In orat. de obit Theod.
using these words. Fruitur nunc Augustae memoriae Theodosius luce perpetua,
tranquillitatae diuturna, et pro hiis quae in hoc gessit corpore munerationis
diuinae fructibus gratulatur, that is: The Emperor* Theodosius of most
honorable memory, now enjoys perpetual light, and continual quietness: and
for those things which he did in this body, he does rejoice in the fruition of
Gods reward. How could S. Ambrose have more plainly expressed his certain
persuasion, concerning the blessed state of Theodosius? And yet within a few
lines after he has these words: Domine da requie^ perfecto seruo tuo
Theodosio, requie^ qua^ parasti sanctis tuis. Lord give rest to thy perfect
servant Theodosius, the rest (I mean) which thou have prepared for thy
saints. First he calls Theodosius the perfect servant of God: But purgatory
by the confession of the patrones thereof, is not for the perfect, but for the
imperfect. And moreover what needs S. Ambrose to pray to God to give
Theodosius rest, seeing he has pronounced before, that Theodosius was already in
possession of that rest, and therefore not in purgatory, where is pain (as they
teach) contrary to rest. It is evident therefore that S. Ambrose in this and
like places meant not to establish the doctrine of purgatory, or praying for
the dead, but uses only a figure of eloquence and vehemency of affection.
Likewise in the Greek liturgy entitled to Chrysostom are contained these
words following. Praeterea offerimus tibi rationalem hunc cultu^ pro omnibus
in fide quiesce^tibus maioribus, patribus, Patriarchis, Prophetis et Apostolis,
praeconibus, et eua^gelistis, martyribus, co^fessoribus, co^tinentibus, et omni
spu^ in fide initiato precipue pro sanctissima immaculata sup omnes benedicta
d^a nostra deipara et se^per virgin Maria. Moreover we offer unto thee this
reasonable worship for all ye forefathers resting in faith: for the fathers,
patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, preachers, and evangelists, for martyrs,
confessors, co^tinent persons, and every spirit endued with faith: But chiefly
for the most holy, immaculate and blessed above all other, our Lady the mother
of God, and evermore a virgin Marie.

These are Chrisostomes words, shall we now gather hereof, because
Chrysostom affirms the reasonable worshipping at the holy communion to be
offered for ye Patriarchs, for the Apostles, yea and for the blessed virgin?
Therefore the Patriarchs, Apostles, and the blessed virgin are in Purgatory?
It is to great an absurdity. This oblation therefore is only a thankesgeuing
to God for the Saints of God departed, with the remembrance of them by name,
who did in true faith depart out of this world. These places well weighed are
sufficient to declare ye true meaning of many other like places alleged out of
ye fathers for praying for ye dead, and for purgatory. But to answer to the
second sort, who think this to much and to come to nere to ye superstitious
rites abrogated: I would those me^ would follow y^ example of ye Israelites, in
a time of variaunce between the^ and some of their brethren, the story is
co^t^ined the.22. of Iosue, Iosue. ^^.
ye effect is this. When the tribes of Ruben and Gad, and the half tribe of
Manasse had received their portion beyond Jordan, at their return home they
builded a piece of work like a great altar, which when the rest of the
Israelites heard of, they intended war against the two tribes and the
half, and sent messengers unto the^, burdenyng them with apostasy, and
reuolting from Gods religion, for that they had builded an other altar,
besides the altar in the tabernacle, which was the only altar appointed by
God. The two tribes and the half answered, and that with calling of God to
witness, that they meant no such thing, nor never ente^ded to offer any sacrifice
upon it: But only builded it for a bou^der and for a testimony, both for them
and their children, yt the bounds of their possessions reached so far. The
rest of ye Israelites were with this answer very well satisfied and
contended, and absteyned for any war making against them. So I do not
doubt, but those who think this action to have any affinity with the
superstitious abrogated ceremonies (if any such men be) when they shall
understand that there is no such thing neither done, nor meant, they will be
likewise satisfied. First of all here is no invocation or massyng for the
dead: nothing else done, but that is godly, First singyng of the Psalms,
afterward readyng of the Scriptures, which put us in remembrance of our
mortality, and of the general resurrection, with doctrine and exhortation.
All which things tend to edifieng of the living, not benefiting of the dead.
The rest of things tend to the honorable memorial of this great prince, as
has been used in all ages, even emongs Gods people. Herein also we declare
that we reverence and honor the authority of Magistrates, as those in who^
the Image of God here on earth is represented unto us. Purgatory gains
nothing by this days action or such like, but rather receaueth a blow, for at
such times there is always just occasion ministered to speak against that
foolish fable. And as for this magnificence, and costs, the Queen's majesty's
act therein, deserves great co^mendacion, showing her self therein a Prince of
honor by doing the office of a Prince, to the greatest Prince that reigned,
thereby exercising the amity that ought to be betwixt Christian Princes. And
that such acts for Princes dead, are with such circumstances lawful and
commendable, may appear by the scriptures. The prophet Ieremye rebuking king
Ioachim, says thus: Pater tuus nonne com edit et bibit, et fecit iudicium et
iustitiam, et been erat ei. etc* Ierem. ^^.
Did not thy father (says he, meaning good king I^sias) eat and drink, and
did judgment and justice, and it went well with him? What means the Prophet
by eating and drinking? no man can live without meat and drink. He means
that Josias did not only eat and drink for necessitte, but also upon just
occasions, made great and roial feasts, and was sumptuous in other matters
meet for his estate, but he joined withal judgment and justice, he destroyed
the monuments of idolatry, he ministered judgment to the idolatrous priests, he
ministered justice to the oppressed, to the widow and fatherles, and God was
well pleased with him, says the prophet. And so if the example of Josias be
followed in the rest, God will not be offended with this. Ierem. ^^.
And (which is more special) it is threatened to wicked kings by ye same
prophet: they shall not mourn for him, alas y^ noble prince. etc. but as Asses
shall they be cast abroad. etc. So that this our doing is an honor due, even
by the scriptures, to this worthy and most noble prince. Gene. ^^.


Let no man here object diversity of religion, Joseph did not refuse to take
the Egiptians, being of a diverse religion, in his company to solemnize the
burial of his father. And David sent a princely embassage to Hanon, 3. Reg. ^^.
king of the Amonites to comfort him, upon the death of his father Naas. I am
of S. Augustines mind: whatsoever (says he) te^deth to the edifieng or
increase either of faith or of charity, is commendable. These kinds of
actions, bisides the entents before alleged, tend to thincrease of charity,
to the continuance and confirmation of unity, concord, and amity, with a most
noble and mighty prince our neighbor, and therefore cannot but be commended of
al those that be lovers of peace and unity. But let this suffice of that
matter.

Now rests something to speak of the third part, which is how a man should
prepare him self to die. Wherein I entend to be very short, because I have
spent much time in the former matters. A very necessary matter it is for a man
to prepare him self to die well, and Christianly, for in that rests al. Apoc.
14.
And therefore they are pronounced happy that dye in ye Lord. But this
preparation must be made according to the direction of Gods word, not
according to the devise of man's phantasy. In times past men made preparacio^s
before death, but (God knows) far out of square: Some redeemed for money,
great plentye of Indulgencies from Rome, and he that had the greatest plenty
of them, to be cast with him into his grave, when he was buried (which I my
self have seen done) was counted the best prepared for death. Others made
provisions or foundacions to have great number of Masses said for them after
death, thereby to be the sooner delivered out of Purgatory. Other there were,
that thought it a more reasonable and speedye way to quench the fire of
Purgatory, before they fell into it, and therefore they procured a great number of
Masses and Trentals to be said for them before death. Some of those yt have been
learned (the more was the pity) have died in an obseruant or gray Friars cowle,
and afterward been buried in the same, and so thought them selves well
prepared. But (alas) al these preparacio^s were preposterous, Parchme^t, and
lead, Masses and Trentals, were they before death or after, the gray or black
color of the Friars cowle, were very slender matters of defense before Gods
judgment seat. These things therefore, being not only not commanded of
God, but also tending to the diminishing of the efficacy and virtue of
Christ's cross, were more apt to kindle the unquenchable fire of hell, then to
quench the fantastical fire of Purgatory, which is no where.

It is not to be denied, but our forefathers were wise me^, and in very many
things highly to be commended: and yet lamentable it is to hear, into what
gross errors and superstitions they were carried, by those that made a
marchaundise of religion, teaching things not convenient for filthy lucres
sake, as S. Paul foreshewed. Tit. ^.
To be brief therefore as the time ouerspent requires, the true preparacio^ to
die well, is to live well. A few words, but a long lesson. Saint Augustine
has a like saying: Non potest male mori, qui been vixit, et vix potest been
mori, qui male vixit. He cannot die evil, that has lived well, and hardly,
hardly (says he) can he die well, that has lived evil. He says (hardlye) for
that no man can limit the measure of gods mercies, Math. ^^* Luc. ^3.
he may when his merciful will is, call at ye xi. hour, as Christ our savior in
the parable of the woorkemen sent into the vineyard, declares. He may call at
the last end of our life, as he did the thief on the cross. But that is not
his ordinarye way, let no man presume upon that, but let every man obey the
voice of god when he calls him, who by his holy word calls al men at
altimes, when they read, or hear it.

When I say that to live well, is the very best preparation to die well, let no
man think that I herein go about to extol the dignity or merit of man's
works: But that I understand by living well, all those qualities, and
virtues which pertayne to a true Christian manne, among which, those that be
of the first table of the commandments of God, are most principal. As
namelye Christian belief, the true knowledge of god, assured faith in the
mercies of God, for the merits of Christ only. Out of which, as out of a
most plentiful fountain, springs true innocation of God, true mortification
of the old man, and contempt of the world, with all the works of charity and
mercy. Of which I will cease to speak any further at this present, both for
that I am excluded by time now ouerpast, and also for that the particular
tractation of these, is the principal matter of all our other sermons. Of the
which, as ye have often times heard heretofore, so shall you also hereafter
hear often, of me and other my brethren, by the grace and aid of almighty God,
who grant unto every one of us, that when the uncertain hour of death shall
come, we may be found vigilant and well prepared: that departing from hence
with a joyful conscience, we may be partakers of that blessedness and
felicitye, which in the Scriptures our savior promises to those servants,
whom the Lord at his coming, shall find watchyng and ready. Which
blessedness God grant us all, and that through the merits and death of the
same our Savior Jesus Christ. To whom with the father and the holy Ghost, be
all honor, glory, and empire, now and for ever. Amen,

The principal Mourners and assistantes at the funerals of Ferdinande, the late
Emperor etc. celebrated at the Cathedral Church of S. Paul's in London, the
third of October. 1564.
Ecclesiastical persons.
THe Archbishop of Canterbury Primate of England. The Bishop of London. The
Bishop of Rochester, chief Almoygnor to the Queen's Majesty. The Deane of
Paul's, with the whole College there
The Lords Counselors and Knights.
William Marquis of Winchester, Lord treasorer of England, chief mournor.
Thomas Earl of Sussex, Lord Lieutenaunt of Ireland, and Captain of the
Pensioners.2. mournor. Henry Earl of Huntington.3. mournor. Henry Lord
Strange, eldest son to the Earl of Darby.4. mournor. Henry Lord Harbert,
eldest son to the Earl of Penbroke.5. mournor. Henry Lord Darly, eldest
son to the Earl of Lenex.6. mournor. John Lord Lumley, son in law to the
Earl of Arundell.7. mournor. Henry Lord of Hunsdon.8. mournor. Sir Edward
Rogers Knighte, comptroller of her Majesty's householde 9. mournor. Sir
Fraunces Knolles Knight, Vicechamberlayne.10. mournor. Sir William Cecil
Knight, principal Secretary to her Majesty..11. mournor. Sir Richard
Sackeuile knight, vndertreasorer of the Eschequer.12. mournor. Sir Nicholas
Throkmerton knight, Chamberlayne of the Eschequer.13. mournor. Sir George
Howard knight, Master of the Armorie.


Imprinted at London by John Day, dwelling over Aldersgate beneath S. Martins.
The.viii. of November. 1564.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.

A new book containing the art of ryding, and breakinge great Horses,
together with the shapes and Figures, of many and diverse kinds of Byttes, mete
to serve diverse mouths. Uery necessary for all Gentlemen, Souldyours,
Seruingmen, and for any man that delights in a horse.


