An Oration or Funeral Sermon uttered at Room, at the burial of the holy
Father Gregory the 13. who departed in Jesus Christ the 11. of April. 1585.
Containing his manners, life, deeds, and last words at his death concerning
the affairs of this present time. Together with the lamentations of the
Cardinals and whole Clergy.

Faithfully translated out of the French Copy, printed at Paris for Peter
Iobert, dwelling in Harp streate. 1585. with the Kings Privilege.

Otherwise to be entitled: A Sermon full of Papisticall adulation and matter
sufficient to procure the wise and virtuous minded to contemn such gross and
palpable blindness, and all persons to laugh at their absurd and erroneous
follies.

Imprinted, Anno 1585.

To the Courteous and Christian Reader.
SVch and so great (Gentlemen) is the obstinate and perverse blindness of the
fond and fantastical Papists, that unworthily they challenge unto them selves
all Ecclesiastical Rites and Privileges, underpropping their ruinous ROMAN
Church with such fair, but rotten, posts, and extolling (even above God)
their whorish Antechrist with such glorious titles of holiness and honor, that
if God did not turn their wordly wisdom to folly, and cause them by running
headlong into gross and palpable errors, to discover their own dotinges, many
true and perfect Christians might by their charming allurements be sinisterly
seduced. As I was thus sorrowfully meditating of these their polliticke
illusio^s, there came to my hands a Copy of the Oration or Sermon pronounced
at Room over the Corpse of GREGORY the xiij. their last and leaud Pope: which
taking in my hand and thinking to find some excellent (though erroneous) show
of skill and learning: after I had vewed and reuewed it over carefully, I found
such a confused Chaos of doting conceits, such an absurd form both of
learning, reason, and method, that I could not but wonder how either Mas
Doctor the Preacher could be so impudent, to utter such balde stuff before so
many stately Cardinals: or such mighty Potentates suffer the Corpse of their
new Saint GREGORY: or their own reverend grauities to be abused with the
rehearsal of such fantastical toys. But seeing their own words may be
best witnesses of their follies, I thought good to translate it into English,
that even the simplest may see how simply GOD wot these great Schoolemaisters
deal in their greatest and most weighty affairs. For who would have thought
that the Cardinals would not have appointed such a learned Prelate to preach
at the Funeral of so mighty a man: nay, as they say, more then a man, that
his excellent Sermon might have been a glory to the dead Corpse of their good
Pope GREGORY: but seeing in such weighty affairs they bring forth such weak
Divinity, let the world judge how carelessly and unskillfully they will gloze
over their small and ceremonious tromperies. This show of their own dotings
then I hope shall be a proof or caveat for the godly to beware of their
poisoned potions, and to lean only to the true Church that is builded on the
Rock Christ Jesus: which happy success in Godliness wishing to al men, I
commit you to the Almighty.

Robert Green.

In Papam Theodori Bezae Carmen.
SI qua fides Roman tibi est adhibenda Tyran^^
Larua tegit summi quem sacra Pontificis:
Auspicijs cuicunque tuis manus vncta refulget
Et capite raso vertice splendet apex
Quinque vbi conceptas tacito cum murmr voces
Fuderit (haec etenim pandere sacra nefas)
Ecce manus inter medias (si credere fas est)
Vera caro euadit, qui modo panis erat.
Non igitur te Pontificem nunc dixero, verum
Carnificem and patrem dixero carnificum.
In eundem.
Non Pontifex, sed Potifex:
Non Potifex, sed Panifex:
Non Panifex, sed Carnifex.
Est Papa, Pater, Pontifex.
An Oration and Funeral Sermon uttered over the Corpse of the holy Father Pope
Gregory the xiij. who deceased in Jesus Christ the 11. of April. 1585.
THERE is nothing so certain as death, either uncertain as the moment thereof.
Wherefore the holy Doctor says: Keep thy self continually in that estate
wherein thou desire to dye. And ye Proverb goes, that many a one thinks
himself in perfect health, when he bears death in his bosom. To say the
troth we do continually carry death about with us. It is in us immediately
after we take life and moving in our mothers womb: and wheresoever we walk it
is still at our heels: If we take horse, it is with us: If we be on the
water, it is the guide of our Ship: so as we can never say death to be
absent from us: for our selves are very death, and no part of our body
immortal: wherefore those that suppose themselves to live in this world are
far deceived in their own opinions, and the pilgrimage of man in this world
is but a shadow of life, which unto us seems life, but in deed is none. The
better therefore to describe the said shadow, I will make an abstraction of the
dead time of man's age from the full and greatest age that a creature can live
in the world. (...)pish De(...)es do ra(...)er imitate (...)y Duns (...)en the
(...)ophet (...)uid, who (...)teth (...)wne the (...) of man (...) consist of
(...). years.
First, the longest age that man can live in this world is but six score
years.

From six score years we must deduct the nights, for man when he sleeps
lives not, besides that sleep is termed the Image of death, so that deducting
the nights, which comprehe^d one half of the time, man lives but three score
years in the world.

Whiles man lives these sixty years, he lives but the one half of them,
for if he have one day of mirth and quiet he has an other of sorrow and care,
because grief does still secretly creep into mirth. And any person troubled
with cares or vexed in mind, does rather dye then live, we must therefore take
from the sixty years before said the one half, and so there remain but
thirty.

Now, let us see whether in the space of six score years a man may not pass
away ten at the least in sickness, mischaunces, or other infirmities? I may
tell you there is no man that lives six score years in the world, but at
several times and during his said age he has above ten years infirmity:
and therefore we must take from the thirty years which are the remainder of
man's life yet ten years, and then there are but twenty left.

Which are now the twenty years of his life? We must take them at his
infancy and in his oldest age: that is, ten years from his very childhood,
and the other ten from his extreme old age: but since as well in Infancy as
in extremity of age there is no life, but rather a living death, I conclude,
that man has not one only hour of life in this world, also that whosoever
seeks life in this world does much deceive himself. In heaven therefore it
is that we must assure our selves to live, and seek for life, but not upon
earth where death does continually haunt us. For we ought to dye to the world,
to the end to be borne in Jesus Christ.

According to the sovereign sentence and decree, (...)ppie (...)was to (...):
true (...)urch, (...)en the (...)embers (...) Anti(...)rist de(...)ease.
O ye Enhabitaunts of Room we see your great Bishop and mine is dead:
behold our Crown is fallen: our Loadstarre vanished away and our light
extinguished. And for my own part, O wretch and miserable man, who am deprived
of him, of two things, I wish for one, that is, either never to remember the
good that we have lost, either else calling the same to mind to find some one
that were able to give me comfort correspondent to the greatness of the
heaviness whereinto I am fallen. And in deed my self do now come into the
Pulpit upon two several occasions mere contrary each to other, viz. to
rehearse the greatness of the good that is taken from us, and to comfort
those that sustain the loss: nay, rather to do two things which seem to
repugne each other: for if it be true that nothing does more aggrauate the
grief of the loss, then the remembrance of the value of the thing lost; then
does nothing seem more contrary to the comfort of the living the^ the praises
of him that is dead, as in this case, wherein so far do the merits of the
deceased exceed, that the arrows which pearce his heart that is deprived of
him are the more sharp and grievous. Howbeit some man would answer, that
contrariwise by the comme^dations of him yt is departed we do declare that he
is not dead, but lives, and thus we may by little and little assuage the
sorrow of our loss and damage in whatsoever manner. But as it were hard for a
Painter in the face of a sorrowful person to represent a smyling countenance,
so does it seem to me a difficult enterprise to undertake to comfort a man by
rehearsing the virtues of him that is taken away from us: and that the more if
we should enter into consideration of him yt is spoken of: of your selves that
are the hearers: and of me yt do make the discourse: for in each of these
three, the same circumstaunces that seem to make my enterprise easy, are
those that in deed do yield it most difficult and troublesome. As if a man
should in respect of him say, that if the multitude of his great virtues do
seem to abridge my labor in seeking some argument whereupon to ground his
praises: Childish (...)easons and (...)orse De(...)initie.
so contrariwise the abundance of so great vettues do hold me so short, that
I can not certainly resolve upon the choice of one only whereupon worthily to
commend him: For you, if a man should say, in that you all knew him and used
him to your great profit, it should seem sufficient for me, only to
discipher matters: so contrariwise your own perfect knowledge together with
your dealings with him, would sufficiently open unto you all my defaults in
displaying of him. And for my own part, if an infinite courtesies and great
favors wherewith he has always gratefied me do seem without seeking any
cunning to breed in me as much affection as is requisite: so by contrary
reason, the great favors and benefits wherewith he has always gratefied me
do not leave me any cunning means to hinder me from having greater affection
then is here to be required of me. And this was the principal reason that
moved me somewhat to refuse this so honorable a Commission, and unto me in
many other respects most welcome, and to request you to appoint and commit to
some other the charge to discourse hereupon, and to leave unto me tears and
lamentations only.

But now unto thee, Oh my good master and father (for so will I always call
thee) do I turn my self: May it be possible that this my oration which
lately in thy life thou did harken unto, should now be employed in
praising of thee being dead, either that this my tongue which employing me to
the service of this country, thou did too greatly honor should now be
occupied, helas, in lamentations for thy so hurtful death to all Christiandome?
And what? have thou then brought me so joyfully to Room, to the end here to
celebrate thy funeralles? Oh how that Commission to read Hieremie might well
foreshewe unto me (but I perceived it not) that my Lecture thereof should end
in lamentations, and now behold that divination accomplished! see Quomodo
sedet sola Ciuitas, how the City sits desolate, notwithstanding it be Plena
populo, full of people: No Spouse but a Stru^pet spotted with spiritual
fornication.
also how this spouse, The Church of Room, who by great brightness seemed
to be Domina gentium, Lady of Nations, now having lost thee, Est facta quasi
Vidua, is made as it were a Widow: and as a Widow all dipped in tears and
lamentations, wills me to celebrate the praises of her dear spouse, which
she all wholly together can not celebrate: wherein although I can not (as in
truth I am not able) atteyne to the least parcel of thy deserts, Beastly and
blasphemous deuinitie, fit for so leaud a Bishop and so unlearned a Chaplain.
which are not well to be expressed, yet at all adventures I assure my self, O
happy soul, that as in thy life time thou did pardon me a number of other
imperfections, so now thou will likewise forgive me this: I know that as thou
were accustomed, thou will make better account of the good will then of the
gloss and pomp of words, and as discreet, shall well see, that not only I,
but also that no Orator is able to atteyne to the type of thy commendations.
Among the which my Lords and ye my hearers, I do freely confess, that I have
greatly doubted whether I were best to begin, as I take the manner to be, at the
greatenesse and eminency of the famely from whence he is extract: and at the
first I was purposed so to do, and that ye rather because it is not yet scarce
two months sense that my self heard him in this Temple, discourse how our
Savior Jesus Christ was content to be borne of a Mother though poor, yet
Noble, and descended of a Noble race, also that Nobility was very effectual
even to spiritual life, as it may be said of him that is noble, that whether
it be through conformity or resemblance of mind with his predecessors, either
through the remembrance of such things as they have done, either else through
the effect of good bringing up, or for whatsoever other reason, he is better
disposed to do well: that nobility serves him as a spur to goodness and a
bridle to evil, also that as the precious stone being ser in Gould makes a
greater show then in Iron, even so the same virtuous deeds do give a more
effectual example when they proceed from noble personages then from men of
base estate, with other things which he spoke to the same purpose. Howbeit I
will not speak thereof, in that it might be accounted rashness in me even in
Room to seek to make his holiness famely more famous then it is. It may be
that some may say that this famely does want glorious titles, preeminence,
riches, possessions, Jurisdictions, pretentions of rights, patronages, ancient
petidegrees of their predecessors, comme^dations of learning, praise of arms,
noble and famous alliances either in Italy or without, and to be brief, all
such things collected into one, as being severally taken are sufficient to set
a fair show upon a whole progeny. Notwithstandin(...) all these things which
are terestriall an(...) too common with others, and for the causes aforesaid
his holiness perceiving, as he perceived all things, that it is not enough
for a horse to be of a good race, except him self be also good, and that they
are happy and wise, who as the sea, do not receive the sweetness of this
vain glory of the rivers of their predecessors, but returning their course and
swelling over the mouths of the rivers them selves, can yield to their
forerunners the reward of firm and permanent commendation, so of that great
nobility which he had brought forth of his mothers womb with him, he did
therein only yield thanks to God for that his actions with their
circumstances, thereby, and in respect thereof were more notable and exemplarie.

Oh most happy parson, who in the midst of so great eminency of birth, could
so well subdue pride, A similitude most fondly applied.
and in himself give example unto other! Even like unto the pearl which
although it lies in the bottom of the sea, yet keeping it (...)fe close in the
shel, and never opening (...) it ascends to receive the dew of heaven, we
find therein no smell, no savor, or drop that tastes of her sea, but being
pure, clear and white, it seems to be formed even in heaven. We must not
therefore take commendations of this people at the transitory things of the sea
of this world, and although he be therein extract of a most noble birth, yet
will I not say any more thereof as of that which is none of his.

But discoursing and speaking of that which properly appertains to himself, I
would ask whether his mind commanded not his body? Also whether it were
possible to find a body more withered, afflicted, macerated, dried up, or pale
through the effect of austere and hard penance? Other men's bodies (O Christian
hearers) are for the most part wished to be of this or that form, because
they yield such or such inclination to the mind, but in this I will show you a
matter worth the noting, that is, that here the case was altered, for it was
the mind that ministered inclination to the body, so that being waxen
altogether spiritual, had not extreme need forced him, he never desired
meat, drink, or bodily rest: and he lived in such sort as it was a miracle
(whereof, helas, we have but too soon seen the issue,) how he could live so
many years, but rather living was dead: And for my part I assure you, I never,
even in the heart of Somer, kissing his holy hands (good God shall I never do
so more?) found them other then cold, wherein there was no heat except the
same proceeded of some excess or immoderate labor, or of some motion of a
sudden fever. O most dear body O most holy members! But look yet once
again upon them, O ye Roman people, and say: Are not these the very hands
which so often have been joined together and lifted up to pray and offer
Sacrifice for us? The head which sought to overthrow the true Church, dissuade
subjects f(...) their aleg(...)ance to they Pri(...) and to may(...)taine his
own Po^(...) and glor(...)
Be not these the feet that have travailed so far for our sakes? Is not
this the head that never imagined any thing but for our benefit? Is not this
the heart that burned in love of us? O dear members! O members so dear! What?
You then shall go under the earth? And what? You must be buried? Helas my God!
who is it that thou have taken away from us? And wherefore do ye hide your
selves? For my part, none but only death shall ever pluck out of my heart the
lively Image of that so well-beloved countenance. Especially in this act wherein
with your eyes toward heaven as it were smiling, and with an Angelical
countenance I see you depart and remain dead.

But it is time for us, O Christian hearors, to proceed to matters of greater
importance, which are so many and withal so entangled one within an other, that
I could not find any more fit mean to part and divide the^, neither do I
think that we can take any better course, then the very course of his holy
life: and there to begin.

When he was a little child he was very devout, and it is well known that God
even in his first youth wrought in him merueilous signs of singular goodness.
The like is read of S. Basile, S. Gregory, S. Dominick, S. Frances, and many
others, as was to be seen in this young child, (say they that do remember
it) namely, that at his return from the College, all the delight that that
age used to take in any other thing, he took only in framing of little
Aulters, adorning of small Chapels, and counterfaiting of holy things.
Matters, which although the wisest may think too base for this place, and for
the occasion now ministered, yet would I not only not disdain, but also take
great and singular pleasure in the same. And although some do say that among
such serious affairs such small trifles should have no place, yet do I delight
to show how commendable, not only grave matters, but even such small things
were in him. Concerning the rest, according to the proportion of his age, or
rather beyond the reach of that age (as occasions do increase so must my style
arise) his holiness being past the inferior Schools, and coming to study
the Law, it is not possible to make an end of writing with what modesty and
gravity he there passed the years of his study: The continency and
virginity of the Popish Clergy does consist in keeping of Concubines.
he was apparelled in Clerks attire, but, which was of greater importance, he
observed Clergy manners, much continency, (as it is supposed) perpetual
virginity, with modest behavior, no vanity, continual study: These were his
exercizes: and to be brief, although through our mishaps the University
wherein he studied were not usually either the quietest or the holiest in the
world, yet might the writing of Naziauzene concerning the Great Basille and the
town of Athens be applied to him. Like as, there is one river which flowing
through the Sea, takes no bitterness thereof: also a certain beast that
lives in the fire and consumes not, even so he with great quietness passing
these troubles, and with sovereign virtue such vices, did first and most
worthily atteine to the doctorall degree, and afterward was called to Room,
and made Cardinal only through desert, for his learned studies, and not by
favor as the most part do now usually practice.

A happy departure, a blessed journey for all the holy Church, but especially
for this great City of Room, which have received so great benefits and so
much comfort at his hands. Notwithstanding whatsoever affairs he had in hand,
yet did he daily apply his study at a certain hour, and so continued his
study even to his death, with so deep judgment and good success, that
although his intellectual habitudes had not very far been surmounted and
darkened through the merueilous brightness of his moral and theologall
virtues, yet in respect of his learning and study only, he deserved great
praise, and in troth he was never other then most learned and a great favorer
of learned men. Who did ever show them more pleasure, or receive them more
courteously? Besides the Seminaries and Colleges, as well at Pauy as here, the
Lectures, the Stipends, with such and so many things done to behoof of
learning, and besides the books which he has of himself written: and now
that the bridle of his modesty does no longer deteine, I hope, as my self
have seen them, so coming to light, all the world shall behold them, and in
them perceive as in him self whether were more the holy writings or good
manners. This lo(...)e of learning and holiness of life he practiced so
diligently in himself, that through Gods grace, and the inspiration of the
holy Ghost, he was in respect of his virtues, knowledge, and holy life, elected
Pope, and his name from Hugh good Companion, (...)ood com(...)nion to
(...)raytors, (...) evil co^(...)nion to (...)e godly.
was changed and called Gregory the xiij. During his Papacy he lived so
religiously and devoutly, that the whole life of a man were little enough to
rehearse the same. But herein I repose my self upon that zeal which I perceive
in every one to commend him, whereby I may shortly see so many proofs, verses,
and rithmes, with such histories, so many Orations, and volumes to his honor,
that all these things, as well such as I cannot touch, as the rest which I
mention and speak of, shall briefly be disciphered and lively colored forth.
For now to rehearse all the holy works of our good Shepherd, or to endeavor
to set forth that very pattern of a Bishop which he has expressed in
himself, to say truth, I think impossible, and much less to believe that the
very summarie of those things that he has done may be drawn into any anales
or chronicle. Neither can I conceive any means to attain thereto, unless some
one have in form of reme^brances been daily collecting the course of his deeds
and works. For my part in this short discourse that I have to prosecute, as one
not able to to restrain the whole sea, I will go see if I may gather the
water at the rivers and brooks from whence this sea does arise, that is, from
his virtues, which in him have wrought so many holy works, notwithstanding I
might at once in general words say that all virtues beseeming a Bishop, which
S. Paul and others do speak of: were to be found in him. Helas how this holy
Shepherd burned in love, how he made him self lean for you! The Wolf is
dead, a(...) the Sheep(...) want a goo(...) Sheephea(...)
O ye poor artificers, Ladies, young infants and poor beggars? helas ye all
have lost your Father, the shepherd is dead, and the sheep remain a pray to
the wolves. How so ever it is here of may we plainly see O Room, that he bare
thee singular good will: and in deed (for I will not conceal thy
commendation) it is evident that thou did answer his good will with
reciprocal amity, witness this thy assembly: these Sobs and these Tears do
testify thy acknowledging thereof, besides all other things, helas! two
bitter and too sweet together, even yt night of his departure, was to you and
to me unfortunate: O great, O great pity, what could be seen more worthy
compassion and tears, then the fearful stir of the people? It seemed, when
the most horrible sound of the Bell called Aue-Maria, How could (...)he Pope
(...)eede the (...)rayers of men, since (...)imself can (...)orgiue sins.
that gave notice of his death, to the end to pray to GOD for him, sent the
Furyes to all both men and women: One ran here, another there, some two
together, others without order or reason: al wept: all cried: all houled out,
saying. Ah, good GOD whereto are we brought? What shall become of us? If the
infection does afflict us who shall pray for us? Ah that we had not deserved
it! Oh how God is wroth with us! with many other exclamations sufficient to
have rent the Marble stones, and cloven the walls in sunder. He was a man of
much prayer and reading, as ever was any, and in private behavior had not his
like. Two things there were that made him wonderful wise: The one, he would
in all affairs hear counsel: The other, he had still recourse to prayer.
Truly he was as wise as holy, I confess that in respect of his example only
I learned to understand this place of S. Paul concerning his care of all the
Churches. Quis infirmatur and ego non infirmor: Quis scandalizatur, and ego non
vror? Who is weak and I am not sick? Or who is offended and I burn not? And
that which follows. To be brief, toward the end of his days, and being
hoare heared, he conceived two excellent imaginations: The one concerning that
great and wonderful College that is now at buylding in your Room, for the
teaching (a wonderful matter) of all Languages in the word: The other, the
same which he propounded and began to put in execution touching the recovery of
the goods of the Cath. Apost. Romish Church. Some Tra(...)terous device for
th(...) persecution of the Gospel.
The same was it which he did so highly commend to the Clergy, yea to the
Christian princes, and to his Successor, to the end that ye Romayne Sea might
recover the full brightness of her glory, and to deprive the enemy of mankind
of that innumerable gain of souls, that through his subtilty he does daily
make.

These were his last words when he left us with the water in our eyes, and
sorrow in our hearts, for the loss of a thing of so great value.
Nevertheless, since it is to no purpose to weep, it rests that we do two
things: The one, that so much as in us lies, we endeavor to reteyne those
notable institutions, and walk in that path which he has prescribed for us:
The other, that we have recourse to God with prayer, that he will send us a
Successor worthy him, and that as Simplician succeeded S. Ambrose: so to this
Ambrose another Simplician in virtue and holiness may succeed.

This is that small matter, Oh blessed soul, which my foolish and unmeet
tongue is able this day to utter of thee in midst of these sighs and
lamentations. Now shall it cease: howbeit, at time convenient, both this day
and ever, my heart shall discourse of thee. Oh wretch that I am, O ye Romayne
people, to who^ happens still the contrary of that which happened to the
Roman Soldier, that was wounded and maimed upon one of his legs, at a
certain victory that he obtained, for he said, that at every step that he
set, and upon the least pain that he felt of his leg, he called to mind the
most honorable blason of his glory: but I contrariwise, in the least
commendations that I may obtain, shall think upon my losses: For when so ever
I shall boste, that I have been servant to such a holiness, and so great a
parsonage, I must necessarily withal remember what a good I am deprived of.
Let us therefore pray to our good GOD, that it may please him of his grace with
his holy spirit to inspire the most reverent Cardinals, the Electors of the
holy Apost. and Roomish sea, to the end his holiness successor, succeeding in
the holy Sea, may likewise succeed in those virtues and holiness, wherewith
he was endued and replenished.

AMEN.

