A Chronicle, containing the lives of ten Emperors of Rome.

Wherein are discovered, their beginnings, proceedings, and endings, worthy to
be read, marked, and remembered.

Wherein are also contained Laws of special profit and policy.

Sentences of singular shortness and sweetness.

Orations of great gravity and Wisdom.

Letters of rare learning and eloquence.

Examples of vices carefully to be avoided, and notable paternes of virtue
fruitful to be followed.

Compiled by the most famous Sir Anthony of Gueuara, Bishop of Mondonnedo,
Preacher, Chronicler, and counselor to the Emperor Charles the fifth: and
translated out of Spanish into English, by Edward Hellowes, Groom of her
Majesty's Leashe.

Hereunto is also annexed a table, recapitulating such particularities, as are
in this book mentioned.

Imprinted at London for Ralphe Newberrie dwelling in Fleetestrete.

Anno Gratiae 1577.

TO THE MOST EXcellent and virtuous Princess, and our gracious sovereign
Lady Elizabeth, by the grace of GOD, of England, France, and Ireland,
Queen: defender of the Christian Faith. etc. Long life, with accomplishment of
all Godly desires.
RIGHT noble and most gracious sovereign: if I should write or dedicate any
thing, as of my self, unto your excellency, with any spark of presumption or
singularity, as a matter meet for the view of the majesty of your sacred
person, or sufficient satisfaction unto the depth of your divine judgment: not
only mine own weakness would bewray me, and justly yeald a cruel scourge of
my discredit, but also procure my worthy reprehension, and no less deserved
chasticeme^t. But simply presuming of your majesty's mild and accustomed
favor, provoked by the eloquence of the Author, encouraged by the profit and
pleasure of the matter, imboldened because this history has been dedicated
by Sir Antonie of Gueuara, and accepted of Charles the fifth, an Emperor of no
common renown, and no less persuaded by the humblenes of a duetifull mind,
as one vowed by oath and alegeance to execute my utter service in every exployt
to your Majesty: the regard whereof not leads but co^straineth (although
with blushing and bashful face) to present unto your magnifice^ce this my
simple travel, translated out of Spanish into the English tongue, containing
the lives of ten Emperors of Rome, namely, Traiane Coceius, Adrian,
Antoninus Pius, Co^modus, Pertinax, Iulianus, Seuerus, Bassianus, Heliogabalus,
and Alexander Seuerus: whose lives, gouernements, ends and conclusions, give
forth matter so meet for the spectacle of princes, as well the virtuous of the
one part to take sure direction, and good counsel to their great comfort,
thereby as a sounding lead, to obtain knowledge both of the depth and coast,
to lead themselves into all safety of body and mind: as also the licentious,
on the other part, to moderate and stay their rash attemptes, as a sheat
anchore in all furious storms of perplexities, to save from shipwreck both
life and honor. All which being considered, in respect that the matter therein
contained, treats of Kings and Emperors, and has been dedicated unto an
Emperor: the work of it self craves your mild acceptance, as only due
unto the souereigntie of your Majesty's estate, to escape the infamy of
abasement. I your Majesty's most humble and loyal servant, in most humble
wise beseeching, that of your great mildnes and clemency, it may like your
highness to accept this my simple present, full fraught, not of skill, but of
loyalty: wherein, for as much as the Author in the front hereof, has fixed
so worthy a prologue, that there seems nothing to be omitted, or that any
thing might be added: yeldeth just cause to cease further to urge your patience
with tediousnes: most humbly beseeching your Majesty, that it may please the
same of your great bounty to pardon all my defectes that herein may appear:
and I your Majesty's most humble and obedient servant, shall never cease to
pray, that the blessing of the living GOD, may always conduct and follow your
Majesty, with all perfect felicity, both of body and soul, as may yield
your Majesty immortal fame before God and man.

Your Majesty's most humble and obedient servant. Edward Hellowes.

The prologue of the famous Sir Anthony of Gueuara, Bishop of Mondonnedo,
preacher, chronicler, and counselor to the Emperor Charles the fifth, upon
the life of ten Emperors of Rome. () The Author proponeth.
VARIVS GEMINVS, a man very glorious, and Consul among the Romans, said unto
Julius Caesar: O Caesar and great Augustus, such as dare presume to speak
before thee, know not thy greatness: and those that are abashed to appear in
thy presence, comprehend not thy nobleness: words in deed right worthy of
such a person. Conformable to that which Varius Geminus said, we do say: It
appertains to the greatness of Princes, that their persons be much
authorized, and on the other part, that they endeavor to communicate with
their common wealths, for that with their mightiness they may give terror,
and with their plain mildness remove all fear. Sucronius says of Octauius
the emperor, that ever any ambassadors came in his presence, which at the
first sight were not touched with fear: and after in communicating did not
adore him: because, great was the majesty wherewith he did receive them, and
after, very sweet were the words wherewith he did dispatch them. Of the
great Cato Censorine, Plutarche says: that being the man of most honesty,
and greatest gravity that lived amongst the Romans: he did never show to
any man, a sad, but cheerful countenance, or give evil answer, nor shut
the door against any person, either denied any thing that was just, neither
shamed or disgraced any man. Not only happy, but also most happy is the
Prince, that for rectitude of justice is feared, and for his good condition
beloved. Much weakness of Princes, and great Lords is covered, and vices
dissimuled, when with their own they be of good condition, and with strangers
of grateful conversation. Of the famous tyrant Dionysius the Siracusan,
Plutarche says: that the immortal hatred which the Sicylians did bear him,
was not so much for the tyrannies that he did execute, as for the incomporcable
condition which he used: for that very seldom he did permit him self to be
seen: and very often was heard laughing. The contrary whereof is read of king
Antigonus, the father of the great Demetrius: who was proud, covetous,
ambitious, cruel, and effeminate: and with all these conditions the people of
his kingdoms did both suffer and serve him: only for that they found the
doors of his house always open, and in his mouth an amorous answer. The end
of all this which we have said is, humbly to pray all princes, and give
warning unto all such as be about them, always to persuade and counsel them
to be so human, that all may endure their conversation: and yet so grave,
that none presume to make small account of them: for that it makes much to the
matter of good government, to be endued with good nature and disposition. No
less inconvenience does follow the common wealth, for the Prince to be holden
in small estimation, then to be intractable, over haughty, or strange: for,
if he be inconuersible, they abhor him: and if not esteemed, they disobey him.

Sardanapalus, the last King of the Assyrians, was with all men so human,
that women made him spinne: and of Phalaris the tyrant, it is read, that he was
so inconuersible, that his own daughters durst not speak unto him. To the
end that Princes be not abhorred in their common wealths, they have to
consider, and also beware to be noted of extremities: which is to wit, in
using too great familiarity with some, and no less strangeness with others:
because much strangeness ingendreth hatred: and too much familiarity
leads to contempt. The rule that in this case we dare give unto Princes,
mighty and noble men, is: that they be neither so affable with their private
and favored servants, whereby to give them hardiness to crave any thing
unjust: either so strange with them that be not private, as to give them fear
to demand justice. It is not removed from Princes, to give their kingdoms
unto their children, to committ their secrets unto such as be serviceable, to
use their liberality with their private and favored servants, to take their
pastimes with their friends, upon such condition, that their conversation be
somewhat general: for as much as the liberality of Princes extends not to
satisfy every suite: they supply much more with their amorous aunswers that
they give, then with the rewards which they bestow. Not unworthily was it
ordained of the most ancient Greeks, that the use of Princes should not be
to pronounce in their letters patents, and commandments: I command this, I
will this, I forbid this: but that they should say: We command this, We
will this, and ordeine this: for their better remembrance, that by speaking in
the name of all, they should in time be conversant with all, be familiar with
all, and divide rewards amongst all, and that they are of all, and not of
them selves.

He that has to hold the least part of the prince, ought to be the prince
him self: for that, great regard is to be had of all men, as concerning the
service of his person: and he ought to be vigilant in all things that are
profitable to the common wealth. How much the more the Prince regards him
self: so much the more he neglects him self. And how much the less he
cares for him self: so much the more shall he attain to him self: for that
the harmony of the common wealth consists in nothing more, then all men to
live of the liberality and bounty of the prince: and that the Prince live in
the love of all men.

The Author prosecuteth his intent.

It is also necessary counsel unto the prince, that he have a sound mind and
disposition, and his intents very well advertised: for that if in his affairs
he make no account to be certain, he shall hardly cease to err: and if he be
not attentive to the affairs of the common wealth, he shall never understand
them.

The prince ought gravely to regard the thing he does, before it be done: for
the error of any other whatsoever, the offense is only felt in his own house:
but the error of the prince, redoundeth to the whole common wealth. The
princes that be wilful in the things which they will: and headstrong wherein
they command: besides that they go laden with thoughts, holding their persons
in peril, escandalize their common wealth, accused to be over amarous of their
own proper judgment, and most great enemies of others counsel. The prince
also ought very particularly understand the things of the common wealth, if he
will use good government thereof. And this he has to be advertised, not of
such as go to murmur, but of such as make just report, and also give counsel
therein: for that twixt the Prince and the common wealth, there shall never be
peace, if to liars and murmurers he give audience. Even as Princes desire not
in their subjects, but to be served: even so their subjects desire not of
their princes, but to be beloved, and most truly, the one is annexed unto ye
other, and depends each of other: for if in the Prince there be no love,
there is none that will serve him with affection. Princes and great lords,
ought to hold in great estimation, that their subjects do obey them: but much
more have the subjects to make account, when their lords do love them:
because, without comparison, his bounty is much greater that binds us to
love, then the travail of him that offers to serve. As love is not repayed
but with love, so Princes are not to be satisfied with only giving such as do
serve and follow them, offices, castles, customs, houses and money: but also
they ought to show them love in their palaces, and favor in their affairs:
because, with their liberality, they recompense their service past: but with
their love they bind them to serve in time to come.

Princes and men of power, ought in their countenance to be amorous, in their
speech mild, in their behauiours much ordered: for that generous hearts, and
blusshing and shamefast faces, that follow courts, and go in Princes houses,
do much more feel the disfavor which they show them, then the rewards
that they deny them. To the end that Princes be delivered of displeasures:
and their kingdoms better governed: it shall be most sound counsel for them to
be affable with all, to give unto all, to deal for all, and to love all: but
if they determine to hold some more private, they ought much to consider whom
they admit to their special favor: because for one to be private in Court,
it is not sufficient that the king do choose him: but that also he be of
merit and deserving.

In giving rewards, princes may not always escape error, but in commending
their hearts, they ought to be most certain: for that, In this whole world
there is not the like torment, as a man to have his love evil employed. If
Princes and great Lords will particularly take into their favor any of their
servant, they ought to be of particular deserving: because, love shall never
be fixed: when in him that is loved, there wants merit. Not without cause we
said, that it were necessary in a Prince to be endued with a good mind and
disposition, and with sound meaning and intention: because if the Prince be
taken with imperfect and unlawful affection, Alas of him, and also of his
kingdom, that by him is governed, It is evil that the Prince have no rule in
feeding, in play, in drinking, in speaking, and also in spending: but it is
much worse if he use it not in his love and affection: for it is a rule
infallible: that every disordinate love, brings with it some notable vice.
It is a love disordinate to be careful to gather riches, and not to have a
mind to spend them: because unto the greatness of Princes it appertains, to
seek what to spend: and not to learn to keep audit. It is a love
disordinate, for ye prince to follow the direction of his own proper will:
because it is impossible but he should fail to perform that which he ought,
that always executes his own wilful mind. Love is disordinate, when the
Prince imployeth his love in few, being Lord of many: because Princes in such
wise ought to love, and be bountiful unto their private and favored
servant, that they disgrace not the nobles of their kingdom. Love is
disordinate, when Princes in vanities, and trifles do consume their times:
because the curious governor in such wise divides time betwixt him and the
common wealth: that he neither wants for affairs, or has too much to employ
in vices. Love is disordinate, when the Prince is orgulous, quarellous,
ambitious, and proud: for notwithstanding, that as a Prince they ought all to
serve him: it follows not that as a God, they should adore him. Love is
disordinate, to hazard the giving and dividing of rewards, not as every man
deserves, but according to the will of him that governs: for there is no
equal infamy unto the prince, as it is to chastise vice, and not to remunerate
service. Love is disordinate, when of will he takes away from another, that of
right apperteineth not unto him self: because to ye greatness and sincerity of
princes, it is just and convenient, yt in their rewards and gifts, they show
their frank liberality: and in receiving, they stand with all men in
justice. The case stands thus: yt the Prince which is endued with these loves
and affections, may not escape many travels, and also many souden assaults and
perils: for yt every disordinate affection, she her self, with her self,
brings grief and displeasure. Plutarche in his books of common wealth,
persuadeth the Emperor Traiane, that he has his will at liberty, and his
love subject to no man: for that according as he says: It little profits
that a Prince be Lord of many kingdoms: if on the other part, he become
bondsman to many vices. The divine Plato said, that for a prince to be good,
he ought to give his heart unto the common wealth, his rewards unto such as
serve him, his desires unto the Gods, and his love unto his friends, his
secrets to his privy counsel: and the time to affairs. Oh how happy were
that prince, that according to this Platonicall sentence should divide and
repart his person: because he being divided for all: the whole should be joined
together, with, and for him.

The author applies all that which is said, unto the end wherefore he did
speak the same. All that which we have above said by writing, (most
sovereign Prince) we will utter and declare by example: for according to the
saying of Eschines the Philosopher, Words well spoken, do awake and revive the
judgments: but great and manifest examples persuade the heart. For to lead or
entice a man to be virtuous, and to do virtuous works, it makes much to the
matter, to persuade with discrete reasons, and sweet words: but in conclusion,
for much credit which we give to yt which he says: much more is given to that
which he does. The Poet Homer said: that it is, a thing very easy to write
acts of great prowess, and very difficil to perform them. For which cause
it is necessary, for such as deal with princes, to show them by example, all
which they persuade the^ by writing: to the end they see most clear, that the
great and mighty deeds done by other Princes in the worlds: they want not
force to perform them: but a mind to undertake them. No Prince has to hold
of him self so small estimation, that he doubt to perform that which another
Prince has done in time past: for after this manner, Theodosius should be
dismaide, by the remembrance of Seuerus: Seuerus, of Marcus Aurelius: Marcus
Aurelius, of Antoninus Pius: Antoninus Pius, of Traiane: Traiane, of good
Titus: Titus, of Caesar Augustus: Caesar Augustus, of Julius Caesar: Julius
Caesar, of Scipio: Scipio, of Marcus Marcellus: Marcus Marcellus, of Quintus
Fabius: Quintus Fabius, of Alexander Magnus: and Alexander Magnus, of Achilles
the Greek. The hearts of these so high Princes, did not read and inquire of
the deeds of their forefathers, to fear them, but to imitate them: and surely
they had great reason: because None amongst the mortal has done any deed so
glorious, that by another man may not be beautified and made better. Princes be
bound to do such and so high deeds and enterprises, that of them selves be
worthy praise, and very honorable for others to follow: for the same it is not
more necessary, to have a noble mind to give the enterprise: the^ after wards
to have the adventure, to finish the same. Plutarche says, that Agesilaus the
Greek said, that Fortune did never show her self noble, but unto a mind that
was generous and noble: and surely he said most truth, because men lose many
things, not because they may not attain them, but for that, they dare not
attempt them. The Prince ought to strain and enforce him self to be good, and
to imitate the virtuous: since with less cost, me^ be virtuous the^ vicious,
mild then overthwart, valiant then cowards, patient the^ furious, and sober
then gluttons: for the thief does need as desperate a mind to scale an house,
as a noble mind is due to a captein that follows the wars. Dionysius the
tyrant, Gorgius the tyrant, Bias the tyrant, Macrino the tyrant, and Catiline
the tyrant: if we might commend them, and they of the^ selves give reason: they
would swear and affirm that they passed more travel, and found the^ selves
in more peril in defending their tyrannies, then Scipio and Cato in conseruing
their common wealths. Oh, what great reason, and how much occasion have
Princes to be good, and to favor the good: since they have authority to
command, and riches to give: whereof if they have skyll to take the
advantage, with their potencie they frame them selves to be served, and with
their gifts they bring to pass to be loved. Jointly with this, I admonish
and also advise Princes and great lords, to be magnificent in their gifts,
and very attemptiue in their commandments. For, notwithstanding, a Prince
may do what he list: it is not convenient he do what he may. Although the
authority of the prince be free, absolute, and without measure: to him it is
convenient in all things to use measure and moderation: for that every
government that is absolute, has a taste or relishe of tyranny. Many Princes
have lost the^ selves by their vices which they used: and many more have been
cast away by executing their will and power: for princes in perfourming all
that they can, and all which they will: it follows, that their affection
makes them stumble: and passion, their eyes to dazell. But (most sovereign
Prince) speaking more particularly, by the imitation of Plutarche, and
Suetonius Tranquillus, I thought good to translate, compile, and to refourme
the story of the lives of ten Roman princes, worthy most surely to be
known, and very pleasant to be read. The purpose wherefore (most mighty
Prince) I have taken so exceeding travail to compounde this work, is: unto
the end my pen may advertise, wherein my tongue with shame dismaieth to
speak: for as Bias the philosopher said: The authority of princes is so
great, that of more things they have to give them to understand, then to dare
or presume to speak. The king Artaxerxes travailing on a certain day, a man
of the country presented him with a little water in the palm of his hand: the
which water, the king received and drank: and when some did murmur of that
deed, and also detract him: the king made answer: It is no less nobleness
unto the Prince to receive little, then to give great and bountiful rewards.
The philosopher Lycurgus, that was law giver unto the Lacedaemonians,
commanded those of his common wealth, that they should offer unto their Gods
few things in number, and not rich of value: whereof, when he was noted and
also accused, made answer: I command not to offer unto the Gods few
things, for that I think them not to deserve much, but because all men
should have wherewith to offer: since of all men they will be served: for in
the time of Apollo, they said unto me: that they had rather have little of
many, then much of few. In the law which God gave unto the Hebrews, he was
so limited in the things he demanded, and so human in that he commanded:
that in the order of the sacrifices which they should offer, he did ordeine and
command that the poor man which could not offer a goat, should offer no
more but of the hair thereof. In considering that Lycurgus offered unto his
Gods, jewels of small price: and that king Artaxerxes received of a poor man
an handful of water: and that unto the true and living God, they durst offer
no more but of the hayres of a Goat, gives me hardiness to present this
work unto your Majesty. ()

The life of the good Emperor, Traiane Coceius, naturally a Spaniard, borne in
the city of Calize, compiled by sir Anthony of Gueuara, Bishop of
Mondonnedo, preacher, chronicler, and counselor unto the Emperor Charles the
fifth.
CHAP. I. Of four renoumed Cities that perished and were subverted in Spain.
BEfore they had Emperors in Rome, either war was raised in Carthage, there
were in four provinces in Spain, four right notable cities, which in
potencie did match with Rome, in riches with Tyrus, in beauty with Helia, and
in opulencie with Tarento. The first was Numantia: the second, Cantabria: the
third, Ystobriga: the fourth, Italica. Strabo, Isodore, and Pomponio Mela,
give great admiration unto the readers, of the great power, richesse, and
wealth of these four cities. And on the other part, it is great pity to
consider, that there is nothing of them remaining to behold. Not without cause
it is said, that nothing remains in them to be seen: because
notwithstanding the province, bounds, and climate is known of the foundation
thereof: yet we may hardly attain to name the very place where it was bu^lt.
Unto the city of Numantia, Soria succeeded: unto ye city of Cantabria,
succeeded Tudela of Navarre: unto the city of Ystobriga, succeeded Merida:
unto the city of Italica, succeeded Civil. The situation of the famous
Numantia, as some men affirm, was upon a certain hill near unto Soria on the
other side of the bridge: and as others do think, her foundation stood in
Garray a village of Soria joining unto Duero. The situation of Cantabria, was a
league from the city of the Groine, and on that side of Ebro, upon a certain
height where now are planted many vines. The seat of Ystobriga was, where
now the ventes of Caparra, being bayting places, stand: and others say, yt was
on the hill that stands betwixt the two rivers Las varcas de Alconeta, yel
casare de carceres. The situation of Italica was joining unto the city of
Civil: and some say it was upon the way to Carmona: and that the arches of
Carmona were made to furnishe the city of Italica. O secret judgments of
the most high, or human instabilitie, that all these places being viewed
personally of my self, where these so excellent cities were buylt, I found not
so much as a tower, a wall, a street, or a house to behold: neither so much
as a stone almost to stumble at. We have great reason to exclaim, and much
more has the discreet reader to wonder: since we understand that fourteen
years Numantia resisted the power of the Romans: and now we see it made a
pasture for sheep. We understand that Cantabria was the last thing which the
Romans did subdue in Spain: and now there remains but a patche of
vineyardes in the same. We certainly know that the greatest strength which
king Viriato held in Spain, was Ystobriga: and now there remains not but
certain gr^ene trees and shrubbes. They which write of the city of Italica,
do say: that it was the most strong and the most esteemed of all the kingdom
of Vandalia: and now they gather both wheat and barley in the same. Scipio the
Africane destroyed the city of Numantia, because in ye first Punicke battles,
they would not help the Romans. Gracchus a Roman captain, subverted the
city of Ystobriga, because from thence Viriato made him war. Pompeius host
destroyed the city of Italica: for that in the parcialitie of Julius Caesar
they were most faithful. The Emperor Augustus ouerthrewe the city of
Cantabria, as a man more moved with ire, then directed by reason. The case was
thus: that as he had the city besieged and brought in great distress, he sent
to require of the citizens, to yield him all their treasure: and give unto Rome
perpetual tribute: The Cantabrians considering, what the Emperor demanded:
answered in a letter after this manner.

Emperor Augustus, we pray the immortal Gods to receive thee into their
defense, and that it may please them to examine betwixt thee and us, who in
this war has more justice: and thou know, O immortal Prince, that men,
although they have power to take war in hand, it is not in their hands, but
in the Gods to obtain victory: because we men begin many things with malice,
the which afterward, the Gods do finish by justice: with thy exceeding
potencie it may not be denied, but that thou have brought this sorrowful city
into great distress: in such wise that we have neither bread to eat, either
water to drink, either skins to make garments, or cork to make shoes,
neither towers to cover us: but jointly with this, thou have to understand,
that if we want armor wherewith to fight: we lack not hearts to abide
death. It well appears that thou have made experience of our weak forces, and
understand not the greatness of our minds: since thou demaundest the
treasure of our houses, and the liberty of our persons. The mines that we
have, be not of Gold to serve thee, but of iron, to break thy pride. Does it
not seem to thee, O emperor Augustus, that since you Romans have fought
four hundredth years in strange countries to be lords, it were great reason
for us to fight in our own houses, to escape bondage? Prosecute thy wars,
and do according to the use of other captains of Rome, and care not to
threaten us, and much less to flatter us: for notwithstanding our country
and houses be thine by force, never whiles we have life shall we be, but the
Gods and our own.

This answer being heard by the Emperor Augustus, he did swear by the
immortal Gods, to take none of them to mercy, either to leave in the city
one stone upon another. And as he promised, so he accomplished. I would say
in this case, that if it were evil to swear, it was much worse to perform
the same. Although it be an ancient custom, the word of a king to be kept
inviolable: for the good prince ought not to put in effect, that which he has
sworn in his ire.

CHAP. II. Of the country and birth of the Emperor Traiane.
PRosecuting our intent, it is to understand that in the days when war was
extremely kindled betwixt Julius Caesar and Pompeius, the Pompeians held
Ystobriga, which now is named Lebrixa: and the Caesarians held Gades, which
now is named Calize: these two cities did serve to gather their banished; to
succor their alies, and their wounded. Before the city of Italica was
destroyed by the Pompeians, there did flourish two famous knights: the one was
named Julius Coceius, and the other, Rufus Vlpius: and these two knights, were
not only Captains at arms, but also were chief of those two linages, that
is to say, of the Coceians and of the Vlpians. Before that cruel wars
entered the city of Italica, these two linages had always betwixt them great
contention: but after wars began, they joined in great friendship: for that
it happens many times, that hearts which may not join by love, do after
consent and agree by fear. The city of Italica being destroyed, these two
knights came to live at Gades, which now is named Calize: the one of them
that was named Coceius, was graundfather to the Emperor Nerua: and ye other
which was named Rufus Vlpius, was great graundfather of the Emperor Traiane,
and of the Emperor Adrian by the mothers side. The Emperor Traiane was borne
in the city of Calize the xxi. of May, in the second year of the Empire of
Nero, Rufus and Catinus being consuls. In those times there was not in all
Europe, so famous, so generous, either yet so profitable a study, as that of
the city of Calize: because from Africa they repaired to study: and from
Graecia came to learn. And to the end it shall not seem a fable, let them
read Plutarche in the life of Traiane, Philon in the book of Schools, and
Philostrato in the life of Apollonius. In that city of Calize, until the age
of xv. Traiane studied the Greek tongue, the Latin, and Rhetorike. Traiane was
high of body, somewhat black of face, thin of hair, thick of beard, a
crooked nose, broad shoulders, large hands, and his eyes, in beholding,
amorous. Traiane entering the years of xvj. left his study, and did exercise
arms: wherein he was no less toward then valiant. Traiane was of great
swiftness on foot, and of great readiness on horsbacke: in such wise that it
is said of him, yt he was never thrown, or had fall from his horse: or ever
was ouerrun on foot. There chanced a certain fleet of pirates to arrive at
Calize, the which being many, and taking the citizens at unawares: the good young
man Traiane, did show him self that day so valiant in fight, and so venturous
in conquest, that to him alone they did attribut the liberty of their
country, and the glory of the victory. Amongst the Myrmidons, which be they
of Merida, and amongst the Ricinians, which be they of Truxillio, there was
raised in those days a certain little war for the pastures of Gaudiano: for
that the Myrmidons did say, they had held them time out of mind: they of
Truxillio aduouched, that they had lost them, and had received of them
assistance to win them of the enemies. The Myrmidons did crave succor of them
of Calize, in respect of their confederation: the Gauditaines did accept the
embassage of the Myrmidons, as concerning their succor, and when they had
chosen Traiane for captain of their army: he made answer: The destinies
never permit, either the gods command, that I take a sword to shed the blood
of mine own country: because if the one be our friends, truly the other be
not our enemies. And said more. Since the war is not begun, and the cause of
their debate may be discussed by justice, it is my opinion, rather to send
them ambassadors to bring them friends: then capteines to attempt wars.
Conformable unto all men, Traianes answer was both given and accepted: the
which from thence forward, was holden and esteemed for a knight of great
valiantness: and for a man of great wisedo^ and judgment. These two virtues
go not always by couples: that is to say, valiantness and wisdom: because,
there be some men that be doutie to take perils in hand, and be not wise to
escape the^.

CHAP. III. How Traiane passed out of Spain being a young man, to go into
Italy.
IN the second year of the Empire of the good Vespasian, great Britain
rebelled which is now named England against the Roman Emperor: unto which
wars Traiane repaired, and this he did without charges to the Romans, and
for him self to obtain fame accompanied with many others of his country: In
those wars Drusius Torquatus was captain for the Romans: who persuading
Traiane to take wages of the Roman people, as all others did enjoy in that
wars: Traiane answered. The merchaunts that come from thence hither, they
repair to be more rich, but we Gentlemen not to be richer, but more honored.
The fame that Iugurth obtained in the wars of Numantia, that same Traiane
obtained in the wars of Britain: in that the one and the other were knights
of strange countries, and young venturours, and also fortunate: because for
their powers and noble deeds, which they achieved in those wars: Iugurthe
was king of Numidia, and the good Traiane came to be Emperor of Rome. That day
which Drusius Torquatus entered Rome, triumphing of the Britains, being
accompanied not only with knights subdued, but also with knights and
noblemen that had overcome: all the Romans did inquire for Traiane to see him
and know him, for that his fame was notorious unto all men, but his person in
Rome to very few known. And hereof it proceeded in process of time, when
Traiane, and Marius Fabritius, did contend for the Consulship of Germany:
Fabritius taunted Traiane, to be a stranger borne, and disgraced in the
feature of his body, unto whom Traiane made answer: I confess unto thee
Marius Fabritius, that thy good face was known in Rome, before thy evil life:
but thou can not deny, that in Rome they did not know mine honest life,
before my evil face. At the first when Traiane came to Rome, Titus, son to
Vespasian the Emperor, placed him Pretour of ten legions: and sent him to the
frontiers of Illyria: where he remained all the life of Titus. The Roman
legions did not a little murmur to have Traiane for their captain: affirming
that in age he was a child, and in nation a stranger: but after when they
found him so valiant in fighting, and so wise in government, they loved him as
a father, and obeyed him as a captein. And as in winter Traiane wa^ted
victuals, for that he had taken truce with the Barbarians: a certain gentleman
said unto him: it is not convenient thou should be so sad, or that we
should suffer so great penury: take in good part, that by dissimulation we
break the truce, by which mean we shall provide for our selves, and our cattle.
The good Traiane answered: I am not only grieved with that thou speak, but
also despited with yt you presumest to say: for those matters which we set down
by promise, we have not so great cause to observe our fidelity made unto men:
as for that we have sworn by ye immortal Gods. And ye Emperor Titus being
dead, his brother Domitian did succeed him in the Empire: which when Traiane
understood, presently he left the charge of frontier capteinship of Illyria.
The emperor Domitian was not a little grieved, and the whole army, as also
all the Senate, ye Traiane had forsaken ye frontiers of Illyria: for that in
matters of war he had great experience, and no less fortune. The Romans
did use great vigilancie, in seeking and conseruing fortunate capteines: with
whom they did dissemble and suffer more defections, then with all other persons:
and this they did, because there be many capteines, that if" they be expert in
arms, they be most unfortunate in the" execution thereof.

Traiane remaining in Rome, without all disposition to take charge of an army:
ye emperor Domitian said unto him: tell me Traiane, it it doutful that my
empire is less then that which my father Vespasian held? or that I am more
ingrate then my brother Titus was? that for them thou should every day
adventure thy life, and for my service thou dainest to take a lance in hand?
Traiane did answer him: I confess that thy power is as great as thy fathers,
and thy knowledge no less then thy brothers: but jointly with this, thou art
very souden in thy commandments, and very swift in the execution thereof:
and it may be, that having charge of thy armies, I might be commanded to do
some thing: the accomplishment whereof, might stand much against all bounty:
and not perfourming the same, I should break the oath of fidelity, that I have
made unto thee.

CHAP. IIII. Of the friendship and parentage that Traiane had with the Emperor
Nerua.
IN those days there was a certain Consul named Nerua Coceius, banished out
of Rome by the Emperor Domitian, a man in years very ancient, and in all
that he either said, or did, of great credit. As Traiane was at that time in
the disgrace of the Emperor Domitian, from Rome he departed unto Nola, a
certain place where Nerua was in Campania: because It is a thing very common
unto a man afflicted, to seek the company of an other in like trouble. These
two right excellent men, which is to say, Nerua and Traiane, remained there
long time in Campania, poor, banished, persecuted, and out of favor: abiding
the time when Domitian should send to kill the^, or when they should hear that
he were dead: because if they desired his death, no less did he seek occasion
to take away their lives. Traiane, for that he was young, held Nerua who was
old in great veneration: and Nerua did bear so great affection unto Traiane,
that he did love him and use him as his son: for that Traiane besides his
sufficie^cie and ableness for all causes, was in his conversation most
amorous. Nerua and Traiane remaining in that banishment, found themselves of
near kindred and affinity: that is to say, of one country, which was Spain,
of one place, which was Italica, and that the one descended of the Coceians,
and the other of the Vlpians, two famous and ancient linages: of whom we have
above made mention. When Traiaane passed into Italy, he found no other
pare^tage, but Nerua and Vlpius Ricinius his uncle: which was two times Consul
in Rome. Some say that this Vlpius Ricinius, was father unto Traiane: but the
truth is, that he was but his uncle: for Plutarche in an Epistle that he
writes unto Traiane, says: The good news in Rome being known, how thou
have overcome king Decebal, which did tyrannize this land: so great was the
joy which the people did receive, that as thy fathers bones be in Spain, they
had been here in Italy: they would do no less honor unto them in the
sepulcher, then they shall yealde unto thee on that day, when thou shall enter
triumphing into Rome. And for that Nerua was so ancient and so honorable, and
Traiane so valiant and so well liked, many Romans did come and go between
Rome and Campania to see them: and this was done more secretly then publicly,
because the Emperor Domitian was very suspicious: being most true, Very few
dare serve or follow such as princes do hate. Amongst all other that went
from Rome unto Campania to see these two knights, was the great Philosopher
Plutarche: who with Traiane, and Traiane with him, did plant so perfect and
sound friendship, that only death was able to give end to the same. And as
Plutarche saw such ability and will in Traiane to learn, and jointly with
this there was no wars wherein to be exercised, he was so drunken with
learning, that he did abhor arms: upon which occasion Nerua said in jest:
By my counsel thou shall leave books, and return to arms, since thou haste
better hands to fight, then a tongue to dispute: for that it is not just thou
should cease to be singular amongst capteines, to be indifferent among
Philosophers. Traiane remaining there in Campania, did marry with Plotina,
which was his only wife: and is said only, for that before nor after did ever
marry other: the which virtue until his time was found in no Roman prince:
for that by growing old or misliking of the one, presently they did take
another. And as on a day certain Romans practiced by secret device to kill
the Emperor Domitian: and in great secrecy, gave part thereof unto Traiane,
did answer: I do well see that Domitian deserved not to be elected Emperor,
and much less deserves to be sustained in the same: yet never the more shall I
consent unto his death: for that I will rather suffer a tyrant, then recover
the renown of a traitor. Many Romans on a time murmuring of the insolences
of the Emperor Domitian, Traiane said unto them: The intention wherewith
Domitian has entreated me, the Gods have to judge: for of his works which he
has done, I may not complain, since he has been the occasion that I have
recovered Nerua for my father, Plutarche for my master, and Plotina for my
wife, and above all the rest, he brought me acquainted with adverse Fortune: for
that before I presumed of nothing but to command: but now only to serve. A
year before Domitian died, or to say better, before they had slain him, he
went to the wars in Germany: and in that year Traiane was elected Consul, in
the Senate of Rome. It was no small grief unto Traiane to accept that
Consulship: not for that he liked not to be lincked with the friendship of
honor: but for the grief which he felt to leave the company of Nerua.

CHAP. V. How Nerua was made Emperor, and adopted Traiane his son.
THe Romans not able to endure the injuries and tyrannies of Domitian,
determined to kill him, the which out of hand they did perform: the xiiii. of
October, in the forty fifte year of his age, when he had reigned xv. years.
In many a day the Roman people had nor received so joyful news, as ye news
of the death of Domitian: in such manner, that they gave rich rewards unto
currers and posts that brought the same, and made great joy in the countries
where they passed: for that they did as much desire his death, as they did
abhor his life. Petronius captain of the guard, and Partenius his
chamberleine, were the men that practiced the death, and also violated the life
of Domitian: and they them selves gave order, that Nerua presently should be
elected Emperor. The Romans did so extremely hate Domitian, that not
contented to see him dead, and to hale his body peecemeale trayling through
the streates of Rome, al his pictures and counterfets they did spoil and take
away, all his arches and titles they did raze out, all his edifices which he
had built they ouerthrewe, all writings which he had firmed they burnt, and all
that were named Domitians were banished, in such wise, that they could neither
endure to see him alive, neither hear him named after his death. The day after
the death of Domitian, Nerua Coceius was declared Emperor: and of his election
all the Roman people were much pleased: the one cause, for that he was so
virtuous, and the other, because he was an enemy unto Domitian. Presently that
Nerua was elected Emperor, presently he sent Traiane as Pretour into Germany,
to the end he should take into his power, the legions and government of that
province: on the one part, for that Traiane was liked, and much desired of
all the men of war: and the other for that Calphurinus captain unto Domitian
was holden somewhat suspected.

Amongst other evil conditions wherewith the Emperor Domitian was possessed,
was: that all things which seemed unto him good, rich, or fair, he did much
praise it, and thereof they had to consider for most certain, that all which
he praised, freely they had to present the same: for if otherwise,
incontinently he took it by force.

Of these like things Nerua found in his palace, much goods of other men's:
which by public proclamation were all restored unto the owners: In such
wise, that this good prince would not only not take from other men, but also
make restitution of yt which by his predecessors had bin robbed. When Nerua
was elected Emperor, he was exceeding old, and of infirmities much
persecuted: for in him there was nothing sound but his tongue wherewith he did
talk, and his good judgment wherewith he did govern. The Romans beholding
Nerua so old, and sickly, complaining that he could not sleep, and that for
weakness of stomach, he durst eat but of very few things: they held it for
most certain, that his life was very short, and with this motion they began
to hold him in small estimation. Considered by Nerua, that he had not long to
live, and that the Romans did not esteem him: he remembered to adopt Traiane
as his son, and to accept him for companion in the Empire: and so it came to
pass, that presently he sent him the imperial ensign, which was a certain
manner of cape with a hoode, and with the same he wrote him a letter, wherein
were written no other words but these: Phoebe tuis telis, lachrimas vlciscere
nostras. As if he should say: Noble Traiane, thou shall have charge with thy
venturous arms to revenge my sorrowful tears. For the disobedience which the
Romans committed against his commandments, and the want of reverence they
held of his person, Nerua of Traiane craved that reuengement, because it is a
thing much used amongst men persecuted and afflicted, that the injuries which
they may not revenge with their hands, they bewail with their eyes. In the
time that this did pass, Traiane was in Almane, in the city of Agrippina,
which now is called Coleine, and the night before that he received the
imperial ensign, and the letter from the Emperor Nerua, he dreamed that he
was invested with a purple garment, and a ring put on his right hand, and
crowned with a certain crown. Only three months and five days did pass
after Traiane was elected Emperor, unto the death of Nerua: who dyed in the
age an hundred ten years, ten months, and ten days.

THE VI. CHAP. Of the laws that Traiane made, to the profit of the common
wealth.
AT the instant in which Traiane understood, that the Emperor Nerua was
dead, he departed unto Rome: where at his coming he did celebrate the
obsequies of his Lord and friend Nerua: and they were such and so rich, that
it seemed rather feasts for the living, then honors for the dead: because
there was nothing in them yt moved sadness, but to see Traiane go very sad.
The first thing that Traiane said, promised, and swear in the Senate, was: that
no man that was good and peaceable, by his commandment or consent, should be
put to death: which he observed, al ye days of his Empire. After this he
commanded Emilia to be sent for, which was captain of the Pretorian armies:
whom he commanded to be discharged of his office, and to be banished the
Empire: the one cause, for that he had disobeyed the emperor Nerua: and the
other cause, for that he had imbezeled the pays of the men of war. He
commanded public proclamation to be made, that all men that had just cause to
complain of the Consuls, of the Senators, of the Judges, or other officers of
Rome, that they should come forth and declare: for that he wished
satisfaction unto the one, and correction unto the other. Personally Traiane
did visit all offices of Rome: which is to understand, where they sold
bread, where they weighed flesh, where they measured wine, where the
merchaunts dwelt, where strangers did lodge, and so of al other offices: among
which, he allowed all that was good, and gave reformation unto all that was
evil. He forbad the use of shops or tauernes in Rome, that is to say: that
they should not sell bread, wine, and flesh dressed in one house: affirming,
that prepared vices, is the occasion to make many vicious. He commanded all
the neighbors of Rome to be registered: and there was found 285000 houses of
married men, and 42000 young men to be married, 7000 priests of the temples,
32000 common women, 12000 houses de mesones, and 65000 stranger factours. He
forbad any poor man to go from door to door, but that all which were
impotent, should be succored of the common treasure: and unto such as could
traueile, they gave them whereon to work from the Senate. He commanded all
Iuglars and Iesters to learn some occupation, and to maintain them selves in
their own houses: and otherwise to be banished Rome. Traiane commanded
reformation in all estates, and caused examination to be taken of al students:
and they were more without comparison that were banished for unable and
vicious, then remained for learned and virtuous. For that in Rome there were
people of many strange countries, jointly therewith so many women, of which
many did perish in childbed: and many children died for want of place to
breed them: For which purpose the good Traiane did cause to be buylt a famous
house in the mount Celius, and endued the same very well with his own
patrimony: where all women that would, were kept and brought abedde by the
space of two months: and that all the children until the age of four years
were there brought up and nourished. Traiane consented not, that in all the
year they should observe in Rome but xxii. holidays: saying, that without
comparison, the Gods were more served on such days as the Romans did
traueile, then on such days as they rested: because the vices were more which
they did commit, then the sacrifices which they did offer. Traiane did moderate
the sacrifices that were offered unto the Gods, that is to say, neither to have
so many, nor yet so sumptuous: saying, that the Gods would rather we should
amend our lives, then offer our goods. Unto the priests of the temple he
commanded to be given oil, unto the vestall virgins wheat, unto the old
horsemen cloth for garments, unto the poor wood to burn, unto Ambassadors
wine to drink: for that all these things were not only in Rome very dear to
be bought: but also not at all times to be had for money.

CHAP. VII. Of the noble and notable virtues that were in Traiane.
THE year that Traiane came to Rome to be Emperor, he was of xlii. years, in
which age, he had in all things such success, and did use such moderation,
that neither by his youth did hazard the attempt of any foolish deed: either
by slothfulness of old age, did leave any thing evil provided. Traiane was a
Prince, in whose words and works envy was never known: and as on a certain
time the Philosopher Plutarche did commend him for the same, Traiane said unto
him: Plutarche, I give thee to understand, that of pure pride, I am not
envious: for that always I thought my self happy, to enterprise such, so
great, and so notable deeds, that all men should envy me for the things I
should take in hand: and my self to mislike no man for any his noble attempts.
Traiane was not malicious, either suspicious, although by nature he were of
sharp judgment: which hapeneth in few persons, for ye commonly, men of sharp
judgment, be not always of sound condition. And as great affairs naturally
bring with them great thoughts and displeasures: although unto Traiane they
gave some grief, he was never seen of man to be angry, because old wisdom
had more Lordship in him, then soudeine ire. Although Traiane had many that
did wish him evil, and procure him evil: some for malice, some for envy,
and some because he did chastise them. He was never found that utterly did
seek his destruction: but that in chastising the quareller and vicious, they
more commended him for his clemency, then complained or murmured for their
grief and punishment Although Traiane were not much learned, he was most
truly a great friend unto learned men: whom he did promote unto honors and
to estates, and did much joy to hold them for his friends: in such wise,
that in his house and court, a learned man was never seen in necessity.
Traiane did much desire to understand the ambitions of Rome, and disorders of
his house: but jointly therewith he would not be advertised by the manner of
murmuring, but rather by the way of advice. Traiane was a great enemy of
liers, and no less of detractours: for which cause they say, yt many times he
said: It is more safe unto princes, to have patience to hear their own
errors, then to give ear unto such as report other men's defections: and
said more. That of necessity the Prince must have bloody hands, that gives
ear to murmurers. Traiane wa^ted ye general vice which usually reigns in all
men, which is covetousness, whereof he was not either accused or noted: but
rather of great bounty and larges, he was of all nations well liked and
commended, because they were infinite that did praise him, for that which they
had received, and no man did complain for that which he had taken. Traiane
naturally did delight in wars, and after they were begun, very diligent in
prosecuting, and most constant in finishing the same. Albeit he was given unto
wars, yet therefore he ceased not to procure by all means to conserve peace:
for as he said, The Gods never permitted that any should be overcome in the
wars, but such as be enemies unto peace. Traiane was very moderate in the
ordinary expe^ces of his house: and jointly with this, most liberal in causes
of war: and most certainly in the same he showed him self to be a prince
skilful, provident and wise: for as Plato said, If the expenses of the common
wealth be not moderated, afterward ye shall not fail, to want wherewith to
withstand the enemies.

CHAP. VIII. Of the proud and stately buildinges which Traiane made.
TRaiane made in Rome many and very notable buyldings: it is to understand, a
great and sumptuous market place, and all the things that were in the compass
thereof. He made a paued calsey, being a broad high way that lasted two
leagues and half, whereon they might come and go in Summer without dust, and
in Winter without mire. He made a temple unto the God Apollo, another unto the
god Mars, another unto the god Jupiter, another unto the god Esculapius,
another unto the goddess Ceres, another unto the goddess Bellona, another
unto the mother Berecyntha, whom the Romans named the mother of all the
Gods. He repaired the decayed walls, he made ten pair of milles upon
barks on the river of Tyber, in which he commanded that the priests, the
vestall virgins, and the old knights should first grind and be served. He
did repair and enlarge the college, and placed gates, porters, and watchemen,
and many counterfetes and pictures of gold and silver: and did use for custom
as often as he came thither, to be the first that entered, and the last that went
forth. He buylt in all streets in Rome public purging places, and commanded
upon great and grievous penalties, that no man should be so hardy to defile
the streates, or other open places: in such manner, that all the days of
Traiane, Rome did not seem, but as a hall clean swept. In the fourth region
joining unto the temple of Serapis, Traiane did buyld most sumptuous baynes,
much larger then those which Titus made, and much richer then those which
Tyberius buylt. Also Traiane buylt an hundred houses large and strong, wherein
to kill and sell their beef and mutton. In the gardeines of Vulcane, Traiane
did buyld an house of pleasure, and made therein a certain fishepoole for
delight: but it is not found or recorded, that he did either eat or sleep in
the same. Near unto the houses of the Fabians, he brought from far a
founteine, in the compass whereof he erected a stately house, naming it the
place of Datia, Traiane naturally, was a friend not only of buylding, but also
to behold buyldinges and work men: which is most certainly known, in that
he made a law: that all such men as should raise any new buyldinges in Rome,
the third part of the charges should be paid from the common treasure. It
was a marvelous matter, that in all these and many other buyldings which
Traiane made in Rome, he used no other men's money, he constrained no man to
travail by force, he deferred no man of payement, for he said and held
opinion, that it were more honest and also more sure unto Princes, to dwell in
poor lodginges: then of other men's sweat to make rich houses.

CHAP. IX. Of some vices whereof Traiane was noted.
TRaiane wanted not some human infirmities, wherein men at times do fall:
for, if with reason he were praised for many things: not without occasion in
some causes he was justly discommended. Until this day there has been no
Prince in whom all virtues did concur, either in whom all vices were
found: because, there is no man such an outcast, in whom there is not to be
found somewhat to be praised: either any man of life so reformed, that in him
there is not somewhat to be amended. Traiane naturally was proud and ambitious
of honor: and after a manner he did delight, that in open place they should
erecte unto him pictures and counterfetes of gold, and that his fame might be
spread throughout the world. In all his erected buyldinges he placed the
titles of his triumphs, and persuaded the Orators to compounde many meetres
to his praise, which he made to be graven in stone in the highest front of his
buyldinges. In the vice of the flesh, Traiane was not a little fleshly: and
yet in this case it is most true, that he never used force to any person: but
jointly therewith, being most diligent in persuasion, and very liberal in
giving: he fixed his amorous affection upon no person, that he inioyed not. In
his garments, and in the manner of the fashion and wearing thereof, Traiane
was most curious and costly: because there was no day, that either of Gold,
silver, or silk, he did not on his person use some change.

As we have said, Traiane was a Prince both wise, and of sharp and ready
judgment: but jointly therewith, much affectionate unto his own opinion:
whereof cares many times did follow and persecute him: because, there is not,
has been, or shall be Prince in this world, so wise, that necessity
constrains not, at times, to change counsel.

Traiane was a very friend unto wise men, but he him self was not much
learned: whereof being reproved by his friend and Philosopher Plutarche:
Traiane said unto him: the Gods have not created me to turn over books, but
to deal with armor. When Traiane had vacant time from wars, he did much
delight to take his pleasure in vain things, wherein he consumed many nights
and days, and of this vice he was not a little noted, and also accused: and
doubtless not without great cause: for that Princes which presume to be good
Princes, in such wise ought to take their pastime, that they seem not to lose
their time. Notwithstanding that Traiane delivered Rome of many vices, and
banished from thence many that were vicious: he was noted and also blamed, that
he defended and sustained the swoorde players, who were men idle and seditious,
and this he did, because in his youth they had been his friends, and delighted
in them: wherein he had lest reason, for that It is not just, that Princes take
such recreation for their persons, as tends to the prejudice of the common
wealth. Traiane was very moderate in feeding, but jointly therewith, not over
sober in drinking: for that to obtain good wine, he was somewhat curious and
careful, and in the drinking thereof, not very temperate. Notwithstanding,
that sometimes he drank somewhat more then was convenient for the health of
his body, and to the authority of his person: yet, at that time, never man
saw him committ or procure any vile deed.

CHAP. X. Of the first wars that Traiane had against the Datians.
IN the xliiij. year of his age, and in the second of his Empire, Traiane
received news, that Decebal king of Datia, which in these days is named
Denmark, rebelled against the Roman Empire: the which news gave no small
skandal and offense unto the Senate: for that on the one part naturally they
were a nation very warlike: and on the other part, for that king Decebal was a
prince of great unquietness, and also of a mind determined. For that the
Emperor Domitian was a greatter friend unto vices, then an enemy unto
enemies: in all his reign, king Decebal did never yeald obedience unto the
Roman Empire: whereby the Datians had recovered great boldness, and the
Romans lost their credit.

Traiane, in his own person determined to go in those wars: for which
purpose he made choice of a very small army, and yet of much strength: for he
held opinion, that, as no other meats should be brought unto the table, then
are to be eaten: so they ought not to lead unto the wars, but such as must
fight: and said further: by experience I have proved, as well in eating, as in
fighting, that many meats at table be lothesome: and in the wars many men be
troublesome. King Decebal being advertised, that Traiane removed from Rome to
make conquest of him and his country, determined to march and encounter with
him upon the way: and as he purposed so he performed: for he held the
Romans in so small estimation, that he counted it shame to be beeseeged of
them. And when the armies were in sight one of another, the Barbarians being so
many, and the Romans so few: they did not a little persuade Traiane, to take
peace, or to make some honest truce, and without peril to return to Rome.
Traiane to this made answer: our weakness should be great, and with great
reason they would blame us in Rome, if so soude^ly we should cease to make
war, without first making proof, to what end their forces do extend, and
also understand what our destinies do contain: because it may be, that if
their power be great, our fortune may be much greater. King Decebal had taken
and fortified all the dangerous passages, and broken all bridges, barks, and
botes of all the rivers, and had taken and spoiled all the victuals where the
Romans should pass: and all these things were occasions to increase
travail unto Traiane, but not of power sufficient to remove his enterprise:
for that Traiane was of so valliant a mind, that where he saw fortune most
doubtful, from thence he did hope of victory most certain. Traiane did take
and possess the height of the rocks and mountains, and thereon with all his
army did travail many nights and days: and king Decebal did never conceive
that Traiane would travail by those thornie mountains: for that he thought it
impossible for men to travail where beasts could not escape. King Decebal was
constrained to return unto the plain country, and to fortify him self in
strong cities, and to this end Traiane did purpose not to fight in mountains
that be dangerous, but in fields that be plain: for he said, that they came
not to fight with the mountains, which bred brute beasts: but to tame
cities which sustain seditious men. In very short space Traiane had taken five
cities, seven castles, and many prisoners: among which Mirto was taken, being
uncle, tutour, and captain of king Decebal: a man of great gravity and of
no less authority. Traiane was so rigorous with them that did resist him and
so pitiful unto such as did yield them, that some for love, and others for
fear, began secretly to practice throughout the kingdom, totally to yeald
them selves unto Traiane: because they saw every day Traians force to
increase, and the power of king Decebal to decay and grow very weak. Traiane
besieging a certain city named Myrtha, holding the captain thereof in great
distress, king Decebal forgate not to send him relief and succor of great
power: against whom Lucius Metellus, a captain of Traianes did march and
advance him self: who at that instant fought so valiantly and manlike, that he
lest not of all the enemies one only person, that was not either taken or
slain. And as in that battle many Romans were slain, and many more
wounded, lacking clothes to bind up their wounds, Traiane tare his own shirt
to supply their want in that behalf. Being known within the city, how their
succorour was discomfited, and how Traiane, to cure his wounded had rent his
own shirt, they did fear the victory, and were amazed at a work of so great
clemency, and both these things were not a little prejudicial unto king
Decebal, chiefly for that he was proud and disdainful: for the good Traiane,
if with his engines he ouerthrewe their castles, with ye fame of his good
works, he did rob and steal the minds of his army.

The city of Myrtha being taken and rendered into the hands of Romans,
presently king Decebal sent Ambassadors unto Traiane, aduertising that he
would become subject unto the Roman Empire: upon such condition, that the
things whereon they should capitulate, were reasonable, and such things as
they should command to be perfourmable: for otherwise, he and his were
determined rather to dye with liberty, then to live in bondage. The conditions
that Traiane sent to demand were these.

That he should leave all armor, discampe his army, subvert his castles,
yield his engines, restore that which was robbed, become a friend unto the
friends, and an enemy unto the enemies of the Senate, render such captains
as came to his succor, and give 100000 pesants of gold to pay the army, and
give one of his sons in pledge for surety of all promises. All these
conditions king Decebal was contented to swear and observe: except the
rendering of the captains which came in his favor to succor him: saying that
so vile a deed did not agree with the clemency of Traiane to demand it:
neither unto his royal fidelity to grant it: for that he yielded him self
and his country, but to preserve the life of his friends and alies. King
Decebal came unto the presence of Traiane, and kneeling upon the ground, did
take off the crown from his head and kissed the knee and the hand of Traiane:
the which lifting him from the ground and again placing the crown upon his
head: said unto him: I admit thee to kiss my knee for the rebellion which
thou have committed, and I gave thee my hand to kiss for the vassalage which
thou owe me: now I give thee place to sit by me as a friend: I return
thy crown unto thee, as unto a king: and therefore, learn to understand thy
fault past, and to conserve this present benefit: for otherwise, thou shall
put me to much travail, and thy self in great peril.

CHAP. XI. How Traiane triumphed of the Datians, and reformed his common
wealth.
MAny castles being furnished, and others overthrown and subverted, and the
armies being paid with king Decebals money: Traiane departed unto Rome,
leading with him the kings son for pledge, and other noble men for
Ambassadors: because it was a law much used and also observed amongst the
Romans, that it were of no value which was capitulate in the wars, if it were
not confirmed in ye Senate at Rome. The Ambassadors of king Decebal arrived at
Rome before the Emperor Traiane: who bareheaded, their armor thrown down,
and their hands joined and lifted up, did humbly beseech the Senate, that it
might please them to pardon king Decebal the rebellion which he had committed
against them, and to confirm all that which the Emperor Traiane had
capitulate, because for that which had passed, he did repent him, and for time
to come did offer amends. With ready disposition the Roman senate did
approve, allow, and confirm all acts agreed upon betwixt Traiane and the
Datians: and presently commanded their armor to be restored them, and to walk
in ye city at their liberty: because it was a law inviolable, that the
Ambassadors whose Princes held wars with the Roman people, might wear no
kind of armor, either walk the streets at liberty without license. Many
and most extreme were the feasts wherewith the Romans did receive the
Emperor Traiane, and very great was the riches yt he bestowed in his triumph:
and admitting yt the Romans did much rejoice to see their Empire rich and in
great power: but it did much more please them to behold Traiane returned
whole, safe, and alive: for it is incredible, what affection and love all men
did bear him, and the sacrifices beyond all valor that for him they did
offer.

On the day of his triumph, the son of king Decebal was placed in the arche
with Traiane, for that he was a very child: whom afterward he did
entreat, not as a prisoner, but as his own proper son. In the conquest of
the Datians, and in visiting the Germans, Traiane was deteyned willingly two
years: and at his return unto Rome, he found not the common wealth in such
order as he left the same, and thereof is no marvel: for Princes making war
with their enemies, presently the citizens make peace with vices. That day in
which Traiane entered triumphing into Rome, he that by chance was most noted
in those plays and pageantes, and of whom Traiane that day did take most
delight, was a certain master of Enterludes named Pilas, who for reward of
his traueile, did not crave of Traiane but license to use his faculty, wherein
Traiane did answer him: Princes have to consider that their commandments be
just: but after commandment, for no request or service they ought to revoke
the same. That which I will do for thee, shall be to pay thee yearly out of
mine own treasure, as much as thou may gain by playing in the streets of
Rome.

Although Traiane went laden with armor, compassed with affairs, occupied in
wars, busied in buyldings, importuned with friends, tired with enemies, and
above all, most studious in amplifying his fame, and to perpetuate his
memory: he never grew negligent in good government of the common wealth. He
was no less attentive in hearing, either less diligent in dispatching base
and civil affairs, then those cases of great weight in the common wealth.
Notwithstanding he were much busied in the affairs of wars, he did never the
more grow negligent in the administration of justice. All the time that he was
remaining in Rome, once or twice a week he did sit openly to dispatche
matters of justice.

For any motion that good Traiane had to be solitary in his house, or for any
disease whereby he was withdrawn into his chamber, either for any affairs
that he ^ad for the wars, never man came to crave justice, unto whom he
denied audience. When any person came, much troubled and furious in complaining
of some friend or enemy, presently he stopte his ear with one of his fingers,
saying: that he reserved the same, to hear the accused.

Traiane did never sit to hear and determine matters of justice, but at the
gate of the Emperor Titus, and in the place of Augustus: and being demanded,
why more there, then elsewhere: answered, I place my self where just Princes
were wont to sit: because in remembering them, I may committ no want of
justice. Traiane being on horseback, and upon the voyage of the second wars
into Datia, there came a woman and said unto him: Emperor Traiane, I am
poor, old, and a widow: and having but one daughter, one of thy household
servant has ravished her. Traiane answered: poor woman, be not importune
with me: for I swear unto thee, by the immortal Gods, that being returned
from the wars, I will do thee justice: to this the old woman did replye: and
what surety have thou Traiane, to return from the wars: hearing so biting
an answer, presently he lighted on foot and deferred his departure, until he
performed justice with the poor old woman. Traiane held for custom, when
any person did complain, presently he commanded it to be written in a book
which he had in his chamber: and this the good Prince did, to the end to ask
account of the Judge to whom he did remitt the same, or else for his own
better remembrance for dispatch thereof.

In some things, some Princes were equal unto Traiane, and in some things
did surmount him, but in rectitude of justice, there was no prince like him in
Rome: for that he did never man wrong in justice, either at any time had
affection or passion in giving sentence. Many times Traiane did use to say:
that for Princes to be Iusticers, it were right necessary to be just in their
own persons: because subjects and vassals be more easily persuaded to do that
which they see, then to obey in that which they are commanded. Traiane was the
first that placed patrones in the Senate, that should defend the poor: and the
first also that gave order, that one day in the week, their causes should be
heard. The Censours or Judges of Rome, did sit but two hours in the morning,
and one at after noone, to hear causes: and Traiane did give order that they
should be resident three hours before noone, and two hours at after noone,
whereof Traiane was much praised, because it was occasion both to cut off
suits, and to dispatch suitors. In the days of Traiane, none that had charge
of Justice might augment his goods: but in that estate of riches or poverty,
wherein he began to govern, in the same he had to conserve him self: and in
repayme^t of his travail, besides the rewards which the Prince did give him,
his sons were married with the goods of the common wealth.

Being known unto Traiane, how immortal suites were in the Senate: he
ordained that all suites of Italy should continue but one year, and the suites
of strange countries, but half a year. Traiane made diverse houses in Rome,
where the Censours and Judges might assemble to hear and administer justice,
and also made strong prisones, in such wise, that this good Prince provided,
that the good should be succored, and the evil chastised.

CHAP. XII. Of the second wars that Traiane had against the Datians.
Twenty months after that Traiane had overcome the Datians, the son of
king Decebal died in Rome, who remained there as pledge, for that which his
father had sworn and promised: and Traiane was no less grieved with the death
of that child, then if it had been his own proper son and heir. The day
that king Decebals son was dead, they say that Traiane said: the death of
this child grieueth me not, for that it is a sorrow to the father, but for
breach of promise which he shall committ: for if he have been quiet, it was
more for ye recovering of his son, then for obedience unto the Senate. Not
long after this news came to Traiane, how king Decebal was rebelled, and to
resist the Romans he repaired the diches, furnished the castles, entered
confederacy with his neighbors, renewed and recovered victuals, and more and
above the rest, made war with the friends of Romans. The camp of Agius,
which was a great and a populous country, being restored by Traiane unto him
from whom it was taken, king Decebal reentred, did take and occupy the same,
in such wise, that all things which Traiane had set down and determined, was
despised, and in all that king Decebal had sworn, he was forsworn. Relation
of these things being made unto the Senate, king Decebal was pronounced an
enemy, to publishe liberty unto all persons to give him and make him war:
because it was a law amongst the Romans, that notwithstanding any did mutine
or rebel against the Prince, until in Rome he were declared an enemy, they
might not make war either against him or his country.

Traiane once more determined in his own person to go to the wars of
Datia, neither would he take with him any Consul or Captain that was notable
in Rome, saying: that since king Decebal to him only had broken his word: to
him only it did apperteine to revenge the injury. King Decebal, how soever
he had made experience of the forces of Traiane, he would not as in the former
wars abide him in the field: but retired into the most strong holds of his
kingdom, to his small profit: for Traiane had sworn before he departed from
Rome, to remain dead in Datia, or bring king Decebal either dead or alive unto
Rome. Many of the Hunnes which now are named Hu^garians, and many of the
Rhenes, which are ye people inhabitant near unto ye river Rhene, were come
unto ye succor of king Decebal, al which people, when they understood that
Traiane came with so great a power, and so determined, they forsook king
Decebal in the plain field: notwithstanding, would he not forsake his wilful
purpose, for that his condition was to begin his attemptes with great
rashness, and no less stout to prosecute them. King Decebal was then of the
age of two and forty years: a Prince most certainly in body of perfect
proportion, gracious in conversation, magnificent in spending, valiant in
arms, diligent and careful in the wars, although in the same most
unfortunate: the which lost both him and his country: because little avails
diligence, where good hap is contrary. King Decebal was a Prince most
unfortunate, to match in contention with Traiane, who was a Prince most
fortunate: because unto the one, all things did happen unto his own liking:
and to ye other, all things contrary to that he did desire. After five
months yt the war was begun, as ye one Prince did increase, and ye other
decrease: King Decebal retired unto a certain castle, with the most valiant
men of his army: where Traiane did utter and expend the vtterest of his skill,
device, and policy, to take him: and king Decebal his greatest force and
fortitude to defend him self. By a Decebal counsel on a certain night, they
conveyed over the wall six young men, fayning to be fled, which came unto
Traianes camp, with minds determined to kill him, either with weapon or
poison. King Decebal had invented this treason: for that wanting, as he wanted
strength: he would profit and provide for him self, by treason and guile. And
as Traiane was of a sincere condition, and nothing malicious, had no suspicion
of that malice and guile, but rather received the^ with great pity, and
conferred with them a great part of the day, inquiring and demanding them of
the armies and conditions of king Decebal: and wherefore he had broken his
promise and oath. There wanted not in Traianes camp, that could discern, by
their countenance, gesture and silence, that those young men were traitors, or
else thieves: and one of them being taken and examined, did confess, that by
the counsel and commandment of king Decebal, they were come to murder
Traiane. And as king Decebal was disappointed of this treason and device, and
the traitors chastised according to their demerites, he determined another
device: and the case was thus. Upon a truce he craved to speak with Longinus,
a famous captain and much beloved of Traiane: who being come upon assurance,
was taken and bound. Traiane was not a little offended, when he understood
that Longinus was detained as prisoner, and no less displeased with Longinus,
that had given too much confidence to the assurance of king Decebal: saying,
that the person which is a promise breaker with men, and perjured unto the
Gods, by no means might deserve credit. King Decebal gave Traiane to
understand, that except he might receive pardon for him self and all his
knights, Longinus should continue prisoner: to this Traiane made answer,
that if he had taken Longinus in good war, he would do any thing to give
liberty unto his person: but since Longinus gave trust where he ought not unto
his word, he was bound to conserve his life: for that good Princes be more
bound to maintain that which they promise, then to procure that which they
desire. Although Traiane spoke these words openly, he did geatly travel to
deliver Longinus, either for exchange, or else for money: but Longinus
understanding thereof, drank poison, whereof he dyed: and sent word unto
Traiane, yt the Gods had never to command, yt for the giving of his life, they
should capitulate with king Decebal, any thing yt were vile or against honor.
This Roman strange act of Longinus, gave great admiration unto friends and
confederats, and did yeald great fear unto the enemies: because he delivered
Traiane of care and thought, and for him self obtained perpetual fame. King
Decebal perceiving the greatest part of his kingdom to be taken and lost,
without all hope to recover the same, either able to defend that which
remained, determined to make slaughter of him self, some say with poison, some
affirm that he drowned him self in water, other affirm, that he hanged him
self: finally, he was found dead without any wound: whose head Traiane
commanded to be cut off, and to be sent unto Rome.

CHAP. XIII. Of the great buildings that Traiane made in the kingdom of Datia.
THe unfortunate king Decebal being dead, and all the whole land in Traianes
power, he made it a Province: which is to say, he did take away the title of
kingdom, and the preeminence of government by Consuls: and gave order to be
governed by Pretors, and to be called a Province. Traiane removed a great
number of the inhabitants of Italy in that country: but many more he brought
out of that country, to be placed in Italy: and this he did as a man of great
judgment: because in displacing the one, he obtained sure possession of the
kingdom: and removing the other, of necessity they must live as others did
live in the Roman Empire. When the captain Longinus dyed, he left a brother
younger of age, but equal in force and valiantness, whom Traiane made
Pretour of Datia, and gave unto him for evermore the castle where his brother
dyed: saying unto him, of two causes, the one is for thine own virtue and
valiantness, and the other, because thy brother Longinus did serve me.

Traiane caused great search to be made for the body of his captain Longinus:
unto whom he caused to be erected such and so sumptuous a sepulcher, that it
was to be douted, whether he would have given him so great riches for service
if he had lived, as he spent in making that sepulcher. In all the kingdom of
Datia, there was no knight or Gentleman that had any rents, but only the king:
whereof the king gave unto every man as he did serve and deserve: whereof it
followed, that the kingdom being so opulent, the king obtained great riches,
wealth, and power. When Traiane came the second time into Datia, king Decebal
had great riches both of gold and silver: not only for the great rents which he
received throughout his kingdom, but that also he exacted of his subjects
great su^mes of money. King Decebal being doubtful unto what destinies he and
his kingdom were committed, determined to bury all his treasure in a river,
which he removed out of his natural channel, and in the greatest depth thereof,
he made sepulchers of stone to bury his said treasure: which being done, he
returned the river into his old channel, which was named Sargetia: and to the
end that no man should discover this secret, he commanded to murder all that
were present at the hiding thereof. But to small purpose, for that a fisher,
which at that time did fish the river, discovered the whole matter unto
Traiane: in such manner, that there is nothing so much hidden, that human
covetousness does not discover. Those treasures being brought into Traianes
power, he divided thereof amongst his armies, unto every man according to the
merits of his service: and of his own share, the first that he commanded
was, to build a most sumptuous temple unto the God Jupiter: wherein he left
provided, that for him self and the people of Rome, yearly sacrifice to be
offered. He reedified there also the royal house, that is to say, where the
kings of Datia did use to be resident: which for the antiqutie thereof was
somewhat decayed, and through continual wars, not well repaired: a work
most certeinely delectable to behold, and pleasant to dwell in. He repaired
also many decayed bridges and mylles, upon high ways he renewed their broken
calseys in all places, he did build new houses, and reedified others infinite
that were burnt. He brake and made plain many ways upon the sharp
mountains, and raised many new fortes, and renewed the old: finally, you might
hardly travel a league throughout all the kingdom, wherein should not be
found some notable work of Traiane. Not yet all satisfied, he built upon the
river of Danubie a bridge of stone, which was so curious in the building, and
so costly in the making, that few works did match it, but none did pass it.
That bridge contained twenty arches in length, and every pillar of one square
stone, and the arches were of the height of an hundred and fifty foot,
wrought without cymet, and the distaunce betwixt the pillars, were a hundred
threescore and two foot: and the breadth of the arches aloft was forty foot:
and above all the rest, the singularity of the mould and fashion was to be
considered, and the richness of the stone to be regarded: because the stone
was of such gloss, that in judgment it deserved to be set in plate. It seemed
incredible to man's judgment, for a bridge to be made upon that river: because
the stream was broad, deep, in course very swifte, and above all the rest, on
no side it might be turned out of his channel, to the end it might be dry at
any time to lay the cymet. That building was so extreme, or to say better, so
monstrous, that it needed to make experience of al high judgments and
capacities, and the Romans there to show their strengthes, and Traiane there
to spend his treasure: because in the work there required great potencie, and
in the order thereof great industry: it is very small that the pen can
magnify, in respect of the wonder which he sees that beholds the same: for
the better credit thereof, at these days the pillars give a muster upon the
fierce waters: declaring the pride of his power, and the riches of the
emperor. Traiane would with that edifice give terror unto the living, and
admiration to his posterity, to give manifest argument, that any thing may not
be so impossible, either so hard, that with man's hand may not be enterprised,
and with ye riches of Rome might not be finished. The cause that moved Traian
to build this costly bridge, so monstrous, was, as they say, to the end the
barbarous people on the other side Danubie, might come to fight with the
Romans, although the river were overflowed: and also that the Romans that
remained there, should not give them selves to pleasure and idleness, when they
considered them selves to be in the eye of the enemy. The Emperor Domitian
had no such mind and valiantness: which for fear that the barbarous people
should come to fight with the Roman host, commanded the arches of that
bridge to be overthrown: in such wise, that the one made a bridge to provoke
the enemy to fight, and the other did raze the same for fear of battle.

CHAP. XIIII. Of the second entering of Rome by the Emperor Traiane, and the
notable thing which he did in the same.
IN finishing the wars, in giving order for the Province, in dividing the
countries, and in yealding perfection unto all his works and buildings,
Traiane was detained in Datia more then three years: in which as he after did
report, great were the travels and perils wherein he did see his person, and
not small were the expenses that he made of his goods. The victories that
Traiane had obtained, being known unto the Barbarians that did inhabit the
other side of Danubie, the mighty buildings that he had made, the great
rewards that he had given, and the clemency that with prisoners he had used,
sent their ambassadors unto Traiane: who with very good will did set down
with him a perpetual peace and amity, and bound them selves to keep and
defend for him the kingdom of Datia. Incredible was the love that all those
nations did bear unto Traiane, which was well known when he departed from
that country to go unto Rome: in that by all cities where he did pass, and
by all ways where he did travel, so great were the tears and cries uttered
by all persons, that it seemed the ground to tremble. In respect of the great
largess and prowess that Traiane had performed in those Provinces, it was no
marvel that his departing was so be wailed: because with his great benefits,
he had won their hearts, and with his great and sumptuous buildings he had
ennobled his people. Universally of al friends and enemies, never prince as
Traiane was so much feared in wars, either loved in peace. The cause whereby
Traiane obtained so great love, and to be so well liked, and in such especial
grace with all men, was, that with his friends he never used negligence, and also
in readiness and strait reckoning with his enemies: in such wise, that such
as stood in his disgrace by his words, they had to understand thereof: but unto
such as did bend to serve him, both in word and deed he did manifest the
same. They were infinite that praised Traiane, in that he had been pitiful with
them, but none did complain yt he had found him ingrate. Ennius Priscus, a
noble and ancient Roman demanded of ye emperor Traiane, by what means
more then all other Princes past, of all men he had obtained so special love
and lyking: Traiane did answer, for that naturally I delight to pardon such as
do offend me, and never forget such as do serve me. And truly Traiane said
most truth: that love and hatred have their beginning of thankfulness and
ingratitude: because there is no enemy so fierce or cruel as he which in time
past we held for a friend, being removed by unkindness. All things as
concerning Dati^a, being dispatched, Traiane returned to Rome. If the triumphs
of the first wars were great, when king Decebal was overcome, much greater
were the triumphs of the second wars, when he was slain.

The feasts of the triumphs of Datia, endured an hundred and twenty days: in
which were slain an hundred Lions, and of other wild beasts an hundred
thousand, which is to understand, Dear red and vallo, Tygres, Bulls,
Leopards, Wolves, Bears, Unicorns, Boares, Panthers, Eliphants, Camels,
Ounces, and many other such strange beasts taken and brought from the deserts
of Africa, and the great India. The feasts of the triumph being finished;
presently Traiane commanded to be made great sacrifices unto the Godds, in
remuneration of the great perils from which they had delivered him, and for the
great triumphs which they had given him. He commanded new temples to be made,
one unto the unknown God to the Romans, another unto the God Mars, which
was the God of the Datians. He commanded great sums of money to be given to
the Priests of the temples: unto the end they should offer daily sacrifice
unto the Gods, for the health and prosperity of his kingdoms: and also to
repair and ennoble their temples. At his coming from Datia, when Traiane
passed the river Rubicon, being detained an whole day for want of passage,
imediately upon his coming to Rome, he sent money and workmen to make a
bridge over that river: which was more profitable, although not so sumptuous
as the bridge made over Danubie. In the marshes of Pontaine, Traiane did raise
and make a calsey both long and large of stone, a work right profitable and
necessary, although not a little costly: for where as before there was but
water and mire, there succeeded houses and inhabitants. In those days there
dyed in Rome, a certain Physician named Suras Lycinus: in whose death Traiane
did utter great sorrow, unto whom he commanded his picture to be advanced in
the place, and a rich sepulcher to be erected in the field of Mars. There was
in Rome two special men learned in letters, and virtuous in manners: which
were perfect friends of Traiane, and in the common wealth much esteemed: the
one was named Palma, and the other Celsus: unto these he gave many and great
offices of honor, and in the place did erect unto them pictures of Alabaster.
Traiane made in Rome many and great Libraries: wherein he did place books of
al sciences, and of all languages, where strangers might read, and citizens
learn. Where so ever Traiane entered, were it within the Empire, or in a
strange kingdom, he was always curious, in causing search for five things:
that is to say, horses of good race, learned men of good inclination, new
armor, fair women, and ancient books. All these things, or which soever of
them, were neither lost by any negligence: or left unbought for any money. In
the place named Datia, Traiane erected a certain most high pillar, a work
most certainly being of one stone right stately, and to behold, in breadth and
height of great wonder. It is not written from whence that pillar was brought
unto Traiane, neither for what intent he did raise the same in that place: but
as some do guess, he meant upon the top thereof to have placed his sepulcher:
others said, to no other end, but to perpetuate his memory.

CHAP. XV. Containing what Traiane did in Sicyl, in Africa, and in Spain.
TRaiane being soakte with delight in the buildinges of Rome, Rufus Galba
Pretour of Africa did advertise, that all Africa was escandalized, by means of
cruel wars, between the Numidians and the Mauritans. These news being
heard in the Senate, they say that Traiane said. The war grieueth me, but
the occasion to pass into Africa does much please me: for that many days
past I have desired to see the famous fields of Carthage, where Scipio in so
short space obtained for him self immortal renoune, and Hanibal lost that in
one day, which he had gotten in sixteen years in Italy. Traiane departed
from Rome by the way of Sicyl: where he stayed all the Winter, and to avoid
idleness he scarsely left any place in the whole Islande personally
unvisited, none that were then alive in Sicyl, might remember to have seen any
Roman Prince within the same: for which cause Traiane found many things to
be repaired in the walls, and much more to be amended in their customs and
manners. Traiane being infourmed, that many strange ships did lurk in the
haven of Mecina to spoil, and many pirates barks did haunt and retire unto
the same, to execute their robberies, in his own person went to the view
thereof, and at his own cost commanded three bulwarks to be made, at the
mouth of the haven: which either for want of diligence of the one part, or too
much malice on the other side, the case was thus: that before it could be
finished, the pirates had overthrown it. Amongst the Panormitains, which be
they of Palermo, and the inhabitaunts of Mecina, of old time had continued
great contention: betwixt whom Traiane not without great travel, determined
and finished all quarelles and debates: and brought to pass, that from thence
forth they continued in great friendship. To the end to perpetuate that
peace, and to root up all passions and unkindness of that Islande by the
roots: to the principal both of the one and the other, Traiane gave pensions
out of his own house, and daily did cause them to eat at his own table. In
Palermo, Mecina, and Tatania, Traiane commanded several temples to be made:
and the Gods to whom those temples should be dedicated, the inhabitaunts to
make choice. Traiane renewed in Sicyl the kind and race of good horses,
reedified the decayed walls, melted all counterfeit money, erected new
castles, builded stately temples, set peace and established quietness amongst
the mutined cities, and gave many great rewards: although no liberties unto
the people. Traiane being demanded why he gave no liberties unto the
Sicylians, as he gave unto other kingdoms: answered, because servitude does
conserve them, and liberty destroy them.

The Winter being past, and the Spring come, Traiane passed into Africa, and
did land in the haven, where old Carthage in time past was situate: and not
finding one stone upon an other, to give testimony of the foundation thereof:
they say yt he said. It grieueth me that Carthage so greatly resisted Rome: but
it more forethinketh me, that Rome should not be satisfied, but with the
total destruction thereof. In the place where old Carthage stood, Traiane
did build a castle more fair then strong, and erected therein two
counterfets. the one of Hanibal the Carthaginian, and the other of Scipio the
African: but presently upon his departing from that country, the pirates laid
it flat on the earth. Incontinent after Traiane had arrived into Africa, there
grew a general pestilence throughout the same, for which cause he could
neither go to see that he desired, either perform that which he determined.
And as the pestilence grew so cruel, Traiane was constrained to retire unto ye
port of Bona, which was somewhat more sound: and from thence he sent for the
principals of the Numidians, and also of the Mauritans: who incontinently in
presence of Traiane, were made friends, and left and committed into his only
hands all their affairs. Amongst all the Princes of this world, Traiane
obtained this excellency: That never man came into his presence, that denied
him that, which he craved, either disobeyed him wherein he commanded: because
in his commandments he was very wise, and in requesting very humble.
Traiane thought to have stayed in Africa, more then two years, and yet
remained there but four months: and as he said afterward, that if the
pestilence had given no impediment, he would of him self have left as great
memorial in Africa, as he did in Datia. Traiane took sail at the port of
Bona, and came by the streightes to Cadix, which is now called Calize, a
city of Spain: wherein he had been bred, and from whence being a very young
man he had departed.

Traiane gave many Privileges unto the Gauditains, as unto his natural
friends: amongst which, two were most notable: namely, that they should be
citizens of Rome, and pay no custom or tribute, for any merchandise which
they transported. Traiane did build in Calize a most sumptuous temple unto God
Genius: which the Romans held for the God of birth. He made also a calsey
of stone along the shore: but it was not all finished, when by the fury of
the water it was all destroyed. He intended to repair the pillars of Hercules,
which by their great antiquity were then consumed: and being persuaded by
certain persons to erect others in his own name, to the end that in time to
come, they might be called the pillars of Traiane, and not of Hercules: he
answered: that which I ought to do is, that as Hercules came from Graecia
unto Spain, to obtain honor: so ought I from Spain to go into Graecia to
win fame.

Traiane commanded the bridge of Alcantara in Spain to be made, a work that
lasts to this our age: wherein concurreth stateliness, subtlety, cunning,
and profit. He made another bridge upon the river Teio, near unto Ystobriga,
and is the bridge that now is broken, at the banks of Halconeta. Traiane
commanded the way named Publius to be continued, being the way that now is
called in Spain, the Calsey, that goes from Civil unto Salamanca: and is
named the Publian way, which is to say, the way of Publius: for that the
first that began the same, was Publius Fabatus, one of the Consuls that
fought with Viriato. That which Traiane made of that calsey, little more or
less, was from the Casar of Casares, until within a league of ye vents of
Capara, which be lodging or bayting places: and so to be understood, not
because the histories do clearly report thereof, but by the pillars which upon
that way be erected: which say in their graven letters, that they were placed
there in the days of Traiane. And he that will be curious to go and see, (as
I many times have gone to see and read, and also to measure:) shall find
within the said bounds, the name of no other Prince but of Traiane: and
before the Casur which is a town, neither after the vents of Caparra, which be
lodgings, upon no pillar shall they find Traiane written. The cause wherefore
the Consul Publius Fabatus did raise that calsey, was to make a division
betwixt the Vetical Province, which is Andaluzia, and the Province of
Lusitania, which is Portugal: dividing from Civil to Salamanca, all on the left
hand of the calsey in old time being Lusitania, and all on the right hand
Andaluzia. Betwixt the Proconsul of Betica, and the Proconsul of Lusitania,
there did arise great contention, upon the division of their bounds:
whereupon this large and sumptuous calsey was erected and performed. Upon the
river of Gadiana, Traiane commanded a long bridge to be made, on the midst
whereof he built a market place for the merchants of both people, to trade and
concur. This bridge appertains to the city of Merida, which at this day
appears very large, and had in the midst thereof a division, stretching
up into the river, the hurl of a stone, which on both sides came back unto
the bridge, continued, directed, and sustained by walls, in the compass
whereof was the place or market. When the Greeks did first give foundation unto
Merida, they made therein two streates, and the river Gadiana betwixt them
both, and where Merida now stands, was the stronger, and that on the other
side the river was more delectable: in such wise, that they held the one to
retire unto in time of war: and the other to delight in time of peace. As the
Consul Publius Fabatus made division of Portugal and Andaluzia, the streate on
the other side the river fell to the Province of Lusitania, and the streate
which is now Merida, fell to the Province of Betica, and from thenceforth
there was always betwixt the^ great contention: in such wise, that they
overthrew the bridge that stood in the middst of the city, and the coin that
in times past had been current, they made of no value betwixt them. This good
Emperor Traiane, meaning to cut off these so old enimities, made in ye midst
of the city, upon Gadiana the bridge that now is: and to remove all quarrels
for walking in each others streates, he made a market place in the midst of
the bridge, where they should congregate, talk, and traffike of their
merchandise. The prosperity of Merida continued, until the time that the
Goths entered Spain: which holding war with the Silingues, being in those
days Lords of Andaluzia: fortifying them selves in Merida, by the Goths were
there overcome, and those generous, sumptuous, and ancient buildings, thrown
flat upon the earth. In no city of all Europe, did jointly concur four
buildings, such as Merida held: that is to say, a stately college, certain
conduites and arches for conueyaunce of waters, a temple of Diana, and a bridge
that contained a great and large market place: which continued in building many
years, and perished in one day.

CHAP. XVI. How Traiane did pass out of Spain, into Asia, and the manner
that he used in the wars.
AFter that Traiane had visited in Spain the Province of Betica, of Lusitania,
and the Province of Carpentania, he came through the province of Tarragona: in
which year in the whole land, there was great scarsitie of bread: whereby
Traiane was constrained to shorten his journey, and to hasten his imbarkage: in
such manner, that the pestilence drove him out of Africa, and hunger out of
Spain. Traiane departed Spain, with determination not to stay, until his
arrival in Asia, and there to take the way unto ye greater Armenia: would
never take land in any port of Italy, but passing like pylgrimes, made no
stay, but only to renew their victuals. All those which traveled with
Traiane, were astonished to see him pass the ports of his kingdoms, as if it
had been the land of enemies. Traiane had a captain named Valerius Gracchus:
unto whom the Emperor did bear special affection, and did esteem him as a
kinsman: unto this man they say, that Traiane said, in great secrecy. If I had
found wars in Sicyl, Africa, or Spain, as I found in Datia, whereby I might
have obtained some victory, I would not have passed without landing in
Italy: but since it is thus come to pass, I swear by the immortal Gods, to
set no foot a land in Italy, until I deserve to enter triumphing into Rome.
High and very high were these words, worthy and right worthy to be written in
the hearts of Princes: to behold this Prince that banished him self from the
delights of his own proper kingdoms, to seek fame in strange lands. With
great determination Traiane did enterprise ye voyage into Armenia, wherein he
entered, making cruel war: taking occasion of ye king of Armenians, which
refused to confess to have received his kingdom from the Romans, but of the
king of Parthians. Traiane not satisfied to make war upon the Armenians, but
also entered the lands and territories of the Parthians: because in the most
principal Province of Trapa, he detained his army more then three months.
Parthurus king of Parthians, a man of great years, beholding the wars
offered him by the enemy, determined to present peace unto Traiane: who being
demanded of his Parthians why he discovered so great fear within his own
kingdom? he made answer. If the wars were but army against army, the
Parthians would not fear the Romans: but we fight with the Emperor Traiane:
unto whom the Gods have given so great fortune, that it far exceeds our
great power.

Without consuming of many days, or employing of many armies, the Parthians
made peace with Traiane, and the Armenians did yeald them selves as overcome.
From Parthimisires king of Armenians, the kingdom was removed, and both crown
and kingdom Traiane gave with his own hands unto his son: and this he did,
because king Parthimisires had said: that of the Parthians, and not of the
Romans, he was crowned king: in such wise, that the good Traiane in removing
the kingdom from the father, did execute justice: and in giving it to the
son, gave a show of his clemency. Traiane was not satisfied, that the
Parthians should have peace, and become tributaries unto the Romans, but
that king Parthurus by the hands of Traiane, must be crowned: and so it came
to pass, that kneeling upon his knees, he received his crown, kissed his
hand, and consented to pay tribute. Traiane did march through all those
Provinces and kingdoms, and unto the kings that did yeald obedience, benignly
he did entreat them, and in their kingdoms did confirm them: and unto such
as did use resistaunce, unto others he gave their kingdoms, and sent them
prisoners unto Rome. Traiane held for custom, that in all principal cities
of kingdoms or Provinces: that he had taken by force of arms, he did
command to erect a most strong castle, whereunto his armies did repair: and
a right sumptuous temple, wherein to worship the Gods of Rome. As Traiane
did pass and travel, visit and conquer all the three parts of the world,
that is to say, Asia, Africa, and Europa: in all which countries he did travel
to leave of him self immortal fame: the testimony whereof makes it credible,
that all the Roman princes jointly have not erected so many buildings, as
Traiane only did perform. Traiane did lead his armies very well furnished,
ordered, corrected, and also in great subjection: and this proceeded, that
always in his own person he did accompany the same, and held them both paid
and rewarded: for as he did use to say, The host that of his own proper
Prince is not visited and paid, is sildome or never in subjection. When
Traiane was in the wars, in his feeding and apparel, he did rather seem a
companion, then an emperor of Rome: for that sildome he went unarmed, and many
were the days wherein he did eat standing. Having a body somewhat dry and
of great sinowes, he was most patient in tedious travail of wars: that is
to say, in suffering hunger, cold, thirste, wette, snow, heat, and perils,
which he refused not as a cowarde, but sought the^ out as one of a valiant
mind: for yt in all hazardes and perils, he never said unto his captains, go:
but, let us go: do: but, let us do: fight: but, let us fight. He gave in charge
unto his armies, not to attempt to burn houses, set fire in corn, overthrow
milles, or cut down orchardes: affirming, that these things are to be
obtained, but not destroyed. When Traiane would take any city, he did not
imploye his force in any thing more, then to deprive the enemies of their
waters. In the camps of his enemies, he did cause to be sown false news:
that is to wite: that if he had victuals, to say, that he wanted: that if he
had money, to say, it was spent: that if he had much people, that they were
gone: that if he would shortly give an assault, to say, that he would depart:
and by this means he brought his enemies into negligence, while in mean time
he did fortify his armies. Traiane was of great liberality unto such as
discovered the enemies secrets: and jointly therewith, of no less providence,
for the entering of spies within his camps. When he held war with any city
or country, he did not permit his soldiers to spoil the borders thereof.
for he held opinion, that small profit might rise to spoil the poor villages:
and great hurt and offense unto the armies, by want of victuals. Unto a
captain that took a ploughman, and kilde his two Oxen at the ploughe, Traiane
commanded to be banished with great ignominy, and to give the ploughman his
horse, his armor, and all his wages that was due. For no fault Traiane
commanded any man to be slain in the wars, but only him that slept being
of the watch, or the captain that ran away out of the battle, or did
rauishe any woman. Traiane was so pitiful, that usually he did pardon all
negligences, especially in the wars, except two faults which he did never
remitt, that is to say, such as blasphemed the Gods, and ravished women.
Traiane was very diligent and careful in visiting his camps, and to keep a
reckoning of all his armies: and this he did to the end that no vagabonds
should wander amongst them: in such wise, that no man went to the wars, that
did not bear armor, and go to the battle. Traiane held in his armies
masters of all exercises to teach the young men the art of knighthood, that
is to say, how to play at the swoorde, to shoot in the crossebowe, to run
an horse, to skale a wall, to mine a castle, to wrestle with the enemy, to
swim over a river: finally, the greatest of Traianes exercise was, to augment
and nobilitate his army and knighthood.

CHAP. XVII. Of the honorable titles that the Romans sent unto Traiane, and
of the earthquake of Antioche.
THE Romans did much desire, that when Traiane did sail from Spain into
Asia, that he should have landed in Italy: but when they understood of the
great victories and prosperities which he had received in Asia, great was the
joy and sportes which were done at Rome. In times past, some Princes overcame
the Parthians, and others of them were overcome: but never prince, as Traiane,
did make them by fear yeald up their kingdom: and that of his own will,
kneeling upon his knees, would by a Roman Prince be crowned. The Parthians
were a people so untameable to be subdued, that they said of the^ selves: the
Gods could absolutely confound them: but impossible for men to overcome them.
Many days they were debating in the Senate upon determination, of the manner
of thanks which they should write unto Traiane, and what ensigns of honor
they should send unto him: since by his virtue they were all honored, and by
his valiant acts, feared throughout the world. All the Senate came to consent
to one advice, the which in deed was very generous and noble: that is to
understand, that all manner of coin should be melted within the Empire, and
made a certain new money in the name of Traiane: wherein Traiane was
engraven, and in the compass thereof, these letters were written: Imp. Vlp.
Tr. Opti. Da. Parth. P. P. Tr. P. Con. 2. Sem. Aug. Which is to say: this is
the Emperor Vlpius Traianus, which was very good, and right fortunate: he
overcame the Parthians, triumphed over the Datians, father of the country,
tribune of the people, two times Consul, his memory shall be immortal. Great was
the joy ye Traiane received, when he saw that money which the Senate had made:
and when he read the writing therein contained: but of all the titles which
they gave him, he gloried in none so much as to entitle him Imperator optimus,
that is to say: best Emperor: for he affirmed, yt all other titles he had
obtained by arms, but this other with virtues. For defense of cold, and
provision of victuals, Traiane retired in Winter unto the city and province of
Antioche: where whiles he remained, such and so fierce an earthquake happened,
as never in the world past was ever heard or seen. The chance was thus, that
on the 22. day of October, before the break of the day, soudenly there rose
such wind and storm so extreme and importune, that pulled up trees, beat down
birds, threw down tiles, and shook the houses: forthwith it began to lighten
and thunder, and did so sparckle and flame, that being night, it seemed to be
broad day. After the thunder and lightening, presently did follow so
terrible tempests and flashinges of fire, which with their furious violence,
brake down statelye houses, set hills on fire, killed men at the soudeine:
finally, it seemed not, but that all the world was on fire, and that the earth
did open. And if the earth were afflicted, no doubt but the Sea was cruelly
tormented: for the waters began to swell, the winds to alter, fishes to be
troubled, the air to be darkened: and that which seemed most terrible, the
waters did so yell, roar, braye, and rage, as if they had been wild, fierce,
and most cruel beasts: presently upon the souden there followed, such, and
so strange a heat, that it constrained al men to give air unto their
breasts, unbuckle their gyrdle, to throw off their clothes, to mount into
galleries, their bodies to sweat: and that which was woorste of all, that if
they went forth into the air, the violence thereof did overthrow them: if
into the sea, the rage thereof did drown them. As the winds did use their
fury so strange or never seen, and the earth so parched and dried by the
drought of the Summer, they raised so sharp a dust, that the air seemed to be
farsed or compound with dust. The matter was marvelous monstrous, and
terrible to behold: the air so thick with dust, the Seas to yell and roar,
the winds in so furious combat, that one might not see another, that they
durst not open their mouths, neither draw breath at their nostrils: for so
great was the dust that they did swallowe and receive into their bodies, that
soudeinly they fell down dead upon the earth. All these calamities, and
marvelous wonders, were no doubt very fearful: but universally not so
dangerous: for although many did perish, many also were saved. Then presently
began the earth to quake so strangely and vnusually, that old houses did fall,
walls did open, towers did cleave, the monuments did rent, and stones did
encounter each other. In some places, the houses were utterly overthrown, in
other parts half thrown down, in other places walls opened, in other some
places trees pulde up by the roots, domestical beasts slain: finally, there
was no street in the whole city, wherein the earthquake had not used his
violence. If such destruction was executed amongst trees and stones: how
great was the calamity that passed amongst men? the case was right lamentable
to hear men cry, women scriche, children wail, beasts howl and braye, one
crossing and encountering another, some dead, some with broken heads, some
with broken legs, some lamed in their arms, and some stricken clean through
the body. At such time as these things did chance, great numbers of people
were come from all the parts of the world unto Antioche, some to see Traiane,
some to ask justice, some that went to the wars, some brought prisoners, and
others that were strangers: and in so great a multitude, there was no man that
escaped either deadly wounded or hurt, except one woman and one slave. Upon
that night of the earth quake, Traiane was lodged in a place of pleasure
without the city, who leaping out at a window, not with such speed, but that
he was hurt on his right arm not able to say of the cause, whether it
proceeded, of timber, tile, or stone. Traiane was so terrified with the
earthquake, that all the time in which he staide at Antioche, he would not
remain in any house, but in the fields in a tent, wherein he did eat and
sleep. Many days after these things did pass, certain persons walking to
behold the fallen houses, heard the voice of a woman: and digging very deep,
they found a woman and her child, that under the hollownesse of a vawt were
escaped: a thing admirable, how the mother without meat so long time, might
have milk to nourishe her child. In reedifying of other houses, they found a
dead woman, and a live child sucking the breast. At the time of the earthquake
in Antioch, the mountain Caucasus did so open and tremble, that all the cities
adjoining, doubted to be overwhelmed with the fall thereof. Running rivers of
immortal memory became dry. Springs never seen or heard of, did flow and
remain. and old fountains for evermore dried up: many hills made plain,
and many valleys made even. Finally, there was no house in Antioche, or within
the compass of the territories thereof, that was not totally destroyed, or
changed after a manner into some other order or fashion.

CHAP. XVIII. How Traiane subdued Assyria, and what he did in Babylon.
Now when Summer was come, Traiane prepared to depart the confines of
Antioche toward the journey of Assyria, to conquer that country, if that by
peace they did not yeald the same: and being arrived at the great river
Euphrates, he found the ships burnt, all the bridges broken, and all the
Barbarians in arms, with a mind to dye, or to defend their countries. The
Barbarians understanding of Traians approach, made an utter spoil of all their
woods, to remove all means of renewing their navy, or to reedifie bridges.
Traiane had intelligence that far from thence, certain ships upon the
hill Nisibin were a making, which presently he sent for, and brought in
carts, and in very short space, a flote upon Euphrates rigged and armed. The
river Euphrates being passed, Traiane found another river named Pessin,
joining unto the hill Cardius, which also was of great strength, and almost
impassable, but Traiane brake up his ships, and once more by land did carry
the same unto that river: wherein he fought with the Barbarians that defended
their banks. And as they after reported, utterly determined rather to dye,
then to submitt themselves to subjection. But that they conceived, Traiane to
be no mortal man, which would fight against them, but some of the immortal
Gods that came to destroy them: moved thereunto, in beholding Traians ready
carriage for ships by land, as they had by Sea. That country was named the
province of Adiabena: which being all ouerrunne and brought under subjection:
he passed unto Arbela, and unto Anguaguemela two most opulent provinces, in
whose fields, in the old worlds past, the great king Darius, was overcome
of Alexander Magnus. Traiane spent all that Summer in conquering those
provinces: which although they differ in names, yet differ not in seignorie,
because they be always annexed unto the kingdom Assyria, which the
Barbarians changing the S. into T. do call the same Attyria. And now when
Summer began to decline, Traiane determined to winter at Babylon: in all which
way he neither found enemies that did resist him, either friends to accompany
him: because those deserts be so solitary and dry, that hardly brute
beasts be found in the same. Before Traiane did enter Babylon, he would first
personally see the lake of Bytamin: the water whereof has this property, that
brick, tile, sand, lime, or chalk, that is tempered therewith, makes a
cyment thereof so hard and strong, that yeldeth not unto stone or iron. With
this water the tiles and brickes were made, and all other matter tempered, that
did erect all ye walls of Babylon. Also Traiane went to see the cave where ye
water came soaking forth, whereout proceeded a stench so pestilential, that
kilde all cattle that came near thereunto, and all birds that did fly over
the same. Men that pass that way dare not venture the view thereof, much
less to approach the smell, except the Eunuchs that be gelded, which fear not
to behold, neither are indaungered by the savor. Traiane might not be
satisfied with the view and contemplation of Babylon, much delighting to view
the infinite antiquities therein contained, and had thereof great compassion:
and also said it many times, how many and how renowned Princes had consumed
there their treasure, and employed the chiefest part of their life, to
perpetuate their fame, which were now forgotten, and their stately buyldings
utterly ruinated and fallen down. Traiane attempted a certain work within
that land which did not only excel all that he had done in Rome, Italic,
Sicyl, Datia, and Spain, but also all that Ninus, Belus, Semyramis, and
Alexander had made in Babylon. Traiane was of so high thoughts, and so
singular in his conceits, which he attempted, and in his buyldings which he
erected, he was not satisfied that others should think him equal with Princes
past: but judge and confess him to be singular amongst the rest. The case was
thus: he opened the mother of the river Tygris, and of the river Euphrates: and
made from the one to the other, a great and a deep channel, to unite them both
into one stream: a thing for the present easy to be written, but at that
time, very terrible to behold: because the channel that Traiane caused to be
made from the one river to the other, was so high, so large, and so deep, that
very great ships might turn, sail, and ride at anchor. Upon that channel
Traiane did build a most stately and a right lofty bridge, a strong castle,
a rich and sumptuous palace, and certain gardeines and orchardes most
pleasant, and on either side the river, he built fair houses to dwell in, and
store houses for merchaunts: and to place there his perpetual memory, did
name the same Traianicall Babylon. This buylding endured not long, and the
cause thereof proceeded, that the river Euphrates had his channel more high
then the river Tygris, whereby Tygris did increase, and Euphrates diminish: and
the Babylonians doubted the one for want of water to be lost: and the other
with the fury of the water to be destroyed. From Babylon, Traiane departed to
the city Tesiphont being the head of that province: which although some days
it stood in defense of it self, in the end it came to be yealded: and there
it is said, that Traiane found so great sums of money, that he had
sufficient to pay his armies, to raise up new buyldings, and also to furnishe
his treasury. Great were the news that daily came to the Senate, of the
marvelous victories which Traiane obtained throughout the world, and how
beyond all Princes past, he had augmented the Empire of Rome.

The inhabitants of Tesiphont were ignorant to sacrifice unto the Gods, or to
observe feasts and holy days: whereupon Traiane commanded to erect a temple
unto the great God Jupiter, and gave them instruction, what feasts they
should observe, and how they should sacrifice unto their Gods.

CHAP. XIX. How Traiane, after great travail to pass into the Indiaes, was
constreined to retire.
ALl these countries being overcome and set in order, Traiane determined to
sail by the read Sea, which is very great, and runs from the Ocean of the
Indiaes, unto Arabia, and is otherwise named the Sea Eritrean, in memory of
king Eritreus which in old time reigned there. The river Tygris in the
discourse of his current makes an Island, conteinining xxx. miles in breadth,
and lx. in length: wherein reigned Athabilus a Prince both proud and warlike:
whom without arms Traiane brought under his Empire. The air of those Seas
being different in nature from other Seas, and being then in the greatest heat
of Summer, Traiane in that navigations passed much travail and peril: and
being persuaded by certain to forsake the Sea, and take the land, answered:
the vicious go from hence to Rome to seek delight, and the virtuous come from
Rome hither to seek travails: because our predecessors in exchange of great
travails, received great and glorious triumphs: wherefore I will never cease
fighting for fear, either navigations for peril or danger. At the mouth of
those Seas, there was a people named Sipassinos, so called of certain fields
which they held: whether from many parts they brought their herds to
feed: these Sipassinos were subjects to king Athabilus: who understanding of
his submission unto the Romans, jointly with great good will came forth to
receive Traiane. Passing along those Islands, and all the cities along ye Sea
coasts on either side being subdued, Traiane entered the Ocean Sea, and
therewith understanding the wrack and decay of his ships, the darkness of
ye air, and his pylots to want experience upon those coasts, he arrived to
land to renew his navy. Traiane was informed, yt those Seas were of such
condition, that they endured not ships made of strange timber, but of wood
of the Indies, for otherwise they did consume, or at times drown them. The
sorrow of Traianes heart, might not be expressed, for that, to pass into the
great Indies, he had no preparation, because of ye insufficie^cie of his own
ships, and want of timber of the Indies. And when Traiane saw his voyage to be
frustrate and without remedy, they say, yt he said with a great sigh: Of all
Princes past, only unto Alexander I give the preeminence, for that he passed
into the Indies: but if fortune had not hindered me: him, as others, I would
have excelled: for I had a will not only to conquer all the Indies, but therein
to have erected a now Rome. All the time that Traiane stayed there, he gave
him self particularly to understand of the state of al things in the great
Indiaes: that is to say, what Gods they worshipped, what temples they held,
what kings they obeyed, what diet they used, what garments they did wear,
how they did fight, in what cities they did inhabit, wherein they were
exercised: and how much the greater things they did report: so much the
more, the sorrow of his heart did augment. From thence Traiane sent certain
messengers unto Rome, with great riches for the treasury: Also a memorial of
all the provinces, kingdoms, Islands, nations, and people that he had subdued
and taken, and brought under the Empire of Rome. Great joy was received in Rome
upon the manifestation of these news: no less wonderful unto the Romans,
to read so many, and so variable people to be overcome by Traiane: because it
was affirmed amongst them in the Senate of Rome, that none had seen them,
either as much as to have heard of them. Presently they erected in Rome unto
Traiane an arche triumphant, wherein was graven the names of the kingdoms that
Traiane had subdued, and ye principal provinces that he had taken: for if they
should have placed them all, conformable unto his memorial, they should want
marble to be wrought, and workmen to grave the same. When Traiane might not
pass into the great Indies, he came unto the house of Alexander the great,
where (as it was said) he died: and there did build all that by antiquity
was decayed and fallen down: and also did add other new buyldings thereunto,
and offered rich sacrifices unto the Gods, in memory and reverence of
Alexander. Traiane sailing on the Ocean Sea toward the Indians, and the
Tesiponts, supposing that he should never return into that province,
determined to rebel, and therewith slew all the Romans, that remained in
garrison, and brought all their country in arms. Against these and other
people that rebelled, Traiane sent Maximinus and Lucius with an army of great
power, who fought most unfortunately: for that ye one fled, and the other died.
He that escaped was Lucius, who to refourme all faults past, took the city
of Nisibin and Edessa, which he destroyed and burnt with fire, whereof Traiane was
not a little offended: because in the wars, he would not any spoil to be
made by fire. Eritius Clarus, and Alexander Seuerus, two Roman Pretours, made
their entry by Seleucia, which they totally did sack and destroy: being
advertised ye Traiane was drowned at Sea, they rebelled and slew ye Roman
magistrates. Traiane doubting the rebellion of the Parthians, entered their
country, having intelligence of the death of Parthurus their king, and the
alteration of their kingdom. Traiane commanded all the principals of Parthia
to appear before him, who assembled in the fields of Tesipont, where Traiane
being advanced did advertise the^ of his determination, which if they did
admit and consent unto, they might safely hold him for a pitiful father: and
otherwise they should find him a most cruel enemy.

The Parthians jointly answered, that their desire was much more to hold him
as a father, then an enemy: and did yield them selves both to believe, and to
obey him: making their humble suite, to give them no king, except he were a
native of their kingdom: for that a stranger should want both love and
obedience. Presently Traiane took a crown in his hands and set it upon the
head of Persnapate, declaring him to be their king and lord, of which
provision they held them selves marueilously well pleased, for that he was not
only of their kingdom, and well known unto them, but also both virtuous and
warlike.

CHAP. XX. How Traiane coming from Asia to triumph in Rome, was staide by
death in Sicyl.
THE land of Parthians being stayed and pacified, Traiane was in disposition to
go to Rome: partly to rest, and to cease from traueile, and chiefly to triumph
over so many nations and kingdoms: but being advertised of the rebellion of
the Agarens, and that the Roman pretours were fledd: presently Traiane
departed unto the land of Agarens, which is in Arabia, having a city as
principal of their province, very little, but marvelous strong: the destiny
whereof was such, that being sieged by infinite Princes, was never taken or
overcome. For defense of that city, the nature and situation of the country
did not a little help: for that the assailants had neither wood or timber to
advance their engines, either water or forage, for relief of them selves or
cattle: and the same unto strangers not used thereunto, did rather seem to
burn, then to give light. Traiane commanded an assault to be given unto the
city: the most valiant captains being mounted upon the wall, at an instant
some were slain, and some overthrown. Traiane disguised, and in disposition
to view the city, was of the enemies both known, wounded, and his Squire
slain.

The Agarens being demanded, if at that instant they had notice of the
Emperors person: they answered, that his gravity, and the majesty of his
presence did discover his estate. Traiane being at that siege, there arose
terrible lightening and thunder, which in that country was never seen: and
besides, there descended upon the Roman camp flies so many and importune,
that both their meat and drink, and their own persons, were continually
covered with the same. Traiane considering the city to be impregnable, did
retire his army. They say, that he said, at his retraite: Since the Agarens,
with mine armies, either my words, be neither subdued or persuaded: the
destinies have reserved this triumph for some other Prince in the world to
come. In the province of Cyrene, Traiane had a great army both of Greeks as
of Romans: and the praetor of those armies was a certain Roman named
Andreas, against whom the Jews of those parts did rebel, and slew both
captain, Greeks, and Romans. The Jews were not only contented to have
slain the Romans, but also brought the dead bodies unto the shambles, and
there did quarter, cut in pieces, and sold by weight: and with no less
appetite did eat that human flesh, then if it had been hens and fesants.
Adding cruelty upon cruelty, they brought forth certain Romans which
they had in prison, and did wage one with another, a deneere, or a point, to
strike off the head of a Roman at a blow. Another thing, not more vile then
horrible, the Jews committed upon those miserable Romans, that is, they
fleyed them quick, and tanned their skins for leather: and further, with
greatest disgrace, did cut off their most shamefast parts, and plaide and tossed
them as a ball in the market place. As the Jews left no Roman unslain, so
left they no cruelty or kind of death that they did not experiment: and in
this matter, we have no less to marvel, at ye hearts of the one to execute,
then of the patience of the other to suffer. That which was don by ye Jews of
Cyrene, was executed by ye Jews of Egypt, and of the Islands of Cypres, who
slew all the Romans within their common wealths: which slaughter was no
less, then 500000 Greeks and Romans. When these sorrowful news came unto
Traiane, he was very sick: but notwithstanding provided what was convenient
for so desperate a case: and presently sent Lucius into Cyrene, Marcus into
Cypres, and Seuerus into Egypt: who committed so great spoils among the
people, and executed so cruel justice upon the inhabitants, that if the dead
had been living, they would have yielded them selves for sufficiently revenged.
Elius Adrianus was captain unto Traiane for the guarde of Syria, and hearing
what had passed in this matter, soudeinly he descended into Jury, and did
execute therein a great slaughter: and they of Cypres, receiving warning by
this great treason, did ordeine that no Jew should dare to inhabit, or pass
into that kingdom: and that if tempest should bring them by chance into that
Island, to have no redemption thereof, but by the loss of their heads.

Traiane naturally was always of great health: but in the traueile of so many
provinces, following of so many wars, sailing upon so many Seas, and enduring
so many wounds, the grief or disease of the piles did not a little vex him.
But the case was thus: that from the day that Traiane might not pass into the
Indies, they never saw health in his person, or joy in his face. Through the
cause or disease of the piles, at change of weather, Traiane had a flux of
blood, which for his health was very profitable. Either by the cold which he
had passed, or angers which in him self he suffered, or great age, wherewith
he was laden: there increased unto the good Prince, a Pasma or numnesse of his
arm, and his purgation by flux of blood was stopped. Joining unto the city
of Seleuca, there were certain famous bathes, whereunto sick people of all
parts did concur, whether Traiane did cause him self to be removed, to make
proof for recovery of his health. And as experience, did after declare, those
bathes did not profit, but hinder: for being weak, consumed, and spent,
although he had force to bathe, he had no strength to sweat. Now when Traiane
saw him self without hope of life, he wrote a letter unto the Senate of Rome,
commending the state of his house unto Lucius, and the affairs of the wars
unto Elius Adrianus. He dyed in the city of Seleuca which is in the province
of Sicyl, which from thence forth was named Traginopolis, in the age of 63.
years, and in the reign of his Empire 21. years, 6. months, and 15. days.

The life of the Emperor Adrian: Compiled by sir Anthony of Gueuara, Bishop
of Mondonnedo, Preacher, Chronicler, and Counselor unto the Emperor Charles
the fifth. ()
CHAP. I. Of the lineage from whence Adrian descended, and of the place and
country where he was bred and nourished.
THE great Emperor Traiane being dead, Adrian succeeded in the Empire: who
was servant, friend, and cousin of the said Traiane. The beginning and lineage
of Adrian by the fathers side, was of Italy, borne in a city named Hadra: and
of the mothers side a Spaniard, borne at Cades, which now is named Calize, a
city of Andoloizia.

His fathers name was Elius Adrianus married unto a woman of Spain named
Domitia Paulina, a woman sufficient wise and fair, borne in the city of
Calize, she was niece unto the Emperor Traiane and his sisters daughter,
whom he did much love, for that of a child she was bred in his house. Adrian
had a sister named Paulina, who was married unto a Consul named Seuerinus: and
the graundfather of Adrianus was named Marillinus, of the lineage of the
Priscans: which lineage did not a little florishe in the time of the Scipions.
Adrian was borne in Rome the 9. day of February, in the consulship of
Vespasianus septimus, and Titus quintus: in the year of the foundation of Rome
488. Adrian had an high body of perfect proportion, except his neck, which
was somewhat stouping, his nose somewhat hawked, his face swart, his eyes more
gray then black, his bearde black and thick, his hands more of sinews then
of flesh, his head great and round, and a broad forehead, a great sign (as
he had) of great memory. When his father dyed he was but of ten years, who
left him for tutors, Vlpius Traianus, and Celius Tatianus, the one being his
uncle, and the other his friend: effectually requestinge to train and
instruct that child in wisdom and valiantness: for that he had no less
ability for the one then for the other.

At the age of ten years, Adrian studied Grammar, and after his fathers
death, his tutours set him to learn the Greek tongue, wherein he was so
learned and expert, that for excellency therein, in Rome they named him the
Greek child: for that he was as ready in the Greek tongue, as others in the
Roman speech. At the age of xvi. years, he had a desire to pass into
Spain, to see his old country, he arrived at Calize, where his mother was
borne, and from whence Traiane was native, and there leaving his letters, did
exercise him self in arms: because in those days the Spaniardes had there a
famous study of science, and the Romans held there a school for the wars.

Adrian both in leaping and running was very light: wherein it is said of
him, that he ran for many wagers, and not a few times by running and
leaping, did win, to supply his necessity. He greatly delighted to ride
swift running horses, and did much presume, to judge and make choice of them:
and after in his old age, he would vaunt and say of him self, that he never
road in coche, mule, or other beast, but an horse. In the time of Adrian his
youth, he was an enemy to idleness, and also of them that were given
thereunto: and many times said, that he remembered not since the age of ten
years, whether he stood still, or walked by the way, that he had not either
a book to read in, or some weapon to fight with. Adrian was naturally sharp
of wit, and of great life, most apparent, in that he was not satisfied, to
know what some men did know: but traveled to have skill in all things that
men understood: with Philosophers he would dispute, with masters at weapons
he would fight, with artificers he would work, and with painters he would
paint. Adrian did praise him self, and according to writings of old time, he
had great reason so to do: because there was no Art, science, occupation, or
invention in the world, that he knew not, or at the least did not travel to
know. When Adrian was young, he was but of small patience, for that he endured
not any to excel him, neither yet to compare with him: and rare was that
quarrel, which he did not make or maintain. When Tatian, Adrians tutor, did
reprehend him for his impatience, and because he was not mylde, as the young
man his cosen Emilius, he made answer: My cosen Emilius is not patient, but
for that he is a coward, and I by quarelling, am become valiant. Neither being
a child, or grown to more years: Adrian used not to break forth into foul
words, although they said, or did him great injuries: but indeed, although
his tongue were slow, his hands were very ready. Adrian was of a sound body,
except that sometimes he complained of his left ear, and that one of his eyes
at times did water: but two evils did not hinder his hearing, much less his
sight.

CHAP. II. Of some evil inclinations that possessed and had power in Adrian.
THe Emperor Adrian did much delight in hunting, which he did not exercise in
the plains, but in mountains for he took no care to flee with hawks, but to
fight with fierce beasts, to make a show of his valiantness. So given and
so venterous was Adrian in his chase, that with great reason I will not say did
reprove, but note, the time that he consumed: and that not only for much time
he spent therein, but for that many times he was in great danger. It happened
sometimes, that in following the chase of wild beasts, Adrian did loose
himself, in those rough and craggie mountains: whereof there followed not a few
times, that he would have eaten if he had had bread, and would have drank,
if he had had water. When he went to hunt, he carried his crosbowe to shoot,
his quiver of quarrels, and his wallet of victuals: and always did place him,
in the pace, where the beast should pass: and had so little fear, and so
desirous of chase, that if it were a bear, he did execute some adventure: and
if it were a Lion, he did abide him. It is not read, that he sieve any Lion, but
one: but bears and other cruel beasts, that he sieve with his own hands,
were infinite. Adrian followed most fiercely a certain beast with so great
desire, and did so travel to attain the same, that he fell over a rock, put
his shoulder out of joint, brake one of his legs, and cast much blood out of
his mouth. In the Province of Misia, Adrian built a city, which he did name
The chase of Adrian, because there he used to pitch his Pauilion, and from
thence at mornings he went forth to hunt, and at night did return to bed. He
had an horse very ready for hunting, which would stay and make ready as a
man, when he understood the chase coming: and therewithal ran as sure
down the hill, as up the hill. This horse was named Borystenes, which being
dead, Adrian did not only cause to be buried with much honor, but also
commanded for the same a very rich sepulcher of Marble to be made and
erected. Adrian did much esteem and delight, to paynt figures and counterfets
very naturally, and to grave in Marble with great skill and device: sometimes in
wax to make new inventions: and was in these Arts so curious, that he made
the Goddess Venus in Alabaster, and with a pencill did paint the wars of
Carthage: and of ware did form the whole Island Creta. And albeit, that in
these things he were ready and expert, jointly therewith he was very
ambitious: because he had as great envy, and also rancour at an artificer,
which was said to paynt or work more curiously then him self, as if the
maintenance of his living had consisted therein. There were in Rome two
excellent men, the one named Dionysius, the other Milesius, men right famous in
the liberal Arts: for that many in Rome did frequent their studies, but much
more did peayse their works: Adrian did take thereof so great envy, that
although he found no cause to kill them, he wanted not occasion to banish them.
A certain skillful carpenter in drawing plots for buildings, being in some
question with the Emperor Traiane, of the form and manner of placing of a
staire, Adrian being present, said his judgment somewhat besides ye purpose:
whereunto ye carpenter Polydorus answered: Master Adrian, if your cunning did
not serve you better to paint gourdes and coocumers, then to place stairs, you
should obtain a small credit amongst painters, as you have amongst artificers.
Although Adrian could dissemble those words, he might not in any wise forget
them: for after ye death of Traiane, he attaining the empire, those injurious
words were no more costly unto the sorrowful Polydorus, but to serve Adrian
for sufficient revenge, to take away his life. Adrian being so great a Grecian,
and also a Latinist, compounded certain works in Heroical meter, as also in
prease, and did much delight to have them praised, and could not endure but ye
some must read them. In those days the Greek tongue flourishing in Rome, brought
ye of Homer in great estimation: whereof Adrian did take so great envy, that
he gave straight commandment, that none should read Homer, either openly or
secretly, but the works of Anthimachus, who was a Philosopher most obscure.
Adrian had condition curiously to inquire, of common and small matters: whereof
he was both noted and murmured: because, Princes being given to make search of
trifling causes, prove variable in providing for matters of importance. Also
Adrian was of fickle disposition: for that at the souden, he would determine,
to perform some enterprise, and after grow cold, and incontinent omit the
same: of this, as of the rest, with great reason, he was noted and accused:
because grave Princes ought to have a reposed deliberation, and a diligent
execution. Adrian was in two things most extreme: that is to say, he used no
measure or weight in his love, or hatred: for unto whom he did love, he gave
all his heart: and where he did abhor, he did employ all his strength.
Admitting that this manner of love, or hatred, is tolerable in others, yet
most truly of virtuous Princes not permitted: because if they be unbridled in
love, in others which they love not, they cause envy: and if they be absolute
in hatred, they seek unto them selves great infamy: wherefore it is
convenient in love, to be discrete, and in hatred, provident and advised, He
was likewise most extreme, that if he praised any thing, he did advance it to
the clouds: and if it fell not into his favor, he dispraised it to the
deepest bottom: in such manner, that all said of Adrian, that in praising, he
was very gracious, and in nippes, tauntes, and gyrdes, not a little malicious.
Adrian had great delight in fair women, who was so absolute and also so
dissolute in that vice, that he did not only enjoy virgins, persuade married
women, but also in the houses of his very friends, he had his secret loves.
Of the one part, considering his injustice, and of the other part, the great
justice that he did execute: the historiographers would not place him amongst
the pitiful Princes: neither condemn him that were tyrannous: because most
truly if he did chastise some by justice, also he sieve others by envy.

CHAP. III. Of the friends and enemies which Adrian had.
ADrian being of the age of ninetene years, Traiane conceiving the ability and
towardness of the young man, as well in letters as in arms, sent to Spain for
him to come to Rome, with whom he did so behave himself, that for
entertainment, he did receive him into his chamber, and in his love, did place
him as a child. The natural bounty, and great ability of Adrian being in
appearance, Traiane from thence forth did so regard and fix his eyes, as well
to honor him, all the days of his life: as also to leave him Emperor, after
his death. Adrian being in so great favor with the Emperor Traiane, there
followed thereof in process of time, no small displeasures to his person, and
perils unto his life: for his enemies by envy, with the Emperor procured his
disgrace, and with their malice, did malign him with the people. It is an
ancient pestilence in the courts of Princes, that the Prince being pleased to
bear affection, or to honor any person, forthwith they join to murmur, and
procure to persecute the same. As Seuerianus being husband unto a sister of
Adrian, did murmur of him unto Traiane, saying yt it was a wonder unto all men
in Rome, to see Adrian to private, and so far in favor, and that they presumed
yt after his days, he should leave him the Empire: unto whom Traiane made
answer: Who has to succeed me in the Empire? only the Gods be acquainted
therewith: but admitting, that it were my will, and the Gods permitting, that
Adrian should succeed me in the Empire: I can say unto thee, that to govern
the same he will prove no fool, neither a cowarde to defend it. The answer
that Traiane made, was very good, and yet not without a secret taunt, for that
the Consul Seuerianus, had neither praised him for valiant, either held him
for wise. This Seuerianus was always a great enemy of Adrian, and did not
cease traveling to disgrace him with the Emperor: whereby Adrian happened at
times, to be both in favor, and disfavor: in such manner, that Adrian burned
betwixt two fires, which is to wit, ear to resist his enemies, and solicitude
in conseruing his friends. The first office that Adrian had in Rome, Traiane
being Consul, and Domitian being emperor, he was made a December viriato: that is
to say, he was appointed for one of the ten men, that were deputed, to determine
contentions amongst the people. Adrian gave so good account of his office, and
recovered in Rome so good fame, that he seemed sufficient unto al men, alone
and in his own person, to govern a common wealth: and so it came to pass,
that in the year following, he was deputed Tribune of the second legion: that
is to say, that he had charge to govern and correct the second capteinship,
of the armies that were in the wars: because it was a custom in Rome, that
every capteinship should have a captain to fight: and a Tribune to rule and
govern. The year of the tribune office being past, he was sent unto the
inferior Misia, governing that Province with so great prudence, and was of
such readiness and skill amongst those Barbarians, that some delighted to
obey him, and the others durst not resist him. Adrian was in no small
perplexity, for the doubt he had to be removed from Traianes favor, which he
suspected, to see him self in Misia, and his enemy Seuerianus with Traiane in
Rome: that upon any report that might be made of him there, ye malice of his
enemy had place to aggrauate, and he for him self being far distant, not
able to answer. Traiane had in his chamber one whom he much favored, named
Gallus, a most special friend unto Adrian: and Adrian being advertised, that
Gallus his most faithful friend was dead, made for him great obsequies, and
wept for him many tears. There succeeded in favor unto this Gallus another
named Surus, a man sufficiently wise and prudent: and also this, as Gallus, was
most special friend unto Adrian: and the very cause whereby he obtained the
favored to be his friends, was: for that in his gifts he was very liberal:
and to do for his friend, no less determined. Also Adrian gave him self to
content, serve, and please Plotina, Traianes wife, and used therein so great
skill, and came so far into favor with Plotina, that out of that so narrow
friendship, he gathered more profit, then she did honor. Traiane had in his
house a niece named Sabina, which was to marry, and requested for wife, of
many noble Romans: but Plotina and Surus traveled and persuaded Traiane to
marry her unto Adrian: affirming that with this marriage, he was excused of
two marriages, that is to say: to seek a wife for Adrian, and an husband for
Sabina. When as Adrian had presented many gifts, and offered many services
unto Plotina: partly for the great love that she did bear him, and for that
she had married him unto Sabina, she made him answer: Adrian, according to the
good will which I bear thee, it is small which I have done for thee, in respect
of that which I mean to do: for that I may do little with my Lord Traiane,
but as he has chosen thee to be his nephew, he shall also adopt thee to be his
son. After Adrian had obtained Plotina for his good Lady, Sabina for his
wife, and Surus for his friend, he little esteemed the enimitie of Seuerianus
his enemy: because in Traianes house, all did honor him as one in favor, and
did serve him as a master.

CHAP. IIII. Of the love that the Emperor Traiane had unto Adrian.
BY the marriage that Adrian had with Sabina, niece unto the Emperor Traiane,
there followed him, not a little, but very much profit: for, besides that he
was most in favor with the Emperor, and very well liked of the Empress
Plotina, the greatest part of the affairs of the Empire, was dispatched by his
hands. Adrian presuming of great eloquence, presented upon a day before the
Senate, a certain pastoral interlude, whereat the Senators and Orators did
greatly laugh: not only of that which he said, but also of the base style
wherein he did speak the same. He gave him self to the Latin tongue, and to
the Art of an Orator, wherein he grew so profound, yt they gave to him as great
glory for his speech, as unto Cicero for his writing. In the first wars that
Traiane had with the Datians, Adrian was made Questor, that is to say, he had
charge to provide, victuals and furniture for the camp: which was an office
amongst the armies, of great honor, and of much confidence: for he had both
the treasure in his custody, and the payment of the camp. When Traiane was
either sick, or not at leisure, on his behalf Adrian went to the Senate: but
the Senators although they did admit him to speak, they did not permit him to
exceed or to take the chief place: for it was a law amongst them much used,
that being assembled in the Senate, none should presume to clap his hands, to
cause silence, or co^mau^d the door to be shut, neither enter being clad with
a long gown, or to place him self in the highest seat, but only the
Emperor. Being notorious unto all men, that Adrian was private with the
Emperor Traiane, and in great favor with Plotina his wife, and therewithal,
that he was a man both prudent and politic: and although in the Senate not
permitted to the chiefest place, yet all things were directed by his counsel,
in such wise, that at home all things were done as he thought good, and
abroad as he did command. When it was known in Rome, that the king of Datia
eftsoons had rebelled, Adrian presently persuaded Traiane, in his own person
to go to that war, and to leave the enterprise to no other man: wherein Adrian
did follow and serve Traiane, more then any other captain: and certainly did
there so valiant and notable deeds, that with Traiane he obtained favor, and
advanced his person to great estimation. Adrian being thus notified in the
wars of Datia, Traiane thought it meet to commend unto him the second
legion, which was under the protection of the Goddess Minerua: and in such
manner did govern the same, and gave his soldiers so great courage, that he
was the man, that did most grieve the enemy, and least did fear perilles. The
thing most esteemed of the Emperor Traiane, was a Diamond which Nerua had
given him: this Diamond Traiane gave Adrian, in the time of the wars of
Datia, which was so kept and esteemed of Adrian, that until the day of his
death, it was never seen off from his finger. The wars of Datia being
finished, Traiane returned to Rome, leaving Adrian as Pretour of that Province,
Sussurus and Seuerianus being consuls. He had not long governed Datia, when
Adrian received from the Senate new provision to pass into Panonia: where he
was not only governor in causes of justice, but also had charge of all
martial affairs: because certain barbarous Danubians had entered those
Provinces, sacking and spoiling great countries. Adrian being arrived into
Panonia, did in short time expel the enemies, visited the countries, reformed
the armies, chasticed the Roman officers: and found by infourmation, that
they were great friends of idleness, and no enemies of robbery. The fame
being come to Rome, of the commendable government of Adrian in Panonia: in the
year following, in the Kalends of January, the Senate did elect him Consul:
and truly, as they were many, that did allow this election, so they were not
few that did resist it: but in fine, the procurers had more force in their
diligence, then the malice of them which resisted.

CHAP. V. Of the care and solicitude of Adrian, to obtain the Empire.
IN all Kingdoms and Provinces, where Adrian was either Pretour or Questour,
presently he made diligent inquisition, if there were any Magicians of
Soothsayers: and if he found any he did persuade them, with sweet words, and
rich rewards, to be certified, if after the death of Traiane, the Empire
should come unto his hands: for that he was not only desirous to obtain the
same, but careful to know the issue thereof. Being resident in the Province of
Mesia, he was advertised by a Mathematike, that he should be Emperor: and
demanding how and by what means, he understood thereof, answered: by a
certain friend which was not only learned in the natural courses, but also
did understand the secrets of the immortal Gods. Although Adrian was
resident in strange Provinces, he was not slack to serve the Empress
Plotina, and to please the chamberleine Surus: in such wise, that if his
enemies did think him far off, they found his service, always ready and at
hand. Now when Traiane was stricken in age, and become sickly, Adrian
continued no less diligent, to solicit Plotina and Surus, to persuade the
Emperor, to adopt him for his son: but on the other side the Consul
Seuerianus, Palma and Celsus, and other his enemies, did withstand: whose
diligence and malice did little profit, because they did but discover their
intent, and could not obtain their desire. Either by the only will of
Traiane, or by the importunity of Plotina, nor by the suite of Surus, either
by the merit of his own person, the Emperor Traiane determined to those
Elius Adrian to be his son, after his days to succeed him in the Empire:
for the Emperor had many kingdoms to give, but no son to whom he might
leave the same.

Before Traiane had elected Adrian, he was long determined, to make no
assignment of any person, to succeed him in the Empire, but to have used the
order of Alexander the great: who being demanded, whom he would assign to
succeed him in his Monarchy, answered, Unto the most worthy. Traiane made a
memorial, of all the most virtuous, wise, and of most worthiness within the
Empire: and jointly therewith, caused to be written of them, several Orations,
in Greek and Latin: and he him self did add with his own hand, what he
thought agreeable to their conditions and abilities. To the end that after his
days, the Senate might open and read the same, and from thence to make
election: not of him that did most procure, but that did best deserve. At one
time a certain Consul, named Neratius Priscus, was greatly in his favor, unto
whom he had thought to have left ye Empire, in so much, ye one day Traiane said
unto him: Neratius Priscus, from henceforth I comend ye Empire unto thee, if
any sorrowful or souden destiny shall happen unto me. All such as did
withstand the adoption of Adrian, did favor the election of Neratius Priscus:
but Fortune that should have framed the effect, brought Neratius into Traianes
great hatred, not a little to the profit of Adrian: because from thence
forth, although their remained enemies to hinder his intent, none as an
opposite, durst demand the same. When Traiane passed from Spain into Asia,
to the wars of the Parthians, Plotina and Surus, made great suite that Adrian
might be sent, as Pretour into Syria: who being in Antioche, was advertised
by a messinger from Traiane, which in times past had been his tutor, how he was
elected to be Traianes son, and assigned his successor in the Empire.
Exceeding was the joy that Adrian received with that news, which he did utter
in such excessive manner and degree, that presently he did celebrate, with
great games and feasts, the day of his nativity: and not only upon that day,
but every year, all the days of his life: because it was the thing, that his
heart most desired, and for the attainement whereof, he had employed his
greatest skill and strength.

At that time were Consuls, Sosius and Pretorius, with whom Adrian entered
new friendship: and the end wherefore he did undertake this new affection,
was, that as Plotina and Surus did solicit and procure the Empire with
Traiane, so those two Consuls should subsist him in the Senate: in such wise,
that if he did watch to obtain it, he did ouerwatch to sustain it. Not long
after that Adrian was adopted, that is to say, after fourteen months,
Traiane dyed: presently Plotina his wife, and the Consul Tatianus, being chief
friends unto Adrian, did take order and use great diligence, that Adrians
admission unto the Empire, might first be notified and known in Rome, before
the death of the Emperor Traiane: which was concealed and covered for
certain days, saying, that he was so sick, that he would not be visited,
until they were possessed of the power of the armies, and had obtained the good
will of the Senate. Adrian did write unto the Senators, giving them to
understand, that Traiane was at the point of death, and that also he was
assigned and adopted to be his successor and heir in the Empire: and did
right instantly request them, to take the same in good part, and therevppon
did promise, and swear unto them, to divide or give offices, but at their own
liking and consent.

CHAP. VI. How at Traianes death Adrian was declared Emperor.
THe news of Traianes death being arrived at Rome, presently it was published,
that the succession of the empire was committed unto Adrian: and upon the
confirmation, or refusal of this election, there arose no small contention in
the Senate: and the matter so far argued and prosecuted, by his friends, and
so resisted by his enemies: that it gave no small doubt of intestine wars, no
less cruel, then the wars betwixt Caesar and Pompey. The servant of
Traiane, the friends of Plotina, and the kindred and alies of Tatian, did use
such diligence in this case, that within three days they confirmed Adrian, in
the Empire: and the greatest cause to move the Senate thereunto, was: that they
had intelligence, that Adrian was in Syria, in full power, possession, and
authority, of the whole army: and might have been constrained to yealde by
force, which they refused to perform by good will. Presently after Adrian was
confirmed in the Empire, he did write unto the Senate, gratifying their
friendly fact, and requesting that Traiane might be collocate amongst the Gods,
since he had been a Prince so divine, whereto the Senate gladly consented,
saying: that although Traiane had finished his life, for evermore in Rome his
fame should endure. In memory yt Traiane had overcome the Parthians, they
ordained yt every year the Parthik plays should be celebrated in Rome, which
endured amongst the Romans many years: but in fine, they and their plays had
an end. Before all things, Adrian gave order, that the body of Traiane might
be brought into Italy, where it should be given a generous sepulcher, and to
effectuate the same, commanded his ashes to be enclosed in a box of Unicorn,
which also was enclosed with gold, and placed in a pillar of most excellent
marble, lyned with most rich purple: all which being lade^ into a gallie, he
sent Tatian and Plotina, with the body unto Rome: al Rome went forth to receive
ye body of Traiane: and as it is said and written, there was never so much joy
uttered for any man, that entered being alive: but much more sorrow was
discovered, for Traianes coming dead. Adrian stayed in Antioche, which is
the head of Syria, partly to assemble the whole army, and partly to recover
money: for being then winter, he could neither camp for coldenesse of the
weather: either march or journey for want of money.

Adrian was there advertised, how the Mauritans did defy him, the Sarmatians
did mutinate, the Britans did rebel, the Palestines resist, the Egyptians
disobey, and that all the Barbarians were in commotion. Finally, it is to be
understood, that upon the death of Traiane, al people and nations were so
escandalized, that it seemed not, but that he left the world without a master
or an owner. Adrian perceiving the greater part of the Empire in commotion,
determined to make them no war, but to entreat them by peace: and for this
cause he refused and forsook al those kingdoms and Provinces, that lay beyond
the river Euphrates, and the river Tygris, which the good Traiane had won and
conquered: in which conquest he employed his noble person, and gave end unto
his honorable life. Unto all kingdoms and Provinces, Adrian sent
Ambassadors, to confederate with some, and to confirm peace with others: and
with some he did capitulate things so slanderous, and with so great
disaduauntage: that it had been much better to have raised war, then to have
procured a peace so infamous. Parsnapate king of the Parthians, came to
complain unto Adrian, saying, that the good Traiane had given him that
kingdom, and crowned him with his own hands, and now upon the death of
Traiane, they would neither obey him, or suffer him to live within the
kingdom. Adrian would not, or else durst not, make wars with the Parthians:
but gave unto Parsnapate, the Seigniorie of certain countries and Provinces of
Syria, being vacant at that time, as Lord to enjoy the fruits thereof, and as
Roman Pretour to govern the people. When Adrian had obtained the Empire,
presently he published and said unto all men, that he would become a pitiful
Prince: and truly, in some pitiful causes, he did show him self to be the
son of Traiane: but in some rigorous matters, he seemed to be the brother of
Nero. A certain man named Bebius, was Prefect in Rome, who was contrary unto
Adrian, in all things that either touched his honor or profit: and being
counseled to kill Bebius, for that he ceased not to be his adversary, made
answer: I will not only permit Bebius to live, but also the office of
Pretour, which he held but for a year, I will confirm unto him during his
life. Laberius and Frugius, two Roman Senators, were banished unto the Isle
of Pontus, whom he commanded to return to their houses, and their goods to
be restored them: but the Consul Frugius being mutinous, moving commotion
betwixt Adrian and the Senate, he commanded to be thrown alive into Tyber:
and obtained no less honor, in the executing of the one, then in pardoning
the other. Unto certain Gentlemen of the army, that said unto Adrian in
times past, that he should be Emperor, he gave double rewards: affirming,
that he gave them not for their advertisement, but for their good will.

CHAP. VII. Of his entry into Rome.
Now when Summer was come, Adrian parted from Antioche to come to Rome: and
left for Preposite of Syria, Catalius Seuerus, and took his way through
Illyria, and determined to make war with the Sarmatians, which would not
receive the Ambassadors of peace. Lucius Turbon, that had been Pretour ten
years in Mauritania, came forth to meet him upon the way, with whom Adrian
had great friendship, being a young man, and in house with his Lord Traiane:
presently he made him Pretour of the Province of Datia, and Panonia. At that
time Lucius Turbon was in Africa, master of the horse men, of whom Adrian
was advertised, that he was very rich, and in great power throughout the
kingdom, and that he had not obtained all that riches, in the time of war,
but by briberie in time of peace.

Adrian was not a little grieved, of that which was said by Lucius Turbone,
because he was his friend, and also servant unto Traiane: but all this
notwithstanding, he applied all that he had, unto the common treasure, and
disarmed him of his knighthoode. As much as Adrian did increase in potencie,
so much did his enemies increase in envy: in such manner, that they could
neither incline their hearts to love him, either yeald their strength to serve
him. The case was thus, that Palma, Celsus, Sobaius, and Lucius, Adrian going
on hunting, were determined in the midst of the chase, to rid him of his
life: whereupon they were agreed, that in his swiftest pursuit of any wild
beast, they would attend him in the most thickest pace or track: and there
under the color to miss their level at the beast, would shoot and kill the
Emperor. All these four were men of noble blood, and rich in goods, and were
called Co^sulares: because at other times they had been Consuls: but as their
treason was discovered, first by justice they were beheaded, before Adrian went
on hunting. Great was the murmuring and mutiny throughout all Rome, when they
understood how Adrian had executed so cruel justice, upon these four
Consulares or noble men: partly for that they held opinion, that Adrian had
raised that quarrel against them: and partly for custom and manner, for that
few were the chastisements, which the good Traiane did execute, but great was
the number that received pardon. Adrian being advertised, that for the death of
the four Consulares, all Rome was escandalized, and that for a man revenging
and cruel, his person was defamed, determined with all speed to come to Rome,
to excuse him self of that fault. The affairs of Adrian stood not in so evil
estate, as upon the way, they gave him advertisement: which did well appear,
in that the Senate did offer him the triumph due unto Traiane, being cut off by
death to enjoy the same: but Adrian refusing, gave order, that the Image of
Traiane should be placed in the triumphant chariote: to the end that good
Traiane should not want a triumph, although but after his death. Presently
when Adrian came to Rome, he went to visit the Sepulcher of his Lord Traiane,
where his eyes did shed many tears, and for him did offer unto the Gods most
sumptuous sacrifices. All the Senate being joined, and also all the most
principal of the people, unto whom Adrian made a long oration: wherein he gave
them to understand of the state of the Empire: and did excuse him self of the
death of the aforesaid four Consulares: because the officers of the Senate
had made search and inquisition of the cause, and the Pretors of ye armies did
execute the sentence. The Senate did offer Adrian the title of Pater patriae,
but he would not receive it, affirming it to be one of the titles of his lord
Traiane: and since he had been a good father, it were great reason he should
prove a good son. It was a custom in Rome and throughout all Italy, that
when their Princes came newely to govern the Empire, that all cities and other
people should furnishe him with a certain sum of gold and silver: with the
gold to make a crown, and the silver for the service of his house: and
sometimes they did present so much gold to make the crown, that the remnant
was sufficient to maintain the wars. Adrian refused not only this service
to be demanded, but also returned that which was brought him: saying, that his
crown should be rich, when his subjects should be in wealth. The officers of
the treasury, that is to say, such as had the collection and keeping of the
mass of Rome, had raised great rentes, daily inuenting new manner of
tributes, in the common wealth: which being known unto Adrian, he commanded
all new impositions to be removed from the common wealth, and the inuentors
thereof to be displaced from their offices. Generally the Romans complained
unto Adrian of the dearth of victuals: forthwith he provided for provision of
wheat from Sicyl, wines from Candie, and oil from Spain: and further, gave
such prices unto the same, and all other victuals, that the poor might feed
with the rich. He did promise and swear in the Senate to put no Senator unto
death, although he were culpable, without the accused should first be heard,
and his cause considered by all the Senate: and truly this oath did excuse
Adrian of many executions, and was no less occasion that the Senators
committed many faults. Princes have to consider what they swear and promise:
for, from that day wherein Princes shall unable the^ selves, to punish vice and
sin, from thenceforth their vassals shall follow wickedness. In the year
that Adrian entered Rome, all things were dear, and the people not sound or
in health: who using great magnificence, commanded much money to be given to
the poor of the common wealth: in such wise, that it was not found that any
died for hunger, either suffered any extreme necessity.

There were many that had been banished, and diverse in prison for debt due
unto the Fiscall: that is to say, unto his chamber. Adrian gave commandment
by public proclamation, that all such debtes should be absolved, and that for
any such debte, none should be runnagates, either kept in prison. Adrian did
derogate the law and custom of his predecessors, which is to weet, that ye
goods of the condemned, should be for the Prince, which he commanded from
thenceforth to be employed not to his chamber, but to the comfort of the common
wealth: for he said and held opinion, that the Judge should never be grieved,
to punish offenders, when he should remember, to inherit a share of the
offenders goods. He extremely delighted when any person came to crave, and
much more did rejoice, if he had to give: but if by chance he had not to
satisfy his demand, at the least he gave him a friendly answer. From the
time that Adrian was in possession of ye Empire: he was never heard to say, or
name, Traiane: but, my Lord Traiane.

CHAP. VIII. Of the good conditions and inclinations of Adrian.
WIth much diligence and no less secrecy, Adrian inquired, what life the
Senators did lead, and what exercise they used: and such as he found poor
and virtuous, he augmented their patrimony: and such as he found rich and
vicious, he found mean to deprive them from ye Senate. Adrian was a Prince,
very skillful, and much considerate in punishing his officers and servants,
that is to say: he kept secret from the people the causes why he removed any
person from his office. And further, if he displaced any person from his
commodity, he did not forget otherwise to recompense him, in such manner, that
if he did chastise them, he did not dishonor them. Many times, did Adrian
speak these words: Whom I shall see esteemed and worshipped in the common
wealth, I will rather determine to take away his head then his honor. The re^ts
which the good Traiane left in many parts of Italy, for ye breeding of
children, the sustaining of widows, and the marriage of Orphans, he did not
only confirm, but also made better. All the servants of Traiane he did
advance to better offices: and such as were not meet for offices, he gave
the^ money. Adrian commanded search to be made, how many noble men were fallen
into poverty: and such as were decayed by mischaunce, he relieved: and such as
procured poverty by vice, he gave them leave to endure necessity. He gave
help to al ye Roman widows to marry their daughters, and he was not more
bou^tiful in giving relief unto ye daughters, then he was an enemy to succor
the sons: for he held opinion, that, that young man deserved not to be
married, that with his hands did not obtain a marriage. By three days space,
he did celebrate the feast of the god Genius: that is to say, the day of his
birthe: and commanded upon those days, to give pitances unto all ye people,
and he with all the Senators and nobles did eat and banquet in his imperial
palace: the cost whereof did not amount unto so little, but as they were three,
if they had been six, the rentes of the whole Empire had been spent, and
part of their treasure.

By the space of six continual days he did cause them to represent the game
of swoorde players: and the people craved certain other plays, which he would
not consent: not for that he delighted not therein, but to give them to
understand in Rome, that it appertained unto Princes, as much to moderate their
pleasures, as to give order for things of importance. Before Adrian was
Emperor, he was thrice Consul, for which cause he made diverse Romans three
times Consuls: and whereas some were offended, for want of like favor, he did
answer: Such as did exceed me in merit, ought to be equal with me in
dignity. Within the compass of Rome, never before the days of Adrian, were
permitted more then two Consuls: the one to govern the common wealth, the
other to go to the wars: but Adrian did add and create a third Consul: for
that if ye one should be sick, and the other resident in the wars, the
common wealth should not remain without an head. Tutinus a noble knight of
Rome, Adrian did create Senator, and gave him the ensigns of Consul, whereat
the whole Senate was offended: affirming, that the Emperor ought or might not
create in such manner: partly, because Tutinus was not of deserving, and
partly, for that the advice of the Senate should have been used therein.
Adrian was displeased with these words of the Romans, and from thence forth
did use more liberty in reparting offices, and less company in determining
causes. He held Seuerianus in great veneration, which had married his sister,
unto whom he gave both honor and great rewards: and at all times, when
Seuerianus came unto his chamber to confer, and to understand his pleasure,
Adrian came forth to meet and receive him at the door. Although Seuerianus
came to visit Adrian, and Adrian came forth to receive Seuerianus, yet
ancient and very mortal was the hatred betwixt them: for in this case, either
of them did utter and discover, to be possessed with a most vile intent: for
that Seuerianus did travail to deprive Adrian from Empire and honor, and
Adrian with no less facility did take away his life. When Adrian was in Rome,
at the least he went thrice a week unto the Senate: and if he were either
sick, or much busied, they did repair unto his presence: in such manner, that
nothing of importance did pass in the Senate, wherein they did not use his
judgment. Adrian, was of familiar conversation with his special friends, and
with his particular servant, with whom he went to eat in their gardeines,
to fish at rivers, to hunt in the fields, and all other such like pastimes.
Naturally he was given to have compassion of the sick, and herein he did
neither consider whether they were friends or foes: for that indifferently he
did visit them, and at his own charges did provide for them. He did not only
visit the sick, but also the old men, decrepite with age: of whom at large
he would inquire of the years that they had lived, the kingdoms they had
traveled, the dangers they had passed, the enemies which they had held, and
the necessities that they had endured, in such wise, that many times, of the
things which they had said, of times past, he took example for the time
present. Adrian was a most singular friend of virtuous men, and wise
Philosophers, and never wanted their company, either in war or peace:
because of the virtuous he learned how to live, and of the Philosophers how to
govern.

Turbone, master of the horse men had a son with Adrian, sufficiently
valiant, and with Adrian very private: but jointly with this, he held him for
presumptuous in speech, and covetous in dealings, because all which Adrian did
at his request and suite, he sold it all for money: the truth of this case
being known, Adrian received thereof so great displeasure, that presently he
commanded the young man to be apprehended, and that all things which by
briberie he had purloined should be taken from him, and restored unto the
owners, and to be transported as a banished man to the Isle of Pontus: unto
whom Adrian said, of this offense, thou shall remain chasticed, and I warned
for ever more, to show overmuch and extreme favor unto my servant, whereby
to convert love into pride, or to sell favor for couetise.

CHAP. IX. Of the manner which Adrian used with the men of war.
WHen Adrian parted from Almaine to come to Rome, not as then determined to
have stayed long there: but the occasion of his stay, was, for that the good
Traiane, in his latter years, was detained so long time in the wars of Asia,
and Europa, that the common wealths of Italy were grown to great and
overmuch liberty. Adrian departing from Rome, came straight unto Gallia
Transalpina: not to conquer but to visit the same. The frenchemen did much
rejoice at his coming, and in every province did him great service, because
Adrian was the first Roman Prince that ever entered France in peace, for that
all his predecessors brake in by violent hostility. Personally visiting all
Gallia, wherein he did erect new buildinges, repaired the old, reedified
temples, reformed priests, set at liberty certain gentlemen, gave gifts
unto the people, pardoned some offenses, and punished others: finally all his
deeds, were grateful unto the citizens, and profitable unto the common
wealth. The affairs of France being set in order, once more he returned to
pass ye Alps, and took his way into Almaine, without any disposition to make
war, but to procure peace: for that Adrian naturally was given friendly with
all men to have peace, which if they would not accept, he was not after easy
to entreat.

In the time that Adrian had most peace, then did he exercise his men of war,
as if he had been amongst his enemies: and for this cause he held opinion,
that al Princes did crave his peace, for that he was never unready to make
war. Adrian invented many devises, wherein his knights might exercise their
strength, as wagers to run, towers, and fortes of wood, and earth, to
assault, march ten against ten in combat: he sought out strong places to
practice the art of mining, provoked them to go to wrestling, and brought them
to rivers to learn to swim: finally, he held them so occupied, that they
desired rather to fight an whole day in earnest, then so many days in jest.
Also Adrian did use to feed of the common victuals of the camp, that is to
say, gross baken, rat eaten cheese, powdered beef, and barley bread: and if
any thing were dressed for his own person, more delicate then ye rest, he made
such division, that the least part came to him self. What more or less, he
always did wear some armor: and if by chance he found any gentleman
unarmed, presently he was checked of his wages: affirming, that the man that
goes unarmed, ought not to be entreated and honored as a gentleman. In the
armies, amongst the greater or less, better or worse, their work or exercise
was equally divided: which is to weete, when the time was to draw, all did
hale and draw: and when the time was to dig, all without exception at their
turn, did dig and mine: at the time of watching in their course, every man did
watch: in these travels he did no more excuse him self then others: for at
his turn, he did both watch and dig in the mine with his own hands. He had
not, neither consented in the wars, the use of high tables to feed on,
either portals to pass the time, neither canes to cool or recreate, either
warmed water to bathe, neither cookerie or dressing of meat, either selling of
sweet ointments: for he held opinion, that the good and valiant soldiers,
did not annoint them selves, but with the blood of enemies. Adrians garments
were not curious or costlye, but very cleanly, whereunto he was addicted, both
in diet, and apparel: and after a manner he did abhor such men as were not
nete and fine: affirming, that filthy men be always of drousie judgments.

In the wars he did never wear silk, purple, or rich vesture, either
buttons, or agglets of gold, or his dagger, swoorde, or armor gilte: but
notwithstanding very fine and strong. When any was notified in the wars, of
valiant and doubtie deeds, presently he did notify him, with great and
bountiful rewards: in such manner, that he did not defer to recompense at
Rome any service don in the wars. When he travailed through mountains, most
times he did alight to bring other men on foot, and did march xv. or xx.
miles in his armor: and this he did, to keep their horses fresh and lusty,
if they should hap to encounter with the enemy. He did always lodge within the
camp, and ordinarily he went from tent to tent, to visit the wounded, and
with the whole and sound to have conversation. Adrian was so familiar with his
men of war, that he called very many by their names, and knew all men by
their gesture: in such wise, that no enemy or stranger, might enter his camp
that to him was unknown. When a horsemans rome was vacant in the wars, the
captains sought out such as should succeed: but Adrian in his own person
would examine him, and this he did, to know his face, and try his strength.
Such as he did elect tribunes, or captains of his armies, were very valiant,
but not covetous: and jointly therewith, he admitted not young men without
beardes, either old men broken or decayed: doubting, in too much youth, want
of government: and in too much age, strength to fight. He made good pay unto
his men of war, straightly forbidding his captains to imbezill any wages, or
to take away present giving unto the soldiers: and this Adrian did, to avoid
necessity in the one, and couetise in the other. He did prohibit by a
public law, that none should carry unto the wars any superfluous thing,
and that none should presume to buy or sell any thing that was not necessary.
Very diligent to furnishe his camps with victuals, which being brought unto the
camp, he did so prise them, that the buyer was not robbed, either the seller
defrauded. Imitating Vegetius, Adrian did write a book, wherein he did
instruct the captains, how they should fight: and an order, how tribunes
should govern the armies: to conformity whereof he made many excellent
laws, which for long time were observed of the Roman Princes. In this case,
of order, provision, and correction of the men of war, they were only three
Princes that attained unto the chief perfection thereof: that is to say,
Augustus, Traiane, and Adrian, because all other Princes, held men of war
not to defend, but to dissipate the common wealth.

CHAP. X. Of the acts that Adrian did in England, France, and Spain.
ALl the time that Adrian was in Almaine, he did most occupy him self in
reforming his men of war into good customs and order, which he did not
without great prudence, after the manner of a good mariner, which in time,
when the Sea is calm, does dress and mende his fails, and order his anchors
against the storm and soudein chances that may follow in time to come.

From Almaine, Adrian came unto great Britain, which is now called England,
and there found peace, as in France, which was then holden for a great
marvel: because from the time of Julius Caesar, which did first conquer the
same, unto the days of Adrian, they were never without wars with the French
men, or rebelling against the Romans. Presently upon his entry into
Britain, he sought curiously to be informed of the laws they held, and of
the customs they used: which being perused and examined, some he did allow,
and some he did remove and make frustrate: especially, he did adnihilate that
law, whereby the man should hold ii. wives, and the woman.vii. husbands.
When Julius Caesar did conquer the Island of England, he brought many people
out of Italy to inhabit that country: and although the native, with the
stranger, held no war, yet lived they not in perfect peace: for the Britans
did term ye Romans new come men, and the Romans did call them Barbarians.
Adrian finding that no friendship might be framed by prayer, or amendment by
correction, devised to divide the kingdom in the midst: and the case was
thus: that in the mids of the kingdom, he made a wall from Sea to Sea, a
work most strange, wherein this Prince did employ great treasure. Adrian
being resident in Britain, was advertised from Rome of the want of good
government that was used in his wives house, by the occasion of certain
Romans, which adventured to accompany the Empress: whose conversation was
more to the prejudice of his fame, then to the profit of his service.
Septicius Prefectus, and Sortonius Tranquillus, which at that time were
Secretaries unto the Senate: these and others grew very familiar with the
Empress Sabina: whom Adrian sent commandment to be deprived of their
offices, and to be banished Rome, Sabina, Adrians wife, was holden to be frank
of speech, and of life somewhat licentious. Adrian did greatly abhor to have
Sabina unto his wife: and would say, not in secret, but openly, that if he
were a common person, he would have been divorced, for that in her
conversation she was presumptuous, and in life loose and dissolute. Adrian was
much inclined to understand, not only the conditions and inclinations of his
frinds but also of the manner which they used to live in their houses: for the
understanding whereof, he would inquire of the servant, slaves and laborers
that brought them victuals, what they did eat, and what they did drink, and
what their masters spent in their houses. Sabina wife unto Adrian, did write a
certain letter unto a Roman gentleman, complaining that he would not come to
visit her, through ye pleasures of Britain, and new loves in that country
yt he had taken in hand, which letter happening by chance into the hands of
Adrian, and the knight understanding thereof, neither went to Rome or abode in
Britan. All things set in order in great Britan, Adrian had intelligence, that
in Gallia Transalpina, which now is named sweet France, a popular sedition
was raised, in such evil manner, that if it were not presently cut off, it might
break out into a long and cruel war. All the contention was raised upon
certain bounds and pastures, in a place called Apim: Presently Adrian passed
into Gallia, and personally went to see ye marks and bounds thereof: and the one
and the other heard, he did divide those bounds and limits equally betwixt
them. When as a Roman said unto Adrian, yt it was the office of a poor
Judge, and not of a mighty Emperor, he answered: I had rather divide bounds
in peace, then conquer countries with war. Now, when Adrian would depart
from France, he received news from Rome, how Plotina wife unto Traiane was
dead: and as she had been his only mistress, and his special friend, he felt
her death so sensibly yt besides sighing and weeping, he grew so extremly
sorrowful, yt he did not eat in long time. He staide in the place where he
received these news many months, and presently did write unto ye Senate, yt
Plotina should be adored amongst ye Goddessses: and on the other part, he
commanded costly and generous sacrifices to be offered for her: he did edify
unto her honor and perpetual memory, a temple near unto Mansin, which he
erected upon pillars of marvelous marble, and did endue with great riches.
The affairs of France being dispatched, he came by ye Pyrinea^ hills, into
Spain, and stayed a whole Winter in the city of Taragon: which in those
ancient times, was the most strong, rich, and also most esteemed in all
Spain. When the Emperor Octauius did conquer Cantabria, he did build in
Taragon, a most noble house, which by the antiquity thereof was much decayed:
ye emperor Adrian at his own cost, co^mau^ding to be reedified in such wise,
yt by repairing the decayed edificies, he renewed there ye name of Romans. The
imperial house being made, Adrian kept court there with all the mighty and
noble men of Spain: where and with whom he made many and good laws: and in
especial, he commanded that the father which had but one son, should
commit the same unto the wars, if he had twain, the second should be
committed unto science, and the third should learn some occupation in the
common wealth.

The Spaniardes complained, that the ships of Italy did transport many
things out of Spain, that is to say, gold, silver, silk, oil, yarne,
wheat, and wine: and out of Italy, they brought nothing into Spane: whereupon
Adrian commanded, that no strange ship should lade any thing out of Spain.
Adrian gave great rewards unto many, and some for company, he caused to go
with him, and others some he gave offices both by Sea and land, of great
honor: and generally, he gave money unto all cities, to repair their decayed
walls, in such wise, that all Spain, of him, held them selves right well
contented. There in Taragon, Adrian walking alone in a garden, by chance, a
young man being mad, brake forth upon him with swoorde drawn: Adrian,
although without armor, did take away his sword, without commandment of
correction, either to him or his master, and also with great pity, provided
for his cure: of which deed Adrian was praised for valiant and pitiful. Also
in the province of Taragon, they had cote^tion for their bounds, wherein Adrian
provided to plant land marks of stone, after the manner of pillars, to the
end, that they should neither be stolen or changed.

CHAP. XI. How Adrian did pass into Asia, and of the things that chanced
there.
ALl the provinces of Spain being visited, Adrian made his navigations, by the
Sea Mediterrane unto the Isle of Sicyl, where he mounted the hill Aetna, to
behold the marvelous things therein contained: from whence he descended more
in fear and abashed, then either instructed or satisfied. Adrian being
descended from the hill Aetna, astonished, wearied and also derided, staide not
in that kingdom, but to visit the works of the good Traiane, which he did
amplify with buyldinges, and endued with patrimonies. Adrian being resident in
Sicyl, understood that Asterlike the greatest lord of Germany was dead, in
whose place he presently created a king, whom he sent to govern the same,
both well received, and better obeyed: because the Germans held them selves
escandalized, in that they had not kings to govern them, but Consuls to
chastise them.

The Mauritans, and the Numidians being divided in cruel dissension, and
understanding that Adrian was in Sicyl, ready to pass into Africa: amongst
them selves they cut off all causes of war, and concluded an assured peace.
At that time also the Parthians soudeinly did arm them selves, came into the
field, made captains, and fortified their frontiers: and brought their
seigniorie to be over the Romans, and not the Romans over the Parthians.
Adrian being advertised of this commotion, prepared a great army to pass
into Asia, and also did write unto the Parthians, giving to understand, that he
held them as his friends, and the Senate esteemed them as brethren, and not
as vassals: wherewith the Barbarians were so much satisfied, that presently
they left their armor, and proclaimed peace throughout the lands.
Notwithstanding, he was advertised of the Parthians retire, he always
continued his navigations into Asia: and descended first in Achaia, and entered
Elusin, a famous city of that province: and leading a great army, and
possessing but little money, he seized the sacred things of the temples,
saying, that he did it not, as a Romain Prince, but as a Grecian: for that
Hercules and Philip being Greek Princes, had first done and attempted the
same. He alone did enter the temples of Asia, which was holden for great
valiantness: because without armor, he entered amongst the armed Priests:
and being demanded, why he would enter to rob those temples alone and
unarmed, answered: because, from our barbarous enemies we take by violence,
but from the Gods by request.

Adrian departed also unto Athens, and curiously did consider the order of
their studies, and the manner of their life: and said, that in Athens, there
was nothing perfect, but Agonata the swoorde player: because he had greater
readiness and skill to play with the swoorde, then the Philosophers in
teaching Sciences: Which notwithstanding, he did greatly honor the
Philosophers: and to some towns, he gave great liberties: from thence, he
returned to Rome, where he stayed but to visit, to honor, and also to bewail
and mourn upon the tumbe of Plotina. Which being finished, Adrian again went
into Sicyl, and from thence into Africa, where he did visit many towns and
cities, reedified certain buyldinges, banished diverse Numidians, and also
Mauritanes, for their mutinies. From thence he did pass once more into Asia,
straight unto Athens, where he finished a certain temple which he had begone,
dedicating ye same unto the God Jupiter, wherein he did ingraue the Image of
Traiane, and did paint with his own hands the figure of Plotina, his most
especial sovereign lady and mistress. The greatest exercise that Adrian did
use in Asia, was in buylding, repairing, and consecrating temples: wherein he
did place his name, and paint with the pencill, or else in Alabaster did grave
his figure.

Adrian feasted and made a great banquet unto king Cosdroe, at that time king
of Parthians, and also did restore him his daughter, which was committed for
hostage unto the good Traiane, and a litter curiously wrought with silver,
gold and Unicorn, and gave him also many other jewels. Many kings of Asia
and other great Princes, came to visit and to honor Adrian, who gave them
all so noble entertainment, and so highly rewarded them, that great was the
honor and magnificence he obtained amongst them. Pharasmano king of the
Albans refusinge to visit the Emperor Adrian, and to renew the league made
betwixt him and the good Traiane: not many days after, Adrian wanted not
occasion to dispossess him of his estate, and to banishe him all Asia,
constrained thereby to crave upon his knees, which would have been given him,
sitting in his chair. Adrian, traueiling and iourneying throughout Asia,
visiting his presidentes, procurors, and chief officers, finding amongst them
faults of great enormitie, did punish the same with most cruel
chastisementes. The cause is not unknown of the displeasure that Adrian did
bear unto Antioche, which hatred was so great, that he travailed to divide
Syria from Phoenicia, to the end that Antioche should not be the head of so
many provinces. Visiting also the whole country of Arabia, he came unto the
renoumed city of Peluno, only to visit the sepulture of the great Pompeius,
which he renewed and enriched, and also did offer great and sumptuous
sacrific^s, in the honor of the great Pompeius: whereof the Roman people
being advertised, received no small delight. He did not only honor the
sepulture of Pompeius, but also gave great rewards unto the people of
Pelusio, because they had that sepulcher in reverence, placing upon the
sepulcher with his own hands this verse as follows: Ossa viri magni, tenni
quam blausa sepulchro.

How small a tumbe of lime and stones,
Conteines a valiant warriors bones.
CHAP. XII. Of the great liberality that Adrian used, and some cruelties that
he committed.
ONe of the things, wherein the Emperor Adrian deserved most justly to be
praised was, yt with al me^ he used great magnificence and liberality: for that
naturally, in receiving he was a niggard: but in giving very bountiful. There
was not ever any thing demanded, that he gave not: if it were not prevented by
some others suite, which always he did recomfort with hope for time to come.
The rewards of his nobleness, was the gift of towns, cities, castles,
Provinces, kingdoms, mountains, rivers, flocks or heardes, salt marshes,
milles, offices: and not only such as happened in the government of the common
wealth: but also he gave the horses out of his stable, the garments for his
person, the provision for his dispences, and the money for his chamber: in such
wise, that to deliver others from necessity, he brought him self in to want
of provision. Adrian in his life was noted of diverse weaknesses and defections,
which were both colored and covered, with his large and bountiful gifts.
Great were the rewards that he gave unto Epiteus, and Eliodorus philosophers:
but much more was his liberality toward Phauorinus, because he both gave him
great goods, and honor in the common wealth. His custom was, when he sent
for any to serve him in the wars, to give him al things necessary for ye
same, that is to say, armor to fight, and money to spend. Adrian being
advertised of a noble gentleman of Numidia, named Malacon, a man both valiant
and warlike: who refusing to receive the usual reward that Adrian gave unto
such as did accompany him in wars, said unto him: It is more reason that I
should prevent thee, in doing mine office, then thou should precede me in
doing thy duty: which is to say, that before thou begin to fight, I should
begin to gratify thee: for in the end, it is much more that thou do for
me, in aduenturing thy life, then I in rewarding thee with my goods. Many times
Adrian would boast him self, that he could never remember that he had eaten
alone, but always did eat in the company of Philosophers that disputed in
Philosophy: either else of capteines, that did talk and confer in matters
of war.

He was neat in his apparel, curious and delicate in his diet. Examining the
order of the diet of his household, and finding the provision provided for the
honor thereof, to be imbeziled and purloyned by officers, he commanded them
to be whipped, and turned out of his gates: for notwithstanding, he had a noble
mind, to give a Province for a reward, he had not patience to suffer or
endure, the deceit or stealth of a penny. Adrian was a man both severe,
gladsome, grave, courteous, pleasant, suffering, rash, patient, furious, a
sauer, liberal, a dissembler, pitiful, and cruel: finally, he was variable
in his vices, and inconstant in virtues: because he did not long abstain from
evil, either long continue in doing good. Adrian unto his friends, was both
grateful and unkind: that is to say, he gave them much goods, and did not
much esteem their honor. Great inconvenience did follow the Emperor Adrian,
for his infidelity and want of faith unto his friends: which did most
clearly show it self in Tatianus, Nietus, Seuerus, and Septitius: whom at
one time he held for friends, and after did persecute them as enemies.
Eudemius a noble Gentleman of Rome, he was so great a friend with Adrian, that
he offered sacrifices unto the gods to give him the Empire: and after Adrian
did bear him so great hatred, that he did persecute him, not only to cast him
out of Rome, but also until he had brought him to extreme poverty. Polenus
and Marcellus, were of Adrian so evil handled and persecuted, that they chose
rather to dye with their own hands: then to live under his government.
Eliodorus, a most famous man in letters, both Greek and Latin, was not only
of Adrian persecuted, but also put to death, and torn in pieces: whose death
was much be wailed for that he was profitable unto the whole common wealth.
Oluidius, Quadratus, Catalius, and Turbon, ancient Consuls, were by Adrian
persecuted, although not put to death, because every one seeking to save his
life, were banished Rome and all Italy. The noble Consul Seuerianus, husband
unto Sabina, sister unto Adrian, of the age of a hundred and ninety years,
was constrained to dye, for no more, but for that he had reported to have lived
the death of thirtene Emperors, and that if Adrian should dye first, it should
make up the number of xiiij. the which, when Adrian understood, he rather
determined to take him from amongst the living, then he should reckon him
amongst the dead. In all things Adrian was very well learned: that is to say,
reading, writing, singing, painting, fighting, hunting, playing, and disputing:
but that he had therewith a tache or a fault: which was, that if he knew
much, he presumed much, wherein he was noted of all men, because he scorned
all men. After he entered into Egypt, he gave him self unto Astrology: and
held for custom yearly to write out of that science, of al things that should
happen that year: which also he did in the year that he dyed, but obtained
not the knowledge thereof.

Adrian in one thing did seem to excel, in that he never desired the
knowledge of any faculty, art, or science: but that he procured to be
singular. He overcame many wars with arms, but he did appease and cut off
many more with gifts: because unto diverse peoples, cities, and towns, he gave
liberty and privileges, and to his Lords and viceroyes, he gave great
rewards. Although in some particular things, touching both friends and
enemies, he showed him self both affectionate, and also passionate:
universally, as touching the weal of the commonwealth, Adrian was always
friend in ministering justice. When there happened any grave matters, at the
souden, he would furiously be altered: but at the time of judgment and
determination, seriously he did both consider and examine them. He did sildome
determine matters without counsel, and to this end chiefly used the advice of
Siluius and Neratius, the most learned of that age, and approved by the Senate.
Naturally, he was of an unquiet heart, and of condition intermedling. It did
happen unto him many times in reading of histories, when he found of any place
or country, that was possessed of any extremity, or singularity, that he
could not come to the view thereof, with extreme desire, he did many times
grow both sick and sorrowful. Notwithstanding he was large and of great
magnanimity with Philosophers, with countries, with men of war, and with his
friends: much more was his magnificence to the ministers of justice: and being
demanded of Fauorinus, why he was so bou^tiful unto them, answered: I make the
ministers of justice rich: because, by robbery of justice, they shall not
make other men poor.

CHAP. XIII. Of the laws that Adrian made.
MAny and right necessary laws were made by Adrian, which were approved by
the Senate, and received of the common wealth, and long time observed. He did
ordeine, that if any man would remove from one city to an other, that at his
own liberty he might sell his house, but not to adventure to pull it down,
either to sell or make profit of the stuff thereof: because the authority of a
common wealth is impaired, when the buildings be ruinated. He did also ordeine,
that when any man was condemned to dye for offenses of great enormitie, and his
goods confiscate, that his children, should enjoy the tenth part of those
goods: in such wise, that for that, which was taken from them, they had to
bewail the offense of their fathers, and for that which was given them, they
should feel, and also commend the clemency of the Prince.

Also there were certain cases forbidden, in which if any man did fall, or
incur, he was accused as if he had committed great treason against the
estate Royal of the Prince: all which Adrian did remove and adnihilate:
affirming, that those laws, were but of small service, to the behoof of the
Prince, and to the great offense of the common wealth. Also the Roman Princes
did use to inherit the goods of strangers: wherein Adrian did ordeine, that
the children, or the next of the kin should inioye the same. Also he
ordained, that what so ever he were, that found hid treasure, in his own
inheritance, should enjoy the whole: and if it were found in an other man's
inheritance, the owner thereof should have the one moitie: and if it were
found in public or common place, that then it should be equally parted with
the Confiscator. Also he ordained, that no man what so ever, of his own
authority should kill his slave, for any offense: but to be remitted unto the
Judge, deputed by the Prince. Also he made a law of refourmation, both for
eating of superfluous meats, and also for wearing of garments, either too
many, or over costly. Also he did ordeine, that none what so ever, should go
or be carried in a litter: and one which he had, he commanded for example, to
be burnt, in the market place. He also commanded that Consuls, and Senators,
within the compass of Rome, should wear their gowns, which was a garment of
peace. He also ordained, that young men that wanted their parents, should have
tutors unto the age of five and twenty years: although they were married. He
also did ordeine, that no slave should be sold, either man or woman, to any
ruffian, iester, or iuggler: affirming the possession of slaves, to be most
unjust, unto such as wander in idleness all the days of their life. Also he
did ordeine, that merchants, or such as dealt with exchange, that brake their
credit, or were bankrupts without just cause, but only of covetousness, by
defraude to enrich them selves: to be set upon the pillorie in the market
place, and afterward to be banished Rome for evermore. He did ordeine, that
none what so ever, should suffer execution within the city of Rome: affirming,
that so generous a city, and consecrate unto the Gods, were not convenient to
be defiled with the blood of wicked men. Also he did ordeine, that men and
women should have their several bathes, and that who so ever should enter
into the forbidden place, to suffer death for the same. Also he did ordain,
that neither for the Prince or Consuls, any victuals should be taken from any
man: but that every man might sell to whom he would, where he would, and how
he might. He did ordeine, that no woman should adventure to heal with words,
either that any man should presume to cure with co^pound medicines: but to
perform all their cures, with simple herbs. In buildings he did chiefly
imitate his Lord Traiane: that is to say, that in all countries, Provinces, and
kingdoms, where he had been, he erected many and very famous buildings:
wherein it is to be noted, that he never placed his own name, but in the
temple of Traiane. In Rome, in a manner he wholly renewed the temple named
Pantheus, dedicated unto the Goddess Berecyntha, and where all the Gods were
honored. The field of Mars in old time was compassed, and by great
antiquity the buildings fallen flat unto the ground: wherein Adrian did not
only renew the decayed walls, but also did furnish ye same with very stately
buildings. He edified the real palace named Neptunus, he enlarged the palace
of Augustus, he reedified the bath of Tyberius, he much advanced the temple of
Titus: in all these edifices, he placed the names of the Princes that in times
past built them, and not his own name which had reedified them. From the
foundation he built a stately bridge, which was afterward named Adrians
bridge. He made also for him self a sepulcher, joining unto ye river Tyber, ye
stones whereof were brought from India, and the workmen out of Greece. He
translated the temple of the Goddess of good Fortune, and the figure of Decian
the artificer that was placed therein: that was of so great weight, that hardly
four and twenty Eliphants might remove ye same, the which figure was
dedicated unto the Sun: Adrian did erect one other to be dedicated unto the
Moon, of no less weight or riches then the other: whereof the great Polydore
was workman. He built in Rome a certain building, which many years after was
named, the mole of Adrian: and at these days is called, the castle of of Saint
Angelo. He removed many rivers out of their channels to water the fields,
brought many fountains, for provision of cities. In Greece he edified a city,
which in time past, was named Adrianopolis. In the kingdom of Palestine, he
reedified the great city Jerusalem, which had been destroyed by Titus and
Vespasian, and gave it for name, Elia, for that his own name was Elius
Adrianus.

CHAP. XIIII. Of some of his gracious and pythie sentences.
THe Emperor Adrian was a Prince, not only sharp of judgment, and provident
in his affairs, but also of great vrbanitie, and gracious in speech. And the
case was thus, that Fauorinus a very friend to Adrian, having an old house,
at the enterie whereof, he had raised a stately porche painted white, he said
unto him: This house of thine, seems a gilded pill, which outwardly gives
pleasure, but within is full of bitterness. An other friend of Adrians, named
Siluius, very black of face, and of evil shape of body, and coming on a
certain day unto the Palace, all clad in white: Adrian said unto those that
were present: That black face with that white garment, seems no other but a
fly drowned in a sponefull of milk. The Emperor Adrian, upon a time from
his Palace, beheld a Senator, in a long black gown, wearing upon the same a
short crimson cloak in grain: and demanding, why he did wear such apparel
in that place: the Senator answered. Sir, I walk here with this red cloak,
to see if my good hap may chance to fish some fair Lady. Whereunto Adrian
readily answered: Thou seem rather a red worm to fish frogs, then as a man
enamoured to fish Ladies. A certain person with a hoarie head, craving a
reward, which at that time the Emperor denied: the said hoare headed
fellow, remembering him self, pouling his head, and shauing his bearde, came
again unto the Emperor, to renew his suite: and Adrian beholding how he was
altered, made fresh, and grown young, did answer: That which now thou
crauest, I denied unto thy father. They held in Rome many fierce beasts, to
magnify a day of great feasting: and when certain Senators said unto
Adrian, that it was somewhat late, and high time to go chase the beasts, he
made answer: Ye might better have said, to be chaced of them, then the beasts
to be chaced of men: for if there be ten that dare abide them, there be ten
myllians that run away.

There was in Rome, a certain man named Enatius, somewhat entered in age, and
of natural condition, mutinous, ambitious, importune, intermedling,
quarellous, and full of garboyle: and being advertised that Enatius was dead,
he fell into a great laughter, and swear, that he could not a little marvel,
how he could intend to dye: considering his great business both night and
day. A certain ancient citizen coming unto the Emperor Adrian, for
certain suites and causes propounding his demand, and also replying an
answer without intermission, removing without all manner, any mean for the
Emperor to speak, answered: Friend, if thou feed on both cheeks, we may
not eat both together: Surely, it was an answer very fair, and of great
vrbanitie: for, thereby he gave him to understand, that if he both propounde
and answer, he could not give him justice. There was a Senator in Rome, named
Fabius Cato, of ancient years, and amongst the people, in great credit: but
jointly therewith he was a man of a small stature, which would soon be
offended, and as soon be pleased: unto whom on a time Adrian said: Since
your chimney is so small, you must beware to lay much wood upon the fire: for
otherwise it will be always smoakie.

CHAP. XV. Of the things that he did worthy praise, and some other things
worthy dispraise.
THe Emperor Adrian, did use and entreat such as did serve him, very well and
with great affection: but he might not endure them, to presume to be over
private: for he would say, that he held them not to command him, but to serve
him: and grew not a little displeased, with such as were not moderate in their
deeds, and courteous in their words. Being in Spain in the city of Taragon,
he beheld in a garden, one of his mean servant, walking betwixt two
Senators: unto whom he commanded to be given a great blow, with this
advertisement: The Emperor commands this blow to be given thee, because thou
shall be ashamed to presume to walk, with such as thou art bound to serve. In
his diet he was neither temperate, much less a gormound that used excess: for
that he left not to eat of any thing, in respect of health, or virtue: but
without diet, did eat, both what and when he liked. In wine he had a good
relish, and at times drank thereof so frankly, that he hindered the health of
his person, and also the credit of his fame. There was in his days great
earthquakes, pestilences, dearth, and hunger: in which calamities, he showed
him self a pitiful Prince, and of great magnanimity: because in time of
hunger, he gave the people wherewith to be sustained, and in time of
earthquakes, money to reedifie. He discharged many cities of their whole
tributes, and to others some part he released: in such wise, that in all his
Empire there was no city, that newly received not, some benefit at his hand,
either delivered not from some old payment. In the first year of his Empire,
the river Tyber did so ouerflowe, that three days damage thereof, was not
repaired in three years. He was of the men of war much feared, for that he
did chastise them: and no less beloved, because he did pay them. The chiefest
cause, of his great praise in Chronicles, or of writers of histories, and the
tender affection that the Romans did bear him, proceeded, that in time of
peace, he held his men of war in great civility: and in time of war, he
governed the common wealth, as if it had been in peace. Always when the
Senators repaired unto him, either to eat, or for affairs, he did always
entertain them standing: and if they were Consuls, he came forth to receive
them, and if they were Judges, he did rise when they came before him: and if
they were officers of the Senate, he would somewhat stoop or nod with the
head: in such wise, that with all, he used great courtesy: and in speech
and conference, no less vrbanitie. To repair temples, to provide priests,
and to offer sacrifices, he was a Prince both careful and diligent: and
jointly therewith it is to be noted, he consented not to the invention of new
devices, and much less did he admit strange customs.

CHAP. XVI. Whom Adrian did adopt to succeed him in his Empire.
AFter the Emperor Adrian had traveled in a manner throughout the world, by
sea and land, and passed both cold and heat, he fell into a grievous
sickness: he himself, giving occasion thereof, for that in his diet, either in
the time of heat, or cold, did sildome or hardly use any order. Presently
upon his sickness, his heart was touched with great care, upon the
determination, whom he should adopt to the succession of the Empire: because
many did follow him, that did much desire it, but very few that did deserve
it. The death of Seuerian, Dion does report, was after this manner. Adrian on a
certain day at his dinner, said unto the Consuls that sat at his table: I
would have you name me ten men, in science learned, and sincere of life: unto
one of which I may commend, after my days, the estate of the common wealth.
They all using silence unto that demand, Adrian said: reckon me but nine, for
I have one, and such a one, as is my brother in law, Seuerian: for that he
has both age, and gravity, After a few days, that these things did pass,
Adrian being in great danger through a flux of blood, that brake forth
without ceassing at his nose: doubting that first his life should have
finished, before the blood would have staunched: did point with his finger,
Lucius Co^modus to be his successor. And after recovering more health, he was
advertised, that Seuerian and Fuscus his nephew, continued murmuring, at that
which he had commanded: and that unto him the Empire was not directed: Adrian
began to disdain and abhor him with great hatred. This Seuerian of the age
of ninety years, Adrian commanded to be slain: because he set him self in
the imperial chair, and gave unto such as were in favor with the Emperor, a
solemn supper, and because in secret, he had conference with the capteines of
wars. Before that Seuerian dyed, he determined to have given the Empire unto
the Consul Fuscus, which was his nephewe: but when Adrian understood, that
Fuscus had conference with Magicians and Soothsayers, to be advertised, if he
should enjoy the Empire, he put him to death: in such wise, that he both lost
the inheritance, and also his life. Pletorius Metus, came to visit Adrian in
his sickness: which being his great friend, he would neither hear nor see:
because he did imagine, yt he came not to visit, but to inherit. Gentian the
Consul, a noble and ancient Roman, also he persecuted, for no other cause,
but for that he understood, he was both liked and honored of the Senate: and
that all men did hope he should succeed him in the Empire. The Emperor
Adrian did never show him self so cruel in his life, as he did somewhat
before his death: because all those that he thought, did hope to succeed him
in the Empire, he commanded to be banished or slain. Being sick in a
village, named Tiburtina, of a flux of blood, where he remained many days
both desperate, unruly, and out of temper: for that he had no patience, to
think that he should dye, and an other should succeed him.

There was always some unkindness betwixt him, and the emperesse Sabina, but
in the end, Adrian used such skill, that secretly he gave poison unto his wife
Sabina, whereby she finished his life, and he lost his suspicion. When Adrian
perceived that of necessity he must needs dye, and that an other must have his
Empire, he appointed Cenoio for his successor, son in law unto Niger: and
this he did against the minds of all them which did serve him, and also of
all such as did best love him: because many others seemed to be of more
deserving, and also of more ability to govern the Empire. Unto this Cenoio he
gave the name of Elio vero Caesar: and to the end it should be grateful unto
the people, and confirmed of the Senate: he gave them the Circen plays, which
was unto them very acceptable, and did distribute throughout Rome, four
thousand Sextercies. Presently upon the adoption of Cenoio, he gave him the
Pretourship, he placed him before the Panoniaes, which were admitted to go
next his person, did create him the second time Consul, did set him at his own
table, and did permit to accompany him in the litter: finally, Adrian did
entreat him as his son, and all did serve him as their Lord.

Presently after that, Cenoio was adopted, he fell sick, of the disease of
death: in such wise, as he had not leisure to give thanks unto the Senate:
whereof Adrian being advertised, said unto the Senate: Unto a weak wall were
we stated, that day when Cenoio was elected. Cenoio dyed in the Kalends of
January, for which cause he was not bewailed of the people: for that month
being dedicated unto the God Ianus, no Roman durst bewail the dead, either
utter any sorrows for the living. Adrian finding him self more oppressed with
infirmity, did adopt and declare Antoninus Pius his successor: upon
condition, that he should adopt the good Marcus Aurelius, and his brother
Annius Verus. The adoption of Antoninus, was displeasant unto some, but
especially unto Attilius Seuerus who with great care did solicit the Empire
for him self: and at that time being Prefect of the city, some he did corrupt
with money, and some with fair promises: but Adrian being advertised of ye web
that Attilius had in hand, did not command him to be slain, but to be
banished all Italy.

CHAP. XVII. How and where the Emperor Adrian dyed.
ON the day that Adrian commanded the old Seuerian to be put to death, before
the executioner came to cut his throat, in a vessel he put certain coals,
adding thereunto some incense, lifting up his eyes unto heaven, he said: You
immortal Gods I take to witness, if I be culpable wherein I am accused, and
for which this day I am condemned and put to death, and jointly therewith I
request and beseech you, that in testimony of my innocence, ye give me no
other reuengement: but that when Adrian shall desire to dye, he may not dye.

For the time that the Consul Seuerian was executed, Adrian never inioyed one
day of health, but many times desired to dye, and sought occasions to kill him
self: but Antoninus Pius understanding thereof, commanded him to be guarded
by day, and watched by night. Being assailed with extreme infirmity, and not
able either to eat, or sleep, he many times sought venom to drink,
sometimes he would have a knife to kill him self, sometimes he would not eat,
by pure hunger to hasten his death: whereof the Senate being advertised, they
did humbly crave, that it might please his excellency, to have patience in
that infirmity, since the Gods were pleased to lengthen his life. Adrian was
much despited, with this suite of the Senate: and so much displeased with him
that said it, that he should be taken and put to death. Adrian had a Barbar
named Mastor, both faithful and valiant, that did attend on his person when
he did hunt, being his ancient servant: whom he did most instantly desire,
and secretly threaten, to dispatch him of his life: but the barbar being
terrified, to hear such words, fled out at gates. By chance he recovered a
knife into his hands, wherewith he would have dispatched him self: but by
force it was taken from him, but therewith and from thence forward, more
desirous to dye, and his life more hateful unto him. Adrian had also a
Physician borne in Africa, this man he did most instantly request, to minister
unto him some poison, to finish his sorrowful and most wretched life: so
hateful unto him self: but the Physician was so faithful unto his lord, and
not able to resist the suit of his sovereign, determined to drink ye same, and
to die. Adrian holding him self, for ye most unfortunate, and the extremest
wretch in distress, that so much desired death, and could not but live: and
most truly ye suit of Seuerian unto the gods, was most thoroughly performed in
him: that is to say, that they would enlarge his life, when he should desire
to dye. Antoninus Pius being now declared, and confirmed for Caesar, and Adrian
every day finding him self to grow in weakness, departed from Rome, unto the
port of Baias, where he remained, using many experiences in medicines and
Physic: which for his health did little profit, and to shorten his life,
gave some assistaunce. Adrian dyed in that port of Baias, the sixth day of July:
and was buried in a village named Ciceroniana. He lived threescore and two
years, and reigned one and twenty years, six months, and sixtene days.
Before Adrian dyed, he commanded this verse to be placed upon his sepulcher.
Turba medicorum, Regem interfecit. Which is to say, The Emperor Adrian by
trusting Physicians, gave so hasty an end unto his years.

The life of the Emperor Antoninus Pius, compiled by Sir Anthony of Gueuara,
Bishop of Mo^donnedo, Preacher, Chronicler, and Counseler unto Charles the
fifte.
CHAP. I. Of the lineage and country of the Emperor Antoninus Pius.
THe natural country of the Emperor Antoninus Pius, was of Gallia
Transalpina, which is as much to say, of sweet France: and was borne in a
city named Nemesa, which from the time of Julius Caesar, was established a
Colonel of Rome. His grandfather was named Titus Fuluius, a man both generous
and valiant, who in the times that Julius Caesar did conquer France, did
utter his great parcialitie in the behalf of the Roman Empire: for which
cause after the wars were ended, he came to Rome. Titus Fuluius in passing
into Italy, and settling in Rome, had happy and great success: for the
Fathers of the Senate, besides their recompense for service, they made him a
citizen of Rome. He had such skill to profit him self by that liberty, and
proved so cunning to content the people, that within the space of four years,
he was twice Consul, once Governor of the city, and once Judge: in such
wise, that his virtue was more beneficial then others, to be natural of the
country.

The father of Antoninus Pius, was named Fuluius Aurelius: a man virtuous and
learned, and no less then his grandfather Titus, was twice Consul: his
grandmother of the mothers side, was named Bobinia, and the father of his
mother, which was, Arrius Antoninus, was no less esteemed in the Roman
Empire, then was his other gra^dfather: for he was Judge two years, Master of
the horse men one year, Tribune of the people an other year, and in the
end, two times Consul. This Arrius Antoninus, was a great persecuter of
Domitian, a great friend of Nerua, and very private with Traiane: which when
he perceived Nerua to accept the Empire being so old, he had great compassion
of him, and said these words: My friend Nerua, I give thee to understand,
either it is some curse from thy predecessors, or some vengeance that the
Gods will take of thee: since they permit thee to take the Empire, and at
the time of most need, to have counsel, they deprive thee of thy sound and
good judgment.

The good old Nerua, did so sensibly feel these words, spoken by his friend
Antoninus, that had it not been by the great importunity of Traiane, he had
presently renounced the Empire: which if he had done, as afterward he did, he
had not erred: because his age was too great, and his strength but weak.
Antoninus Pius had a father in law, named Julius Lupus, which long time was a
Senator, that desired not to bear office, but with his patrimony to live in
quietness.

Antoninus Pius married with the daughter of Annius Verus, who was named Annia
Faustina, a woman of excelling beauty, and this was mother unto the famous
Faustine, wife unto the great Emperor Marcus Aurelius. Antoninus Pius, and
Faustine his wife had two sons, which died in their youth: and also two
daughters, of which the elder was married unto the Consul Sillanus, which also
died in their youth. The second daughter (as the mother) was named Faustine,
and married unto Marcus Aurelius, in whom the succession of the Empire did
remain. Antoninus Pius had but one sister, named Iulia Fadilla, whom he
tenderly loved: not only, for that he had no more, but because they were
twins and borne both at a birth, Antoninus Pius was borne the xiii. day of
October, at a certain place named Laurina: which afterward he did nobilitate
with stately buyldinges, and endued with great privileges, and also did
amplify the bounds thereof, which were but short and narrow. In the most
time of his infancy, he was nourished with his fathers father: and being more
entered into years, he continued with his other graund father by the mothers
side: and was so virtuous and so well inclined, that he was pleasing unto all
men, and beloved of all persons: he attained to be known unto all his
grandfathers both of father and mother, who all fixed their eyes upon
Antoninus, as well to inuest him with learning, as to endue him with riches and
wealth: for, as he afterward reported of them, they used to say, that they
favored him more for his virtue, then for affinity. With his graundfathers he
learned both tounges of Greek and Latin, he gave him self more to
Cosmographie, then to any other science, and did much delight to talk with
men of strange nations, to give them to understand, that he did know all the
particularities of their countries, by science, as they did by experience.
Being so entirely beloved of his graundfathers, they held him always in
company with Philosophers: who of his own natural: condition, delighted not,
but in the company of the virtuous: whereof it proceeded, that after he became
so cruel an enemy unto the wicked, and so perfect a friend unto good men. The
customs and companies that Princes do take in their youth: they love and
follow afterward when they be men.

CHAP. II. Of the inclination, proportion, and natural fashion of his body.
ANtoninus Pius was of an high stature, slender and very straight, his eyes
somewhat outward, black hair, thick bearde, white, rare, and gaptothed, his
face white, merry, gladsome, and fair, in such wise, that he did rather
provoke, to be loved, then feared. Naturally, he was of great health: his teeth
excepted, which he lost before he came to age. When a certain cunning man made
offer to be bound to place him teethe wherewith to speak and eat: Antoninus
made him answer: Since never from my heart proceeded fained or double words:
there shall never enter into my mouth, counterfete teeth. The want of his
teeth, made him to eat with pain, and stutter in his speech. Being touched
with a Iester for his stammering, Antoninus answered: I recke not greatly to
stumble in words, so that I err not, and stand up right in deeds. In Rome
there was a Senator named Taurinus, liberal in speech, and not sober in
diet, who reproving Antoninus for that his teeth failed him, both to eat and
speak, aunswering, said: I consent to that which thou say: for that I, if
I would, may not be a glutton: but thou may, and wilt not leave to be
malicious. Many Princes did excel Antoninus Pius in science, but none did
match him in eloquence: for that ordinarily, he did talk in the Latin
tongue, and did dispute in the Greek. He was naturally very well conditioned,
which had in him most appearance, for that always his words were without
malice, and his thoughts without suspicion. Although he were of complexion
cholerike sanguine which gives men occasion to be rash and soudein, it had no
place in Antoninus Pius, for that he was constant in adversities, and patient
in injuries. When in his presence they said any words that did grieve or
offend him, or brought him any sorrowful news: in biting of his lipp, in
casting down his eyes, and laying one hand upon another, they understood his
great sorrow: but jointly herewith, he was never seen of any man, soudeinly to
change countenance, much less to speak any cruel or injurious word.
Before he was Emperor, he was the welthiest man of all the Empire: for that he
did inherit from his four graundfathers, great and ample patrimonies: unto
whom he was sole inheritour. He was given to gather, conserve and augment his
goods, riches and wealth, but without all oppression to any person, for that
he lived only of him self, defrauding no man of his suite. After he obtained
the Empire, when by chance any talk was moved of the covetousness of men,
and of the necessity of Princes, many times he would say: I give thanks to
the immortal Gods, that since I have been Emperor, I have not taken any
thing from any man: either before, that ever I was benighted with debt. He had
great affection to the works of the field, and therein had not only the
tools and things necessary for the purpose: that is to say, buffes, oxen,
carts, ploughes, but he him self would be occupied in sowing corn, cutting
vines, pruning trees, and at times would take the plough, and make a dozen of
furrows. He was extreme in nothing, but that in, and for all things, he
placed him self in the midst: which he did very well discover in the
government of his person and estate: wherein, neither for his prodigal
expense, he was noted proud: either for want of a noble mind, esteemed a
niggard. Many times the Heavens being clear, and a settled fair weather in
appearance, he would say: upon such a day we shall have rain, or change
of weather, wherein he never erred: and many times did aduouche, that the
knowledge thereof proceeded not of science, either of Philosophy, but of
certain experiences, which he gathered, when he used the labor of the field.
When on a certain time, with his knife he was pruning of a plumb tree in his
orcharde joining unto the high way, a Senator said unto him: since you are an
Emperor, cease to use the office of a labourer, unto whom Antoninus
answered: it is less evil for an Emperor to prune trees in his orcharde,
then to consume lost time in his palace. He was very attentive to that which
was said, and curiously he did consider, what others did: chiefly to the end
to attain knowledge: for that naturally, he was sharp and of delicate
judgment. He was always occupied, either in reading, studying, disputing, or
doing something with his hands: and wherein he wanted skill, he disdained not
to crave to be taught. Always for the more part, he went bare headed, through
much heat he had therein: and one aduising him, the air of Rome to be very
hurtful, and therefore right necessary to have his head covered, answered:
assure me from troubles of men on earth, and I am assured that nothing shall
offend me, which the Gods shall send me from Heaven. He was of him self
excellent in Music, delighted therein, and a great friend to Musicians.
Antoninus Pius, was such and so good, that all hearts did love him, all
toungs did praise him, and all such as did not know him, but by report, had
him in admiration: finally, he was compared unto Numa Pompilius, because in him
there were not more virtues to be desired, either one only vice to be
reprehended.

CHAP. III. The works of piety which he did, and the cause, why he was
entitled Antoninus Pius.
ANnius Verus, father of the first Faustine, and father in law unto Antoninus
Pius, became so old, that he was not able to sit on horseback, either to go
on foot, but that he was led and staide by the arm, to say his opinion in
the Senate: because, from old putrified men, ripe and found counsels do
proceed. Antoninus Pius being the man that delighted to lead his old father,
did not only give him way in foul places, but in going up of stairs, did
rather seem to bear him, then lead him. Passing on a certain day, and
beholding an old man named Iulianus led unto prison for debt, and
understanding the cause, he presently paid the same, and added a work of more
pity, that paid not only all his debtes, but gave him also to sustain him
and his house. For that a penal law, provided in that behalf, that by justice
or otherwise, none should shead blood within the compass of Rome: for his cause
at the gate Salaria, a place deputed for execution of offenders, and masters
also did there chastise their servant: and thus it chanced, that Antoninus
Pius, passing that way, found there, many slaves bound and beaten most
cruelly: he conceived so great pity, to see them so beaten without pity, that
presently he bought them all: and the same day he bought them, the very same
day he made them free. From his youth it was his inclination to visit the
sick, and to accompany such as were in sorrow, distress, and out of
comfort: wherein the good Antoninus did so much utter the grief, that he had
of their grief, and he so much sorrowed of their sorrow, that no man did so
sensibly feel his own grief, as he did bewail the misfortune of others.

An ancient Roman widow, which had but one son, whose misfortune was to
kill another young man, and being condemned to dye, the sorrowful mother came
lame^ting, wailing, and crying unto the Emperor Antoninus: with whom he did
so earnestly and so grievously weep, as if it had been his own son. And
being advertised by his friends, and his most special and private servant
how evil it became him to weep with and like a woman, answered: that
sorrowful woman came to crave help and succor for her son: and for that I
may not relieve her with some remedy, I did assist to bewail her mischaunce.

The Romans had a custom, to leave the dead bodies of men executed in the
fields: but Antoninus Pius was the first that gave order for such bodies to be
buried: affirming it sufficient, to take from men their lives, and not to feed
beasts with their carcases. From the time of the proud Tarquine, the Romans
held for custom, to give malefactors great torments: the good Antoninus did
take away all tortures, wherewith the members of man's body was put in danger:
saying, that the torment was sufficient that were to chastise, but not to
dismember. Fabatus, Dioscorus, Lipolus, Macrinus, Fuluius, Torquatus, Eucenius,
Bruscos, and Emilius, whereof four being Consuls, three Judges, and two
Pretors, and banished by Adrian, Antoninus gave them all pardon: and for that
many did mislike this deed, affirming it to be done to the prejudice of the
fame and memory of Adrian, he answered: Adrian my Lord did not err in that
which he then did: and I think I do not err in that which I now do: because
then, he did it to profit him self by his justice, as I now do to obtain
advantage by clemency. Whether so ever he went, either in Rome or other
places of Italy, weekly he did visit the prisoners, and the poor which he
found there for debt, he commanded the creditours with his own money to be
paid: and after that he had three times paid for one man, and the fourth time
found in prison for debt: he commanded him to be delivered unto his creditour
for his slave. A few days after this commandment, his clemency not able to
endure so rigorous Justice: notwithstanding the sentence was most just, he
provided at his own cost once more to buy and to give liberty unto that poor
man. As before recited, when Adrian was sick, and so distempered with his
infirmities, that some he commanded to be taken, some banished, and some put
to death: but Antoninus Pius being adopted Augustus, and being invested with
the whole government, did neither arrest, banishe, or kill them: but only
commanded to absent them selves, and not to appear in his presence. Amongst
all the notable works of piety that Antoninus did perform, was, that Adrian
striving and watching to kill him self, Antoninus did ouerwhatche to preserve
a live: being most true according to sensuality, he should have procured,
and not have given any impediment to have finished his life: since unto him,
both house, goods, and estate should succeed.

The Senators, and many other magistrates of Rome, did attempt to adnihilate
the laws, and monumentes of Adrian: which Antoninus did most stiffely deny,
withstand and repulse: and in the end not only did cause all his acts to be
ratified, confirmed, and allowed: but also did frame and bring to pass with
the Senate, that Adrian should be accounted amongst the Gods. He built in the
honor of Adrian a most solemn temple in a certain place, named Pusoll, and
did furnishe the same with Priests to serve him, and endued them with rents to
find them, and were commonly named Adrians priests. In the honor of Adrian, he
did institute certain plays, entitled Lustra, to be played every fifth year,
for the maintenance whereof, he gave great rentes.

Before Adrian died, he had made for him self a sumptuous sepulcher near unto
the river Tiber, whether Antoninus brought him to be buried, and brought to
pass with the Senators, and the people of Rome, to receive him with no less
honor, then if he had been a live. No Prince had reigned in the Empire, that
had not been noted either cruel, or of small piety, Antoninus Pius excepted:
who with his tongue, never commanded man to be slain: either would ever
firm sentence of death, or ever would behold any man executed: because so
great was his clemency, that he might not behold the sheading of blood.

CHAP. IIII. Of the words that Adrian said unto the Senate, when he did
adopt Antoninus Pius.
AFter that the Emperor Adrian was recovered of a certain great surfeit, it
happened afterward as he sat at his dinner, he was taken with an incessant cough,
whereof followed a bleeding at the nose, in such abundance, and with such
continuance, that both him self, and others thought, first to have seen him
dead, yer the blood would have ceased to run. Adrian perceiving, the
greater that his flux of blood did increase, so much the more his life did
shorten: desiring like a good Prince, to provide for the weal of his
subjects, commanded all the Senators, Consuls, and all other the notable
officers of Rome to come before him, unto whom he briefly said certain
words, right worthy to be committed unto memory, as follows.

His Oration to the assembly.
Fathers conscript, you see with great certeintie, how soudeinly and unawares
death has assailed me, and by how small occasion I lose my life. Let me be
an example unto you, and all men, and hold it for most certain, that that
part of life is most times in peril, where, of certeintie of life we had
settled most affiance. Nature has not granted me to have children of mine
own, but therefore I give great thanks unto the immortal Gods, because in
delivering me from children, they have discharged me of great and many
cares. There goes much difference betwixt the ingendering, or the electing of
a son: for the one proceeds of necessity, the other is elect at large,
will, and liberty. The sons that nature gives us, are many times lame,
filthy, and also foolish: but such as we adopt, we elect them able, sound
and discrete: for that no man is so imprudent which at the time of election,
chooses not the best. In time past, I elected Lucius, sufficiently known unto
you: but the destinies were so contrary unto him, that before he had power to
command in the state of Rome, he was buried in his sepulture: but now we have
elected Antoninus for your emperor, who we promise you, shall prove mild,
benign, quiet, and merciful: for that clemency is as natural unto him, as
it is unto the Sun to give light by day. He receives the Empire in a
competent age, to the end ye fear not, by his too much youth, to committ
some rash deed, either by too much old age, negligently to govern the
common wealth. He has been bred and nourished in our own country, and
therefore will observe the customs thereof. Also his life has been trained
under our own laws, a sufficient occasion to avoid all search of
unnecessary laws of strange countries, and this you have to regard, not as
a matter of small importance: because there is not any thing that more does
offend the common wealth, then to infecte the same with strange and unused
customs. He knows what thing it is to go on warrefare, to govern armies, to
suffer both passions and motions of people, to use clemency with some, and to
correct others: in such wise, that in him is contained great sufficience, for
the government of the common wealth, since in all things he has experience.
Ye know him, and he knows you, ye have dealt with him, and he has dealt
with you: and I hold of him such opinion, that he will neither despise you,
either forget you: in such manner, that his obedience shall be unto me, as unto
a father, and shall deal with you in love, like a brother. And I would that
all you which be here present, as also all other persons in Rome, that upon
such condition I transfer the Empire, that after his days he leave the same
unto Marcus Aurelius his son in law, and my servant: and from henceforth, I
swear and protest, that these two elections shall be acceptable unto the Gods,
and profitable unto men. In credit, life, and science, Marcus Aurelius does
exceed Antoninus: but that hitherto Antoninus has had more experience: for
which cause unto him, the rather we have commended the Empire, because, for the
general government of any estate or common wealth, one year of experience is
more worth then ten years of science. I have been weak, careless and
negligent, in many things of the common wealth, partly enforced thereunto by
the greatness of mine enemies, but for the recompense thereof, I do leave two
such Princes one after the other, to govern the Empire, which for their
singularity in science and virtue, shall excel all that be past, and I doubt
in equality, not to be matched with any their successors.

These words being said by Adrian, he drew a ring from his finger, and put
the same upon the fingar of Antoninus Pius, and after that hour he was
holden, served, and obeyed as Roman Emperor: notwithstanding that Adrian
lived some time after. Perfect was the election of the Emperor Nerua, in the
good Traiane, and no less of Traiane in the adoption of Adrian, and most just
of Adrian in the election of Antoninus Pius, and Marcus Aurelius, which five
Emperors were such and so good, one after the other: which seemed a
Prognostication, that the felicity of Roman Emperors, should in them take
an end.

CHAP. V. Of the offices that Antoninus held before he was Emperor.
BEfore Antoninus Pius came unto the height of ye Empire, he did often put forth
his money to usury, but all the gains of that trade, he spent in succouring
the poor, and redeeming captives. He was sent on a time by Adrian to visit
the Isle of Sicyl: in which visitation he reformed many people, chasticed many
tyraunts, deprived many officers, removed many enimities, repaired ruinous
buildinges, did melt many counterfeit coins: but most of all in such manner
did govern the common wealth, that no man remained discontented.

He was iiij. years Praetor within Rome, he was Consul in Campania, with
Catilinus Seuerus, he was Judge three years together, in all which offices he
was never noted, either rash in commandments, or rigorous in his
chasticements.

Adrian divided all Italy into four jurisdictions, placing in every one a
Consul for government thereof, and established Antoninus supreme governor of
them all: in such wise, that he held such authority and credit, that in Rome
all was governed by his counsel: and in Italy all did obey his
commandments. Were his person far distant, always Adrian and the Senate
had his counsel present: the cause whereof proceeded of his clear judgment,
in the foundation of that which he said: and through the bounty of his
virtue, he frankly did speak his opinion.

We said not without just cause, that by his virtue, he did freely say his
opinion: for speaking the very truth, he is not only unjust, but very wicked,
that has liberty in his speech, and has not virtue in his life. Exercising
in Asia the office of Proconsul, he uttered so great wisdom in his
commandments, and so much without covetousness in his dealings, that he was
entitled, the holy proconsul, which government amongst strangers, by a
stranger, was a case somewhat strange, because detestation always
accompanies such government.

Coming from Asia unto Rome, in Antioche he buried his eldest daughter: who
had such fame in her life, that after her death she left behind a slanderous
memory. We have said how the wife of Antoninus was named Faustine, which
was mother unto the fair Faustine wife unto Marcus Aurelius: and most truly,
both mother and daughter were touched with infamy, by the mean of too much
liberty, and too little virtue.

It was never seen in the Roman Empire, that two so virtuous Princes, had
wives so licentious: notwithstanding the one was sufficiently advised, the
other corrected: but for that they were so gracious in their conversation, and
so perfect beautiful of their persons: it was very little which was said unto
them, in respect of that which was dissembled.

Antoninus was so limited in that which he said, and so advised in the
counsels which he gave, that he never repented that demanded the same. Before
Antoninus came unto the Empire, he was covetous, but afterward very liberal:
and his wife reprehending, that he used no order in giving or spending, he
answered: Faustine, simple is thy judgment, since thou understand not,
that after we were advanced unto the Empire, we lost all that ever we had,
because all Princes of noble minds be bound to give, but have no license to
keep or hoorde.

The tribute coronall, that is to say, the money that was given unto the
Emperors for their coronation: the one half thereof he gave unto the cities of
Italy, to relieve the charges of the common wealth. His wife he did both
honor, and cause to be honored: and it was in such manner, that he obtained
and brought to pass with the Senate, that she should be entitled Augusta
Faustina, and in her own name to grave and stamp certain money, the which
is seen at these days. Antoninus was embraced with so ardent affection of the
Senate, that without his request, they erected the pictures and counterfeits of
his father and mother, his graundfathers, and graundmothers, his brothers and
sisters, notwithstanding they were all dead.

The Circene plays, which were used every fifth year, the Senate did ordeine
to celebrate every year on the day of his nativity. And after that he
therefore had greatly gratified the Senate: by great request he obtained the
celebration of them, to be performed on the day of Adrians death.

The Senate to satisfy Antoninus, consented that his wife Faustina, should be
entitled Augusta: and also in the coins which they made, unto her honor,
there should be engraven, Augusta Faustina: which excellency, was never
granted to any Woman of Rome: for that in giving her the title of Augusta,
they gave her authority to set her hand to the things of the common wealth.

CHAP. VI. How he held all provinces in peace, not by arms, but with letters.
Amongst all the Roman Princes, there was none, that performed so great
constancy in his affairs, as Antoninus Pius: which proceeded, for that he was
not rash in his commandments, either variable in his determinations, but
that exactly he considered and examined, what he did command: and after, for
no importunity would revoke the same. Antoninus being resident in the province
of Campania, sending unto the Senate to request a certain matter, which
notwithstanding the difficulty thereof, was granted: Gaius Rufus a Senator,
said unto him. Serene Prince, I beseech thee to give me to understand, by
what reason it is brought to pass, that in all thy enterprises thou do
never repent: in all thy requests thou art never denied: either in all thy
commandments thou art never disobeyed. To whom Antoninus made answer: If
I repent me not of any my deeds, it is because I do them according to reason:
and if my requests are not denied of the Senate, it is because I crave not but
that which is just: and if in my commandments I am not disobeyed, it
proceeds that they are more profitable unto the commonwealth then for mine
own person.

Most truly these were words right worthy of such a man, and to ye memory of
Princes most chiefly to be commended. It was an ancient custom amongst ye
Romans, to have the time limited for their residence in their offices, that
is to say, the Dictatour, six months, the Consul one year, the Praetor two
years, the Censour three years, the master of the horssemen half a year, and
so of the rest.

Antoninus would not consent unto this custom, but in every respect did alter
the same, in such wise, that with some that should have continued but two or
three years, he held them in office seven or eight years: and others that
should have continued three years, he displaced them in three months:
affirminge, that the good officer ought to be conserved all the days of his
life, but the evil, not to be suffered one only day.

He sent Fuluius Tusculanus, as Praetor into ye province of Mauritania, whom
wtin half a year he deprived of his office: for yt he was both impatient and
some what covetous: and complaining of the injury, said and alleged, that in
times past, he had been friend unto Antoninus, which now was forgotten.
Whereunto Antoninus Pius did answer: thou have no reason thus unjustly to
blame me, because the office was given thee by the Emperor, and not by
Antoninus: and since thou did offend, not as Fuluius, but as Praetor: even
so I discharged thee of thine office, not as Antoninus thy old friend, but as
an Emperor of the Roman Empire. He was not inclined to begin wars,
either in his own person to prosecute the same: for he hold opinion, that the
Prince with more sound counsel should commend his wars unto his Captains,
to the end in his own person to govern the common wealth, then to go to the
wars him self, and leave his common wealth unto others.

Talkinge on a time in his presence, of wars and battles, that Julius Caesar,
Scipio, and Hanibal, had fought and overcame in the world, Antoninus Pius
answered: Let every man hold opinion what he thinks good, and praise what
it pleases him: but for mine own part, I do more glory in conseruing peace
many years: then with wars to conquer many battles.

In the second year of his Empire, the Britains rebelled, against whom he
sent the Consul Laelius Vrbicus, who subdued that Islande, although afterward
by mischaunce he lost his life.

In the third year of his Empire, the Mauritanes also rebelled, which are a
people of Africa: against whom he sent the Consul Murus Cespitius, who used
so great policy in those wars, that he constrained them to crave peace. In
those days the Germans and the Datians had great wars amongst them
selves, upon the division of certain territories: but in the end, after
their own destruction, amongst them selves, they came to such concord, that
they bent their whole force, as cruel enemies against Rome, and the countries
thereof: protesting and affirminge, their charges to be much more in paying
so great, and so continual tribute, then might arrise by defense of their
persons against the Roman power.

Antoninus understanding of this rebellion, he would not presently send
forth an army, but a Judge with great power, to visit those countries, to
mittigate and unfold all griefs, and to remove all unjust tributes, and
jointly therewith did write such and so good words, that at the instant
those Barbarians left their armor, and did yield their countries unto the
obedience of Rome.

Of this example, all mighty Princes have to take example, to the end, that
with fury they undertake not to tame a furious people: because many times,
hearts be more tamed with sweet words then with cruel arms.

The Jews that were in the province of Pentapolis, also he did repress and
tame, which was don by the hands of the president that was in Assyria, whom he
commanded first to offer them peace before he made them war. In Achaia and
Egypt also certain people did rebel: understanding the occasion to proceed
of the Roman Pretors, which were rigorous in their commandments, and
covetous in their dealings, gave order, that his officers were chastised and
the people pardoned.

The Pretors that were resident in the countries of the Alanes, sent to
complain at Rome, how daily they were threatened to be slain, only for
demanding tribute: unto whom Antoninus answered. We have received your
letters, and be grieved with your perils, and no less sorrow your travails:
if these people do pay their tribute which they do owe: suffer their
threateninge which they make: because it is needelesse to think that any man
which is a tributarie, shall live contented. In any wise, adventure not to give
them injurious words, to committ briberie, or to do them wrong: because in
such cases, we have to hear their complaints, and to correct your offenses.
The Gods have you in keeping, and guide well your Fortune.

CHAP. II. How he did visit the officers of his common wealth, and the
reformation of his house.
WHen Antoninus sent any Praetor to govern any province, he was not satisfied
that he were wise, prudent, and valiant: but also without any infection of
pride, or covetousness: for he held opinion, that he may evil govern a
common wealth, that is a subject to pride or covetousness. Unto Pretours,
Censours, and Questours, before he gave them any government of any country,
first, he caused them to give an inventory, of their own proper goods: to the
end that when their charge were finished, the increase of their wealth might be
considered: and jointly therewith he did both say and warn them, that he sent
them to minister justice, and not by fraud to rob countries. In all things
that Antoninus commanded, provided, and chastised, he was very pitiful: such
excepted, as did offend in the execution of justice: with whom he was both
rigorous and extreme: in such wise, that other offenses, were they very great,
he did pardon them: but as concerning justice, the smallest offense was
grievously punished. On a time certain officers of his treasure, brought him a
memorial: wherein was contained the manner and form, yearly to increase his
rents, which being seen and read, in the back thereof, he did write these
words: the order and form that you have to search, ought not to be to the
augmentation of my rents: but for the advancement of my commonwealth: either to
impose new tributes, but to devise with order, to avoid excessive expenses:
for if Roman Princes use no rule to moderate their charges, either we shall
lose our selves, or rob our common wealths. Amongst all the Princes past,
only Antoninus did never permit, the rents of his estate, either more or less
to be augmented: but rather did pardon many common wealths, of their old
debts, and also relieved others of some new impositions. Presents that were
brought him, of silver, gold, silk, purple, iuels, or other rich things, he
would not receive them, were it not of the kings that paid tribute unto the
Empire: for he held opinion, that the common wealths, rather then him self,
had need thereof. The things that he used most commonly to receive, were
books to read in, horses to run, and fruit to feed on: which he forgate
not, gratefully to recompense. In affairs he used great expedition, that is to
say, that if he once did undertake any business, he never withdrewe his hand,
until it were finished. Every year he caused his house to be visited, as
concerning excessive expenses: if exaction or briberie were committed by any of
his household, against strangers: if they did serve, which received wages: if
amongst them, there were any that were notably vicious: finally, all that
which the visitour for the remedy hereof did set down, presently was
performed. For the time of Domitian, the Emperors officers had a custom, to
receive many and chargeable fees of al men, that by warrant of the Princes
liberality received relief: which the Emperor Antoninus, as a vile custom,
did utterly take away: affirming, that a gracious reward, ought gratis to be
dispatched. The pride, the presumption, the hautinesse, and also the
tediousness of the whole Empire, he brought, placed, and restored unto the
plat of great humility: in such wise, that as easily they dispatched
affairs, with the Emperor Antoninus, as with a citizen of Rome. A matter
surely to be noted, to behold the Court of Rome, in the days of this good
Prince, how perfect the refourmation thereof was established: for surely,
whether their affairs, were either with the Prince, or with the Senate,
neither did they begin their suit with fear, or were dispatched, with just
cause to murmur. The officers of his house, and also of the Senate, by whose
hands matters were dispatched, some he advanced, and to others he gave double
fee: to no other end, but to remove them from aduenturing to take any bribe.
Being (as he was) a great friend unto the common wealth, and not a little
delighted to be in the grace thereof, and to this end, with the good he used
great liberality, and with the evil great clemency: in such wise, that of
all men he was beloved, and also praised: as well for that he pardoned the one,
as gave unto the other. All that ever he said or wished, to be used of good
Princes, the same did he perform after he was Emperor: and reformed all
things, that he thought were to be amended.

In the third year of his Empire, Faustine his dearly beloved wife dyed, in
whose death he did utter so great sorrow, that it exceeded the authority of
his estate, and also the gravity of his person. In the memory of Faustine, he
placed her picture in all the temples, and performed with the Senate, that she
should be recounted amongst the Goddesses, which was, as to canonize her: all
which was truly agreed by the Senate, more at the request of Antoninus, then
for the deseruings of Faustine.

CHAP. VIII. Of certain notable buildings erected by Antoninus.
THe buildings which he made were not many, but exceeding stately and
sumptuous: for in them appeared and were represented the greatness of his
estate, and the magnanimity that he had in spending. He built a temple in the
reverence of his Lord Adrian: wherein he erected a picture of silver, with a
Coronet of gold, and a chaplet of Nacre: a work most certainly, no less
curious then costly. He reedified a certain building, called Gregostasens:
which served to lodge all strange ambassadors: because the Romans did use
to give ambassadors, an house to dwell in, and a stipend for their diet. He
did amplify and nobilitate the sepulcher of his Lord Adrian: whereunto none
durst approach, but on their knees. The greatest session house of al Rome, was
burnt in the time of Domitian: which the good Antoninus, built from the
foundation. He built the temple of Agrippa, and endued and dedicated the same,
in the reverence of the Goddess Ceres. Over the river Rubicon, he built a
sumptuous and a stately bridge, and also not a little necessary: because before
time many were there daungered, and aftewardes that way much victual, and
provision was carried.

Not far distant from the port of Hostia, near unto the sea, he built a
right strong tower, for the safety and defense of the ships of Rome: which a
foretime might not bring in any victual or other provision, but were
distressed of pirates. The haven or port of Gaieta, which had been long
through great antiquity forsaken, he freshly reedified, that is to say, built
new houses, erected a mighty tower, made a strong wall, placed inhabitants,
and gave them great privileges: in such wise, that whereas before time, it was a
thing utterly forgotten, it was from thence forth most esteemed. That which
he did in Gaieta, he performed in a port of Spain named Taragon: which he
reedified, and amplified, with great buildings and privileges. A mile from the
port of Hostia, he built a sumptuous and a curious bathe, and endued the same
in such manner, that in all Italy it was the only bath, that was unto all
men free without charges. A mile without Rome he built three temples, naming
them Laurianos, for that many bay trees grew there, to this end: that the
dames and matrones of Rome, walking according unto their manner, should
encounter with some Church to pray in.

CHAP. IX. Of certain laws which the Emperor Antoninus Pius made.
IT was a law amongst the Romans, that such as were put to death by justice,
might make no testament: but that in loosing their life, they lost also their
goods. Antoninus moved with piety, did ordein, that none for any fault, what
so ever, should jointly loose both life and goods: but if any were put to
death, he might frankly make a testament of his own proper goods. Where he had
placed any good and sound Judge in any common wealth: he did not only permit
him not to be removed: but also with gifts and requests he did sustain him.
This good Prince made a law, that none should presume to sue to the Prince or
Senate, for the office of justice: upon pain to be banished Rome. There was
in Rome a Judge, named Gaius Maximus, who in Rome continued a judge twenty
years: of whom Antoninus would often say, that he had never seen, heard, or read
of a man more clear of life, either right in justice. In the place of Gaius
Maximus, there succeeded Tatius Succinus, a man surely of many hoare hairs,
and of much learning: but the office of Pretour being so tedious, and he of
years so ancient, dyed immediately upon the burden thereof. Antoninus being
infourmed, that the good old Tatius dyed with the burden of his office,
divided the same betwixt Cornelius, and Repentinus: but after the Emperor
being infourmed, how the Senate had given the same unto Repentinus, not for
his deserving, but at the suite of a Gentlewoman of the Court: he commanded
him publicly to be banished, declaring by the voice of a cryar throughout all
Rome, that he was banished for obteining the office of a Judge, by the suit of
a woman. This was the first officer of Rome, that in the days of Antoninus,
suffered punishment, which correction gave so great fear throughout the
Roman Empire, that from thencefoorth the Emperor Antoninus was as much
feared of the evil, as beloved of the good. A mighty Senator named
Tranquillus, confessing to have procured his fathers death, of extreme desire
to inherit: he commanded to be removed into an Island, only to pass his
life with the bread of sorrow, and the water of tears. All the time of his
Empire, he gave wheat and oil unto the citizens of Rome. The people of Rome
in those days, being given to drink wine without measure: he commanded that
none should presume to sell wine, but in Apothecaries shops for the sick or
diseased. He established a law for him self and his successors, that openly
three days in the week, they should show them selves in Rome: and if by any
weighty cause, there happened some impediment, that on such days their gates
should stand wide open, without porters, that freely the poor might repair to
follow their suits. In dear years he did ordeine through Italy, that no
gardener should dare to sow in his garden any feed, but wheat and barley:
whereby the poor of the common wealth might be relieved of their penury. He
made an universal law, throughout the Empire, that gouerners and rulers of
the people, should not adventure to spend the goods of the common wealth, in
matters either unprofitable or superfluous: but to the defense of enemies, or
repayring of fortifications, either else for provision of the common wealth in
time of dear years. There was in Rome certain stipendarie interpreters of
all languages, to manifest the meaning of strange ambassadors: whose fee and
office Antoninus commanded to be forbidden, and taken away, affirming it to be
very convenient unto the greatness and majesty of Rome, that al nations and
kingdoms should learn to speak their speech: and that it were abasement for
them, to learn any strange tongue. Also he did ordeine, that all the old,
impotent, and blind people in Rome, should be sustained at the charges of the
common wealth: but such as were younger and more able, should be constrained,
either to boult meal at the bakers, or to blow the bellows at the smythes.
By chance on a certain day, he found an old seruitour, which he had known
long in the wars, rubbing and clawing him self against the pillars of the
Church: Adrian demanding why he did so rub him self, and wear out his
clothes: the old man made answer, I have no garments to clothe my self,
neither any man gives me to eat: yet if it may please thee, Adrian, I have
found mean to rub my self. Adrian took great compassion of that which he
did see, but much more of that which he heard: and presently he commanded
goods to be given him, and slaves to serve him. And as envy, is natural unto
the poor, as pride is common among the rich: The next day other two poor men
came before Adrian, rubbing them selves amongst the pillars, in hope to receive
the like liberality: whom he willed to be called unto him, commanding the one
to scratch the other, and by turn to ease each other of his itch. Unto king
Pharasmaco of the Parthians, Adrian gave great gifts: that is to say, fifty
Eliphants armed with their towers, and three hundred men of Hiberin in the
country of Spain, which were of his guard.

CHAP. XI. Of the prodigious and monstrous things that happened during the
Empire of Antoninus.
MAny travels and hard adventures followed the Emperor Antoninus while he
lived, and also in all his kingdoms, in the time of his reign: because
Fortune is so variable, that she never stays her wheel, or ever cease to
be turning thereof. In the second year of his reign, hunger was so great, so
sharp, and so general throughout all Italy, that thereof there dyed no
less, then if it had been of a fierce pestilence. There was in Asia, so
cruel, and so general an earthquake, that many houses and buildings were
subverted, many people slain, and not a few cities disinhabited: for the
repayring of which great hurtes, he sent not only money from the common wealth
of Rome, but also plentifully sent his treasure out of his own coffers. In the
month of January, there was in Rome so furious a fire, that it burnt ten
thousand houses, wherein there perished of men, women, and children, more then
ten thousand. In the same year was burnt the stately place of Carthage, the
one half of Antioche, and in a manner the whole city of Narbona. In the
month of August, there was at Rome great floudes: and besides, loss of their
corn, both reapt and vnreapt. The river Tyber did so swell and ouerflowe, that
one days loss was not repaired in three years. On the fourth of the monethe
of May, there appeared a star over Rome, containing the quantity of the
wheel of a myll: which threw out sparks so thick and so continual, that it
seemed rather the fire of a forge, then the shining of a star. In the sixth
year of the Empire of Antoninus, in Rome was borne a child with two heads,
the one like a man, the other like a dog: but the strangeness of the matter
did more exceed, in that, with one head he did cry and bark, as a whelpe: and
with the other did weep as a child. In the city of Capua, a woman was
brought a bed and delivered of five sons. At that time was seen in Arabia, a
great and a most huge serpent: which being seen of many persons, upon the
height of a rock, did eat half his own tail: in which year, there was
throughout all Arabia, and marvelous great pestilence. In the ninthe year of
the Empire of Antoninus, in the city of Mesia, barley was seen to grow in
the heads of their trees: in such wise, that no tree bare fruit that year,
but ears of of barley. In the same year, there happened in the kingdom of
Artenitos, in a city named Triponia: four wild and unknown Lions to lie
down in the market place: which became so tame, that they made them
packehorsse to the mountains for wood, and boys became horssemen upon their
backs. In the kingdom of Mauritania, a child was borne, which had the head
turned backwards, which lived, and was bred up, and also such as would either
see or speak with him, most conveniently did place them selves at his back:
which notwithstanding, could both see, speak, and go, but with his hands
might not feed him self. There died in Rome a Senator, named Rufus, a man of
great wealth and credit, which after his death did many times come to the
Senate: sitting in his wonted place, and clad with garments, after his old
fashion, but was never heard speak one word: and this vision continued in
the Senate, full two years.

CHAP. XI. Of the wars that happened in the reign of Antoninus Pius, and
other his acts.
IT chanced unto no Roman prince, as it did unto Antoninus: which always
remaining within the bounds of Italy, and commonly within Rome, was so
beloved, feared, and served of all strange kings and kingdoms, as if
personally he visited and had conquered the^. In the fourth year of his
empire, king Pharasmaco came to Rome, but only to see Antoninus, and brought
and presented unto him, so much and so marvelous things, that the eyes of
men were not satisfied in beholding, either their hearts in wishing them. The
king of Parthians, had taken away much lands from the king of Armenia: who
sent to complain unto the Romans, as unto their friends, alies, and
confederates: for whom the Emperor Antoninus did write his letters unto the
king of Parthians, to cease to do wrong, and also to make restitution unto the
Armenians: whose letters being received and read, was presently obeyed and
performed. King Abogarus one of the mightiest and most notable kings of the
Orient, the Emperor Antoninus did force to come to Rome: because that owing a
great sum of money unto one of his vassals, he would not come to account. The
good Emperor Traiane, had constrained the Parthians to receive their seat and
royal crown, at the hands of the Romans: which subjection, the Parthians
both denied and refused: but Antoninus not only by letters, but also by
apparent threatenings, did force them to yealde and consent unto the obedience
of Rome. Rometalce king of the Pindaroes, was accused in ye Senate, of
disloyalty unto the Romans, in the wars they held against the Rhodes: who
coming unto Rome, to quite him self, the good Antoninus did not only
confirm him in his kingdom: but also did not permit, that for any thing past,
any motion should be made: affirming that his offense might not be so great,
but that his submissiue appearance did reform the same. The Olbiopolites a
people in Asia, held war with ye Taurocistes, alies of Rome: unto whom
Antoninus sent succor by sea, and with assistance of the Romans, subdued the
Olbiopolites, who not only paid all charges of the wars, but also gave
hostages to maintain peace. Antoninus never raised war, but that first he
sought to conserve peace, and praised not a little that saying of Scipio: that
is to say, He rather wished the life of one citizen of Rome, the^ the death of
a thousand enemies. When he married his daughter Faustina unto Marcus
Aurelius, he made a su^ptuous feast, and gave great rewards unto his men of
war. He held his son Marcus Aurelius in great reverence, and would have
made ^im Consul, which he refused, holding it for more happy, to turn
books, then to appease nations.

After he had sent unto Calcedonie for the great Philosopher Apollonius, and
had given him an house to dwell in solitarilie, near unto the river Tiber:
Antoninus sent for him, who refusing to come sent answer, That scholars do
use to come to their masters, and not masters unto their scholars: whereat
Antoninus laughing said: A trim ieste, that Apollonius has paste so many seas,
from Calcedonie unto Rome, and now refuses from his house to come to mine.
Although Apollonius were learned in Philosophy, yet was he in his life very
covetous: whereat when certain in presence of the Emperor did murmur, he
aunsweared: for very dear that Philosophers sell us their Philosophy: always
their science is more worth which they teach us, then the goods which we
give them.

CHAP. XII. Of the succession of the Empire, and the occasion of his death.
AS ye Emperor Antoninus in his youth was always a friend unto the virtuous,
even so in his age carefully he did seek the conversation of the wise: and
therewith had no less care of public matters, then of his own private
affairs. Generally he was so liked and loved of al nations, that in all
temples, in all walls, gates, and buildings, these four letters were placed,
namely V.A.C.R. which is to say Vita Antonini Conseruatur Respublica: which
is to say, On the life of Antoninus, the whole weal of the Roman Empire
depends. Leaving a part many good laws, which he made for the Common wealth,
for which purpose, he had always attendant about him, men in the laws
singularly learned, who among ye chief was Vindemius Verus, Siluius Valente,
Abolusius Metianus, Vlpius Marcellus, and Iabolinus: before whom he set the
laws of all kingdoms, and of the most necessary and approved, to take the
choice to be established in his kingdoms. When he did institute any law,
either ordeine any proclamation, he always expressed therein so great reason,
that his commandments were never disobeyed, either his laws revoked. The
cause of his death they say was after this manner: from Gallia Transalpina, that
is to say, sweet France, they did present him certain cheeses, whereof he
eating at his supper more then was convenient, they ministered unto him a
perilous vomit, whereby they discharged his stomache not only of meat
superfluous, but also of blood right necessary, which bredd in him a furious
fever, and finding himself in great weakness, without disposition to sleep,
either appetite to eat: he commanded all the Senators and chief governors,
to be called unto his presence: and before the^ all did commend the common
wealth unto Marcus Aurelius his son, and Faustine his daughter. And making
his testament in very good order, wherein he gave unto his servants great
gifts, which being finished and performed, he gave unto his daughter Faustine,
the inheritance of all his lands which he possessed before he came unto the
Empire. His fever increasing, and his strength and life wasting, the fourth
day of his sickness about noone, beholding and viewing all the circumstants,
and shutting his eyes as if he would sleep, gave up the ghost: who was no
less bewailed at his death, then he was beloved in time of life: and presently
by conformity of the whole Senate, was entitled Holy: and all the people at
the news of his death, a vie in every streate did grite, skrich, and cry,
aduauncing and magnifying his bounty, clemency, benignity, liberality,
justice, patience, prudence, and providence. All the honors were done unto him,
and all the famous titles were given him, that upon any noble Prince had been
employed. And deserved that in the temple of Jupiter, a priest of his own name
should be institute. Also they built him a temple, and dedicated unto his
honor the Circene plays, and a fraternity: where they were all called
Antonines. This Prince only amongst all Princes, lived and dyed without
sheading of blood: and for likelinesse, compared unto Numa Pompilius, not
only in good government of the common wealth, but also for sincerity of life.

The life of the Emperor Commodus, the son of good Marcus Aurelius: compiled
by Sir Anthony of Gueuara, bishop of Mondonnedo, preacher, Chronicler, and
Cou^seler unto the Emperor Charles the fifth.
CHAP. I. Of the birth of the Emperor Commodus,
THe Emperor Commodus had to his grandfather Annius Verus, and his father was
the good Emperor Marcus Aurelius: and his mother was the right fair and
renouned Faustine: on whose side, he was nephewe unto the Emperor Antoninus
Pius, a man of a reformed life, and very beneficial unto the common wealth of
Rome. He was borne in a certain place named Lodie, on the eight day of
September: at the time that his father, and Drusius his uncle, were Consuls:
the one governing matters of war in Datia, and the other in refourmation of
causes in the common wealth. The Empress Faustine being great with child, and
near unto the time of her child birth, dreamed that she was delivered of
certain serpents, but especially of one, more fierce then the rest: of which
dream, when his father Marcus Aurelius was infourmed, they say, that he said:
I fear me Faustine, that the son of this birth, shall prove so fierce a
Serpent, that shall be of power to commit a murder of our fame, and to poison
the whole common wealth of Rome. The Astronomers and Nekromantiques, which in
those days were resident in Rome, they said and prognosticated many things of
the birth of the Emperor Commodus: and as it appeared afterward they said
very little, in respect of that which followed: because this miserable and
unfortunate Prince, in his manners, did rather resemble the infernal furies,
then reasonable creatures. From his infancy his father Marcus Aurelius,
carefully did travel, in the learning and instruction of his son Commodus:
for which purpose, he made inquisition throughout the whole Empire, for men
learned in science, and of life and manners reformed. His first scholemaisters
were, Onesicrates to teach him Greek, Capilus to instruct him in the Latin,
Teyus to instruct him in the Art of Oratorie, Pulion to infourme him in Music,
Calphurnius to give him order for behavior on horsbacke, and Marcius to give
him rules for good manners: for that his father having no more sons, did not
a little travel, to frame in him such perfection, as was due unto a most
noble and perfect Prince. But alas for pity, that so many and so excellent
men, neither could persuade him to follow or embrace virtue, either separate
him from his detestable vices. Right happy may we call those fathers, whose
hap is to have children inclined to virtue: for if they naturally be evil
inclined, neither does it profit, that which their masters teach them,
either wherefore their parents do correct them. After Faustine was conceived
with Commodus, she never ceased to say, how painful he was in breeding, and
how dangerous in his birth: and his nourses for his biting when he did suck,
always complained: in such wise, that from the time of his first conception
he was painful, and tedious in conversation. After Commodus was weined, and
began to feed him self and learn to talk: presently it appeared, that he was
hard of condition, intolerable to serve, ungrateful of benefits, a glutton
in feeding, malicious in countenance, cruel in reuengement, impatient in
injuries, proud in commandments, and above all, filthy, double, and
uncertain in his talk. At the sixte year of his age, it was marvelous to
see how in so tender years, he was given to all manner of vice: that none
whatsoever in times past, had used such industry to prove either valiant or
learned, as the unfortunate Commodus did travel to be vicious. He was sharp
and of a delicate wit, and of excellent memory: he was also, quarelling,
valiant, and doughtie: most apparent in him from his infancy: for he was
never seen to fear either water, or fire, sword, or wild beasts. Nature
also had endued him with natural abilities, which valiantness if he had
employed in wars, either his memory unto learning, or his wit unto virtues,
he might have proved an other Alexander in prowess: or Plato in science,
either Traiane in justice: but by evil conversation, he rightly resembled
Brute the traitor, Nero the cruel, and Catiline the tyrant.

CHAP. II. Of the honorable titles, given unto the Emperor Commodus, in time
of his youth.
NOtwithstanding that Commodus was as yet but young, he was overthwart,
quarellous, hateful, and generally of the people not well liked. At the age of
fourtene years, the Senate gave him the title of Caesar: not for the merit of
the son, but to yealde to the virtue of the father. The Emperor Marcus
Aurelius, seeing his son increase in age, and decrease in virtue, advised to
place him in a college of priests, with whom many sons of noble men were
bred: but in the end, he as little profited, by the company of priests, as by
the doctrine of his scholemaisters: for he held always, enimitie with other
men's counsel, and great friendship with his own will. When his father came
from the Parthike wars, in token of gratefulness, the Senate gave unto
Commodus the title of Prince: which name unto that day, was never given unto
the son of any Emperor.

The Roman Princes held a custom, yearly to give unto the people for their
sustentation, wheat, wine, and oil, and other things, on which day always
in Rome they made great feasts. Commodus being then of fiftene years of age,
and also placed in the temple of Traiane, gave and divided unto the people,
their accustomed shares of wheat, oil, and wine: on that day Commodus was so
feasted of all the Senate, as his father was the day he entered triumphing into
Rome. When the Emperor Marcus Aurelius came from the wars of the Argonautes,
he was received into Rome with great triumph: and the more to honor and to do
him pleasure, the Senate did ordeine, that his son Commodus, should with him
be placed, in the chariot triumphant: and further and beside this, they did
inuest him with the garment imperial: that is to say, they did abilitate and
elect him, that after the death of his father, his son Commodus should be
Emperor. Marcus Aurelius went into Egypt, and also into Assyria, to visit
those countries, and lead with him his son Commodus. The Senate understanding
the noble works and deeds which he performed in all those countries and
provinces, sent him a dispensatio^ of the law Annuaria, which did prohibit,
that no young man might be admitted to be Consul: to the end that freely he
might establish his son Commodus, Roman Consul. Commodus was but xvij.
years of age, when he saw him self clad with the imperial garment, when he
divided shares of relief unto the common people, when he was elected a Roman
Consul, and was placed with his father in the chariot triumphant: which four
titles and honors, were not given to honor the son, but to please the
father. His proportion was after this manner: his body long and slender, his
face fair and well bearded, his eyes great and black, his hands white and
long fingred, his hair yellow and thick: finally, he was so fair and so
gracious, that in his person there was no blemish, either in his life any thing
to be praised.

It was monstrous and also lamentable to see, how this Prince was naturally
endued with so high a wit, and of such perfect singularity of proportion, and
further, being named Commodus, how to all purposes, he was incommodious, that
according to the judgment of al me^, he was not only unworthy of so great
and singular graces, but possessed his life with great indignity.

Commodus had his locks so perfect yelow, that when they were moved in the
sun with the air, they seemed not hayres, but thredes of gold: and many
held opinion, considering the incomparable beauty and finenesse of his
person, and the lively freshenesse of his face, that he had not been engendered
by mankind, but that the Gods had made him with their own hands. At all
times when he did ride through Rome, a vie both men and women left their
business, placing them selves at windows, upon houses, and all streets, to
behold him, as though they had never seen him: but as much as they praised
him for his beauty: so much did they dispraise and abhor him for his wicked
life. Commodus was far out of favor with his father Marcus Aurelius, and too
much cherished of his mother Faustine: wherein both the one and the other had
great reason: for doubtless, he gathered too small profit of his fathers
counsel, and followed too much the liberty of his mother. Commodus had another
brother named Verissimus, unto whom, if he had not dyed young, the father had
left the Empire: but so the destinies did ordeine, that he died which deserved
to live, and that he lived which deserved to dye. When in the presence of
Marcus Aurelius, talk was moved of Princes that had been honorable and
happy: some praising Alexander, that overcame Darius: others, Scipio that
subdued Haniball: others, Julius Caesar that conquered Po^peius: others,
Augustus that defeated Marcus Antonius: Marcus Aurelius made this answer: I
hold the Emperor Nerua more happy then all the rest, and for no other cause,
but for that he adopted Traiane for his son, in such wise, that he elected
whom he liked, and not as I most sorrowful, that must take such as they have
given me.

CHAP. III. How Commodus did inherit the Empire of his father Marcus
Aurelius, and of a certain speech which he used unto the Senate.
JN the xvi. year of the reign of Marcus Aurelius, and in the 63. year of his
age, war was raised in Panonia, which at these days is otherwise named
Hungary: in which wars the good Emperor would go in his own person,
leading also with him his son Commodus, according unto his accustomed manner,
that by the taste of travels in the wars, he should bend and yield him self
to conserve peace. The Emperor in the greatest heat and fury of those
martial affairs, was soudeinly stricken with a deadly sickness, and in few
days deprived of his life: Commodus being then in so tender years, that he
neither felt what he lost, either the danger wherein he stood. At the death of
Marcus Aurelius, his son Commodus was elected Prince, and confirmed Caesar,
whereof proceeded (but chiefly for affection they bare unto his father) that
presently he was obeyed of all the armies, as true Emperor: notwithstanding
they all suspected, he should be the loss of their common wealth, and procure
to his person some evil conclusion. Before the emperor Aurelius died, he left
his son Commodus commended unto certain tutours, as well fortunately to
finishe those wars begone, as also to assist and counsel him in the
government of the common wealth, because ye father comprehending the son,
did fear, that leaving ye enemies, he would abandon him self unto vices: and
although the common wealth were forgotten, would dedicate him self unto the
pleasures of his person.

The exequies for the good Prince Marcus Aurelius being celebrated, and
sumptuous sacrifices also offered for him unto the Gods, Commodus was advised
by his counsel, to use some speech unto all his Senators, and captains
attendant in those wars: who being advanced upon an high skaffolde, began
after this manner to make his Oration.

The Oration of Commodus made to the Senate.
The universal calamity, and the particular sorrow, which for the death of
my father, this sorrowful day does represent, is no less common unto you then
to me: for if I have lost a pitiful father, you have lost a righteous and a
just Prince. My loss is not small, that have lost such a father, but much more
have you lost, that have lost such a Prince: because the hurt of one is
tolerable, but that which redoundeth to the offense of many, for ever is to be
lamented. Experience teaches us, that of an hundred fathers, there be not
twain, that are evil unto their children: and by the contrary, of an
hundredth princes, ye shall hardly find twain, that exquisitely shall prove
good for their subjects. If this be true, as it is most true, that I have
said: it is just, and very just, that if sons lament the death of their
parents, with tears of their eyes: that subjects bewail the death of their
good Princes, with drops from their hearts.

How humble my father has been unto the Gods, how severe with ye wicked,
how affable with good men, how patient in injuries, how grateful for service,
how bountiful in his house, and how zealous for the common wealth: although
you have seen, you have not thoroughly comprehended: for that good Princes be
not exactly known, until they be lost. My father was so fortunate and
venturous in the wars, so singular in science, so sincere and clean of life,
and so perfect a lover of the common wealth, that the dead had envy at the
living, not of the life which they possessed, but of the Prince which they
inioyed. It may not be denied, but that the Roman Empire is in debt and
beholding unto many Princes past: but I say and affirm, that Rome is more in
debt unto my father, above all other: for others made the common wealth rich,
but my father made it virtuous: others repaired walls, but he reformed
manners: and that which is more, others brought to pass that Rome was feared
of all strange nations: but my father framed, that Rome of all in general was
both served and beloved. You all well understand, what difference there goes
betwixt voluntary, and forceable service: for as my father did use to say, it
is more tolerable to be commanded of such as love us, then to be served of
such as abhor us. My father has now finished his journey, and certainly,
most perfectly has run out his race: herein ye may conceive his inestimable
love toward you, in that he commended me his only son into your hands:
and if I follow and perform his will, he gave me not the Empire to command
you, but to the end I should serve you, for he expressly gave in charge, that
my Empire should tend more to your utility, then to mine own profit, humbly
beseeching the immortal Gods, to make me such, as my father at his death
commanded, and as you Romans do wish and desire: because there is no man in
this world so evil, that desires not to be governed by a Prince that is good.
You with me, and I with you, in the manner of our government after his death,
he did very well express in the time of his life, directing me by
commandment to call you fellows, and forbidding you to call me Lord: for his
desire was, that you should favor, and counsel me as a son: and that I
should deal with you as with brethren, and trust and believe you as fathers.
The love which the gods do bear us, the same my father always used with you:
that is to say, he did so tenderly love you all, as if ye all had been but one
man: whereof it follows that you are not so much in his debt, for that which
he did for you, as for ye he would have done, and could not. I remember me,
that many times being a child, my father delighted that ye should take,
embrace, kiss, and cherish me: to the end that embracing of me in your arms,
ye should place me in your hearts: and also, that I finding your arms open,
should not unjustly close my bowels from you. My Empire is not as the Empire
of others, yt is, I neither bought it with money, either obtained it by voices,
or won it by arms, or took it by guile: no doubtless, it is not so: for as
others obtain by adventure, naturally I inherit. You have great reason in
mind to be satisfied, and in heart contented, since ye have a prince not
delivered by the hands of strangers, but borne in your own houses. I confess
that to prove good, it avails much to desire and also procure to be good:
but jointly herewith I say, that to be a prince, it necessarily requires to
have the favor of his kingdom: for otherwise, if strangers do repugne, and
subjects do not succor, it may be in his own hands to be a good man, but not
in his power to be a good Prince.

My father was old, and I am young, whereof it follows, yt more glory
redoundeth unto you, by yealding obedience unto me, then unto my father:
because obedience done unto him, proceeded of the merit of his authority: but
that which ye shall yealde unto me, proceeds of your own pure virtue. All
the rewards, honors, and offices, that my father gave in time of his life
from henceforth I confirm them unto such as hold them: for that being (as he
was) both holy and virtuous, the Gods aproouing all his acts, it were not
just, they should be disalowed of men. Neither in the dignities of the Senate,
the captainshippes of the armies, the offices of my house, there is nothing to
be said, much less to be altered: only one thing remains betwixt my father
and me, which is, that I confirm his good works, and change my unreformed
manners. Let us jointly put on noble minds, to give good end unto the wars
which my father has so happily begun, which being finished, we will all
go to our ease and solace, and enjoy the pleasures of Rome: which wars, if
we should leave undone, although the hurt should redound to me, the fault
should proceed and be imputed unto you. I will not say more unto you, my
friends and companions, but that I request and desire you, always to commend
unto your memory, the great love that my father has borne you, and the good
dealing he always used with you: that from his antiquity, my tender years,
and your great virtue, ye may frame a Prince, good for your selves, and
profitable for the common wealth.

Finally, I say that if ye have my father in remembrance, ye will never
forget or disobey me his son: for comparing his virtue with my liberty:
doubtless and without comparison, ye shall be much more persuaded by his
nobleness, then altered by my youthfulness.

This talk being finished, much money was thrown out amongst the armies
because, on such days, it was amongst the Romans much used. The Roman
Princes did not much vary from reason, to give and promise much money in the
beginning of their Empires: for as much as the malice of man is greedy and
covetous: they are more persuaded with a little money which is given, then
with many words that are spoken unto them.

CHAP. IIII. Of a certain famous and notable speech, used by one of his
tutours: for that he would leave the war of Panonia unfinished.
ALl the officers of the Senate, and all the captains of the army did
marueilously mitigate their sorrow, for the death of their most loving Lord
Marcus Aurelius, when they heard his son Commodus talk with so great
singularity: not only for that he confirmed, whatsoever his father had done,
but also because he promised by imitation most naturally to resemble him.

But what and how great difference was betwixt the words of this Prince at
that instant, and the works which after he performed in his life, was much
and too much: for nothing was more aparant, then that al his good words and
works, upon that day did finishe and take an end, because from that day, he
did not only speak evil, and do evil: but that which is woorst of all, it
was never seen, that ever he had any motion or desire to do good. Many be
wicked, and desire to amend: but this person so unhappy and sold to sin,
was not to day so evil: that he desired and procured not to morrow to be
worse. Certain days after he had used this talk unto the army, he permitted
to be governed by the advice of his tutours: but even shortly after he both
forgate the commandment of his father, and his promise made unto his men of
war: for that he lost not only the fear of his tutors, but also the love
and shame unto his friends. Commodus when he did inherit the Empire, was
weak, delicate, and of tender years: but notwithstanding did use such license
and liberty of life, that decayed his person, and damnified his inclination
and manners. His tutors and governors finding the offense that insued thereof,
advised to remove the mischief by information and counsel in secret: but so
perverse was his condition, that for their gentle admonition, he did presently
abhor them. Now when Commodus had publicly lost his fear unto tutors, his
obedience unto governors, and reverence unto his friends, he would neither
behold the one, or speak with the other: but that all his communication, and
conversation was with persons light, young and vicious, unto whom he committed
all his secrets: who began to persuade him to leave the wars, to go to Rome,
renewing his memory with the opulencie of Italy, and the beauty of Rome: and
jointly did murmur at the land of Panonia, saying, it was barren, dry, cold,
poor, and contagious: and that to drink a pitcher of water, they were first
constrained to break the Ice.

With these and such like words, Commodus was easily persuaded to leave the
wars of Panonia, and take his way into Italy: and to bring the same to
effect, calling his tutours and governors into his presence, fained to have
great suspicion, that while he remained in ye wars, some others should
conspire and rebel in Rome: in respect whereof to avoyde ye woorste, he was
determined first to assure him self of his own countries, before he
conquered straung kingdoms. So great sorrow entered the hearts of the gouerners
and capteines, that were present at that assemblye, that heavily castinge their
countenaunces on the ground, they were not able to answer one word. A
Senator named Po^peyanus being present at that counsel, who had married
Lucilla, daughter unto Marcus Aurelius, and elder sister unto Commodus: besides
his aliance in marriage, he was a man both rich, wise, valiaunte, and
aunciente: and therewithal had great boldness in that which he did, and no
less credit in that which he said. This Consul Pompeyanus, beholding all the
assembly in great silence, thought good to take in hand, to answer the
Emperor Commodus after this manner.

The Oration of Pompeyanus to Commodus.
Oh my son, and my Lord, for thee to have desire to see Rome, and to go into
Italy, is no meruel: for the same which thou desire, all we have long
wished, but following and embracing reason, we endure not to be overcome or
carried away with sensuality. I call thee son, because I have bred and
nourished thee from thy youth: and I call thee Lord, because thou art Lord of
my mother Rome: by the one I am bound as a faithful vassal to follow and
obey thee, and by the other thou art bound as unto a good father to believe
me: and may it please the immortal gods, that thou have as ready an heart to
believe my counsels, as I have, redilie to obey thy commandments.

Many years I did follow and serve thy father, and also am fully persuaded,
that my service was grateful unto his heart, and did not only tenderly love
me, but also frankely gave and recompensed me: for which reason, unto him and
his house I will never become ungrateful: and am determined, one for one to
counsel thee, in that which thou ought to do, and afterward employ my
life where in thou shall command me. In that which I shall now say, if I have
not that reverence, that from a vassal is due unto the Lord, at the least I
shall have that love that a father does owe unto his son: and if now thou
shall be displeased with my words, and shall take them to other end then they
be spoken, the time shall come, wherein thou shall repent thee, for not
believing the old Pompeyanus, and that thou have followed thine own will and
judgment. But coming to the purpose, thou see (most sovereign prince) that
all which be present, neither do behold or answer thee, which may not
proceed, but that either they know not to speak, or dare not answer, or else
they think thou will not believe them: any of which, is too much hurtefull
and dangerous: because it is a fault in a prince, to demand counsel of him
that knows not to give it: but it is much woorsse when they dare not speak
that which is meet to be said: but that which is woorste of all, is, when a
prince knows not to take the benefit of good counsel.

If thou had in remembrance, what thy father commanded, it were superfluous
at this present to advance my self to give thee counsel: and I dread, that
as thou haste made no account of his commandment, in much less estimation
thou will hold my request: but in the end I will say my opinion, and after
wards, make choice of what shall, or may please thee.

My son, call to remembrance whose son thou were, that is to say, of my
Lord Marcus Aurelius. for if thou do consider that thou had to father so
good a father: thou art much bound, being his son, to prove a very good
son. Thou did inherit of thy father his house, his goods, his estate,
and his memory: all which doubtless is very little, if thou did not
inherit his nobleness: because, for thy only virtue thou art to be honored
and obeyed: as touching the rest, as thou did inherit in one day thou may
lose in one hour. The glory which thou receiuest, to have so good a father,
so near and in company with the Gods, the same should he have there, to
have so good a son here amongst men: for other wise, as much pleasure as
thou take of his glory, so much grief shall he receive of thy infamy.

Thou will (my son) leave this war which thy father has begone, and
wilt go to enjoy the delights of Rome: I swear by the immortal Gods, I may
not immagine ye unworthiness of him that put the same into thy head: because
such and so great an enterprise as this, ought not to be left unfinished,
either if it were not begone, unperformed.

Thou may not deny, but that thy father was wise, advised, patient, and
valiante, which being so in my iudgmente it should be right just, that thou
should adventure thy goods, where in he adventured and also lost his life.
The affairs of Italy are in peace, in Rome there is no mutinous person, in
Asia, and Africa, there is no common wealth out of quiet: the cause thereof
proceeds, of ye great affection which they did bear unto thy father: and of
the great power, yt here they understand his son does possess, which if
thou forsake, and lose therewithal so great reputation: thou shall leave the
Barbarians in peace, and make war against thy self. If thou (my son) wilt
obtain rest and a good life, sustain and conserve that which thy father did
win and get in time of his life: and thou shalt find, that he conquered
all, won all, recovered all, and made all plain: and it is not unjustly
said, that he had all: for if he conquered walls with armor, he won hearts
with good works and noble deeds. My son, what will thou seek out of
Panonia, yt thou may not find in Panonia: if thou desire to see Rome, I give
thee understanding, that true Rome is where the Emperor of Rome is resident:
because Rome is not holden for Rome, for the stately walls where with it is
compassed, but for the heroical men where with it is governed.

If thou will have riches, behold here is ye treasure and the collectors
thereof. If thou will have men of counsel, here is the whole sacred Senate. If
thou will have men of noble minds, there are none in the world, as those of
thine army.

If thou will have lusty young men of thine age, here are the sons of all
the noble Romans.

If thou will fish, behold here the great river Danubic, if thou will hunte
and chase the wild beast, here are sharp mountains, if thou will have
fair women, behold here women both of Rome and Germany most beautiful. If
this be true, as it is most true, wherefore my son will thou depart from
Rome, to go and seek Rome? If upon the soudaine thou leave this war, thou
shall stain thy fame with a great blemish, and also put thy common wealth in
great danger: because the barbarous shall think, that thy power is not
sufficient to overcome them, and also that thou dare not attempt to assail
them. Thy father left thee with great power, and great reputation in the
Empire: and thou (my son) should rather bend and fix thine eyes to
conserve thy reputation, then thy potencie: because thy power only profits
against thine enemies: but thy reputation profits to conquer enemies, and to
conserve friends. And thou ought not to conceive or think that ye power of
the Roman princes is so great, that it lies in their hands at their own
likinge to make war or peace with the barbarous nations: because there is
nothing wherein fortune is less correspondent then Martial affairs. The good
princes ought to do much, travel much, and also adventure much, to avoyde
war and to obtain peace: but after they are determined to attempt and
prosecute the same, they ought to respect nothing more then the finishing
thereof: because many euiles are cut off, by a good war, which may not be
finished or brought to pass with a suspicious or a doubtful peace. It is
great folly for any man to endaunger him self, only upon the hope of a
remedy: but much more is it, when a man has allredie thruste him self into
danger, not to seek to escape the peril thereof.

CHAP. V. How Commodus left the wars of Panonia to go to Rome.
After that Pompeyanus had ended his Oration, Commodus did show him self
offended, for the opening thereof in so common assembly, and pleased for the
integrity of his words, giving for an answer, that for the present he
would defer his departing: until ripe counsel, should determine some other
matter. Not withstanding his small age, he was of such dissimulation in
matters he would bring to pass, and so double in his words which he did
speak, that the answer which he made, was not to the intent to stay his
departing, but to confirm them in negligence and want of providence. It was
published in the whole army, what Pompeyanus had said unto Commodus, and that
the departing into Italy was deferred until the wars were finished: of
which news some were pleased, and some displeased: because the ancient and
virtuous wished all things to be done to the honor of the common wealth: but
the younger persons and such as were vicious, had desire to go the vices of
Rome. Some remaining quiet, and others negligent, Commodus determined to
proceed with his purpose: and wrote certain letters unto Rome, wherein he
commanded, they should order his house and prepare for his coming: and he
did also write, that they should relieve him with some monye, for that with
the wars he was much consumed. His letters being dispatched unto Rome,
Commodus commanded all the valiant capteins to come unto his presence, with
whom he did communicate the manner and fashion which he would use with those
barbarous people, to frame them to yeald to some honest truce: and if a better
conclusion might not be obtained, to finish the same with a peace dearly
bought. After that messengers had passed betwixt Commodus and the Barbarians
diversely to and fro: in the end it was resolved, that he rendered many
countries, that had been taken from the enemies, and also gave the^ a great
sum of money: and they promised to continue friends, but not vassals unto
the Romans. This conclusion being known and published, was not a little
grievous unto all noble minds of the army: because most truly the
capitulation thereof was too too infamous, that in respect of the state of
those wars it was not only not to be done, either as much as to be talked of.
Of these infamous conclusions, and ye paimente of so great sums of money, he
gave no part thereof unto ye Senate or governors to understand, but unto such
men of war as he understood had desire to be gone, and such as he thought
durst not repugne. The fame being published that Commodus would depart toward
Rome, the whole army was so altered, that none would remain in the frontiers,
but that every man without order, prepared with great have to return into
Italy: in such wise that Commodus, not only ceased to continue hostility
against ye Barbarians, but also left no garrisons, to guard the Roman people.
The Emperor Commodus parted from Panonia to go to Rome, ye tenth day of ye
month of February: and so great was his desire to come to Rome, that in many
cities which were in his way, where they came forth to receive him, he would
not only stay to hear what they would say, either receive yt which they would
present: but also alone and disguised, in post would pass their streets.

Incredible was the pleasure which they received in Rome, when Commodus did
write of his partinge from Panonia: but much greater was their joy, when they
understood that he was at hand: for remembringe that he was borne amongst
them, and that they had bred and nourished him, and that he was the son of so
good a father: they held it for certain, that in his time Rome (more then
ever it did) should flourish, and that every man in particular, should augment
his estate. In respect of the great love and reverence they did bear unto the
father Marcus Aurelius, and the report blown amongst the Romans of ye
singular beauty of his son Commodus, they did so extremly desire to see him,
that he held him self most happy that came furthest off to receive him. March
was half past when Commodus came to Rome, at which time trees do yealde forth
their flowers, and fields their fragrant smelles: against the day that he
should enter Rome, the Romans had made all ways even and clean, and
banqueting houses deckte with boughs to eat and drink in: the Senators
came forth in great order, the women of Rome in sumptuous apparel, and the
townsmen all with boughs and green branches, in such manner they received
him that day with as great pleasure and joy, as if he had entered in his
chariote triumphant triumphinge of all Asia. After he entered the city, that
which he first did, was, in visitinge all the temples within the same:
chieflye he stayed in ye temple of Jupiter, where he offered sumptuous
sacrifices, all the noble men of Rome being present. Also he did visit
certain ancient sepulchers, especially ye sepulcher of Adrian, of Traiane, of
Antoninus Pius his grandfather, of Faustina his grand mother, and Faustina also
his mother: and some things yt were in them evil handled, or decayed, he
commanded to be repaired and made better. Joining unto the sepulcher of
Adrian, he commanded another sepulcher to be made, rich and sumptuous,
wherein the bones of his father Marcus Aurelius should be translated, which
sepulcher being finished, and having in remembrance how great love Marcus
Aurelius did bear them, and the good and sincere dealing he used with them,
the Romans did visit, honor, and held his sepulcher in as great
reverence, as their chiefest temples. This done, Commodus on a day went unto ye
Senate, saying and giuinge them warning, that in all and for all things, they
should follow the ordinance of his father, and perform and execute all that
he had commanded them: because after this manner, the imperial state should be
conserved as concerning strange nations: and the common wealth well governed
amongst them selves. Also he commanded all Judges of Rome to come before him,
charginge and commaundinge them, that without all exception of persons, equally
to give sentence according to justice: with a warninge, that if any of them
should presume to attempt the contrary, to have his sentence revoked, and his
person chasticed.

The Romans received great delight, to see how Commodus was obedient unto
the Gods, a lover of temples, grateful unto his friends, and zealous of the
common wealth: but alas for sorrow, so few were the months, and also the
days, that this gracious heat endured, that it seemed rather they had dreamed
it, then that he had done or performed it.

CHAP. VI. How Commodus was cruel, and of the cruelties which he used.
IN the ninteenth year of his age and the third year of his Empire, he
advertised the Senate, that he would visit all the cities in Italy: at his
departinge from Rome he went unto the mountains to hunte, on which chase,
many were the days that he employed, much money he spente, but much and many
more were the vices which he there committed.

Three months and odd days he went a fishing at rivers, passinge the
fields, and huntinge in mountains: in all which time he never entered city,
town, or village, either slepte in any house: and then sent his commandment
unto the Senate to prepare a triumph, for that he would enter triumphinge into
Rome: affirminge, that he better deserved triumph, for killing beasts that did
eat corn, then other Emperors for killinge of men that lived in towns. The
Senate neither might or durst, but to receive him with great triumph: and the
abominable Commodus, most odiously in the chariot triumphant, placed a young
man named Anterus, and openly, after the manner of man and wife, did embrace
each other. In his progress and pastimes which he used in those mountains,
he lost no part of his evil customs: but rather added evil upon evil: that
is to say, the fierceness which he recovered in slaying of wild beasts,
after his coming to Rome he employed in murdering of many honorable
personages. As touching the first, it is to weete he banished xxiiii. Consuls,
possessed their goods, and made a reward thereof unto his strumpets, and other
infamous persons: whereof five by importunate suite, of his gracious favor
were restored to their houses, and shortly after he cut off their heads. There
was in Rome a Senator named Birrius, a man in ye days of Marcus Aurelius much
esteemed, who deserved to marry with a sister of Commodus: who for that he
warned and informed Commodus of his evil and foul life, he commanded him and
all his friends to be slain: and also all the alies and servants unto his
sister.

From the time of Commodus father, there was remaining a certain prefect named
Ebutianus a man most truly ancient in years, and no yonglinge in virtues:
Commodus being advertised that Ebutianus had much lamented the death of the
Consul Birrius: unto whom Commodus sent a messenger to say unto him: that he
would understand of him, if he would weep for the death which he sent him,
as he had weept with the life which he possessed: which being said, by the
commandment of Commodus he cut off his head.

Another Senator named Apolaustus, who also sorowed the death of Ebutianus,
Commodus commanded to be slain.

The day that Apolaustus was executed certain young gentlemen of Commodus his
chamber, when they understood of execution done unto such as mourned for
Ebutianus: they devised to make a show of great joy for the death of
Apolaustus to escape the like danger: whereof Commodus being advertised, he
commanded their throtes to be cut: saying yt for any act done of the
prince, they ought neither to laugh or weep: but hear and see and hold their
peace. Also he slew Seruilius and Dulius with all their parentage which were
descended of the lineage of Silla: and he slew Antius Lupus Petronius, and
Mamertus, with all their band, which were of the lineage of Marius, affirminge,
that he executed the Sillans, to revenge the Marians, and executed the Marians
to revenge the Sillans.

There was in Rome a young gentleman a cosen to Commodus, both very fair and
valiant: and one saying by chance unto Commodus, that Mamertus Antonianus his
cosen, did resemble him in favor, and imitate him in valiantness: he
commanded them both presently to be slain, affirming, that he should be an
Emperor that did so resemble and compare with him. Amongst other anciente
Romans, there were six old Consuls, whose names were, Alius Fuscus, Celius
Felices, Lucius Torquatus, Alatius Ropianus, Valerius Bassianus and Patulius
Magnus, who for their impotencie were not able to come unto the Senate, he
commanded them all to be slain: saying, that he was bound to do in Rome, as
the good gardener in his orchard: yt is to say, that the dry old tree must be
cut or pulled up by the root and cast into the fire. In the government of
Asia, the Senate had placed Sulpitius Crassus, Julius Proculus, and Claudius
Lucanus, as Proconsuls to govern those provinces: whom with their families,
Commodus gave order to be murdered with poison: because in his presence they
were praised, for their deeds done in Asia: and also for communication, which
they had of his evils committed in Rome. Marcus Aurelius visitinge the kingdom
of Achaia, had borne unto him a Niece, and daughter of his sister, named Annia
Faustina, whom also Commodus commanded to be slain: but the quarrel that he
had to take away her life, was, for that she had married without his license.
On a certain day upon the bridge of Tiber, were fourteen noble Romans
talking and passinge the time: and Commodus at that instant passinge that way,
said unto one that he should demand as of him self, whereof they talked:
unto whom they answered, that they were recountinge the virtues of Marcus
Aurelius, and that they had great sorrow of his death. Commodus hearing this
answer, presently and out of hand, commanded all the xiiii. gentlemen to be
hurled headlong over the bridge into the river: affirming, that they could not
speak well of his father, but that they must speak evil of him which was his
son. He would many times play with the sword players: and betwixt ieste
and earnest he killed a thousand of them. He was so cruel of nature, and so
doughtie in his deeds, that he had no scruple to kill, either fear to be
slain. Commodus perceiuinge that all the Romans fledd, either to see, hear,
speak, or to be conversant with him, to no other end but to avoid occasion
to be slain at his hands: he remembered to inuente a conspiracy, which is to
weete, to say and publishe, that many had conspired against him to his
destruction: all which he commanded to be strangled and cut in pieces,
notwithstanding that any such conspiracy was never thought of or intended.

CHAP. VII. Of a certain conspiracy attempted against Co^modus, and of
Perennius his most favored counselor.
Amongst other sisters, Commodus had one named Lucilla who in ye life of her
father Marcus Aurelius, married with a Consul whose name was Lucius Verus, who^e
he admitted with him self to be companion in the Empire, by such mean as
Lucilla was entitled Empress, and her husband Emperor. But a year and
three months, Lucius Verus lived as companion in the Empire with Marcus
Aurelius, his father in law: in such wise, that even then, when he was very
young, he lost his life, and Lucilla as young became a widow. Lucius Verus
being dead, Marcus Aurelius married his daughter Lucilla unto a noble Roman
named Pompeyanus, a man very wise in letters, expert in arms, and aunciente
in years. After the death of Marcus Aurelius, Commodus succeding in the
Empire, and not then married, did always entreat his sister Lucilla as
Empress, for as much as she had been wife unto an Emperor: and also being
an ancient custom, continued in the malice of man, that although the state be
finished, and the goods consumed, notwithstanding folly remains. Thus stood
the case: Commodus was after married unto a Roman lady named Crispina, unto
whom from thence forth honor was done, that was accustomed to be used unto
Lucilla, yt is to say, in ye Theater or open place to sit in ye chiefest
seat, to receive gifts and presents of free men, and by the ways to have
torchlight, and to be recited by name in prayers made in Temples. Mortal was
the envy that Lucilla received, to behold the honor imperial which she
had once in possession, to be removed, and pass unto her sister Crispina: and
from thence forth, all her device, practice, and speech, tended but to rid
her brother Commodus of his life, and Crispina her sister in law of her honor.

There was at court with the prince a young gentleman of Rome, of noble
blood, and of face beautiful, with whom it was bruted, Lucilla used dishonest
love: his name was Quadratus, the son of a very rich father, unto whom she
discovered the secret of her intent, to kill her brother Commodus, because he
persecuted her husband Pompeyanus, and the Empress Crispina did deadly hate
her.

Quadratus desirous to do Lucilla a pleasure, consented to perform that act,
and the order which he used therein was, that he joined in counsel with the
son of a Senator named Quincianus, a young man both doughtie and valiant:
who should upon the soudaine, with a sword drawn, enter upon Commodus in his
chamber, with these words: This present the Senate sends thee: and at the
instante to cut off his life. Quincianus accepted this enterprise, that is to
say, to kill the Emperor Commodus: but failed at the time of the execution
thereof: for notwithstanding he had courage sufficient to enter ye chamber with
a sword drawn, yet to perform the deed his heart was dismaide: in such wise,
that the treason was uttered and the deed unperformed.

Quincianus was presently taken, and discovered the conspiracy that Quadratus
and Lucilla had devised for the destruction of the Emperor Commodus. And for
as much as Quincianus was son unto a Senator, Commodus did bear so mortal
hatred unto the Senate, that from thence forth, whosoever named him self a
Senator, he held him for a traitor. Immediately after Commodus began to
reign, a warrlike captain named Perennius, fell into his favor: who in
martial affairs was very expert, and of inclination and condition no less
perverse: for his pride was intolerable, and his covetousness, insatiable.
The favor, conversation, and credit, that Perennius had with Commodus was to
the great prejudice of all the Roman people: because if Commodus were cruel,
Perennius was most cruel: if Commodus had ire, Perennius did persuade to take
vengeance: and beyond all the rest, did not disuade from vice, but invented new
devises to lead unto wickedness. Pompeyanus being a man both honorable and
aunciente, and husband unto Lucilla sister unto Commodus, the Emperor did
bear him some reverence: and jointly therewith, Lucilla had the fame of great
riches, in money and jewels: whereof proceeded no small displeasure unto
Perennius, who hardely endured the estimation of others in the court of the
Emperor Commodus.

Where upon, the treason being discovered, he with great impatience did incite
the Emperor Commodus, on Pompeyanus and Lucilla to execute cruel justice,
which he incessantly persuaded, not for justice sake, but to finish ye favor
which the Emperor did bear unto Pompeyanus, and to get unto him self the
treasure of the lady, Lucilla.

When princes be in ire, and furious, they have much to consider, of whom they
demand counsel: because, not a few but many times it happens, that the
private and favored courtiour gives counsel unto the prince, not so much
for the favor he bears to the execution of justice, as for the reuengement
of his own cruel and damnified heart. The tyrant Perennius beholding Co^modus
inflamed with ire, did know to take the profit and benefit of time: that is
to say, Pompeyanus, Lucilla, Quadratus, Quincianus and al their affinity,
brothers, friends and servants, he caused to be slain, put to death, their
goods to be confiscate, in such wise, that he was not only revenged of all his
enemies, but also applied unto him self all their treasure.

After the death of these persons, all the affairs of the Empire were governed
at the will, wisdom, and pleasure of Perennius: who grew to be a lord so
absolute of the Empire, that al ambassages that came to Commodus, he only heard
them: and all letters missiue he read and answered them, in such manner, that
Commodus bare ye name of Emperor, and Perennius did enjoy the empire. All
offices and rewards being given by the hands of Perennius, procured service
and diligence from all men, yt in as much, as he that might do most, saved
most: but he was so hard of condition, and of gold and riches so cruel and
covetous, that of mere grace he gave no office, but by the weight of pure
money always did sell the same: and to him that would not buy, he gave
presents more dear then the money which he demanded. Perennius had enrolde
the names of all the moneyed men in Italy, which if they did not present him
some rich iuells, he procured them to be placed in offices: wherein he did
seek quarells, to spoil them of their lives, and to rob them of their
goods.

CHAP. VIII. Of a conspiracy that Perennius wrought against the Emperor
Commodus.
IN very short time Perennius became very rich, but his presumption and
riches being examined and laid together, without comparison much greater was
the pride which he did show, then the treasures which he possessed. Commodus
had such confidence in Perennius, that he not only committed unto him the
government of the whole common wealth, but also the order and honor of his
house: in so much that Perennius was of the one and the other so absolute and
so dissolute, that he was not contented to rob Co^modus of his riches, but
also used unlawful company with his own especial courtisans, by who^e he
had both sons and daughters. Perennius had sons grown to man's estate,
which were in the armies: and when any notable deed was done in the wars,
he would report at the Emperors table, that it was performed and atchiued by
his sons: in such wise, that from them ye were in peace he bereft their
goods, and them that died in ye wars he spoiled of their honor. In ye fifte
year of Commodus reign, the Senate sent an huge army against the Britains,
whereof Perennius was admitted both Consul and captain: in which journey he
was not satisfied, to be served as one in favor, and obeyed as Consul: but
would be reverenced as a prince, and adored as a God.

Perennius prospering in his martial affairs, and holding the whole common
wealth in his own hands, and possessing wealth above all reckoning, he then
immagined to want nothing but the attainement of the Roman empire: for the
accomplishement whereof, he thoroughly determined to kill his Lord and master
Commodus, placing his sons Pretors over all the armies, to be ready at hand
in time upon the news of the death of the Emperor Commodus. Perennius also
had drawn unto his parcialitie certain Senatoures, and other the welthiest
neighbors and citizens of Rome by gifts and rewards in secret, but in
especial by aggravating the wicked life of Commodus. On the fourth day of May,
the Romans did celebrate the great feast of Jupiter Capitoline, whereunto
not only the whole people of Rome, but also of all cities of Italy did
concur: and when the Emperor on that day was resident in Rome, always in
his own person went to authorize and see the feast. The Emperor Commodus
beholding the plays and pageants provided for that triumph, and Crispina his
wife being placed on the one hand, and Perennius the private and greatly
favored courtier, set on the other hand: they beheld a carte coming al
covered with boughs, crying continually for room and audience. And when they
were come unto the presence of the Emperor Co^modus and all persons by his
commandment using silence, the people thinking they would have uttered some
pageant or matter of disporte: soudeinly there appeared a man aloft upon the
carte, which had a long bearde, a sheepeheardes hook in one hand, and a sling
in the other: and from the girdle upward all naked, his other garments very
poor, and after the manner of a Philosopher, and directing his words unto
Commodus, said:

The Oration to Commodus
O Commodus, it well seems that thou art a Prince, and that very young,
which art in these plays and delights so careless and negligent, which
thou ought not to do, because Princes of thy age, estate, and condition,
run much more in peril, in their excessive pleasures, then in their mean
travails. Being (as thou art) rigorous with thine own, and furious and
unbridled with strangers, thou ought to consider, and not to be unmindful,
that thou have enemies: for the Prince that is feared of many, has just cause
also to fear many. The greatest riches, and the best treasure in this world,
is truth, whereof Princes be most poor of all people: for that their ears
being filled and led away with lies, may take no taste in matters of truth. Thou
Commodus and other Princes, do not evil govern your common wealths of any
prepenced malice to destroy the same: but because ye give not, either delight
your selves to hear the poor that be grieved and oppressed, when they
complain, neither the good, godly, and virtuous, when they give aduisement, of
the great and horrible vices of briberie, extortion, and violent robberies,
committed by officers, by the private and favored, by the mighty and men of
power. Great is the fault of Princes, for the vices which they committ, but
much greater is their offense in dissembling the offenses of their favored
servant, because ye offend not, but only the Gods, but they both offend the
Gods, vex and trouble men, and are traitors to your own persons. Although
Commodus, thou be licentious, dissolute, wilful, and also not very honest: it
is impossible, but if the hurtes and mischiefs, scandals, and robberies,
committed by thy officers and favored servants, were notified and given thee
to understand, thou would command them to be amended, and also to be
remedied: for in the end there is no Prince so evil, that desires not his
common wealth to flourish. At these days, truth in Princes houses is so
odious, that who so aduentureth but to make report thereof, of death he must
have determination: and if any such do escape with life, it proceeds of some
conceit to be spoken of madness. That, which at this present I will say and
discover, I protest unto the immortal Gods, it proceeds not of madness, for
that my natural judgment is confirmed with reason: either do I say it of
malice, to be revenged of any person: but only (Oh Commodus) to deliver thy
life of great peril, and to franchise Rome from servitude of a tyrant: for that
which I presume to say, and adventure to discover, I am assured before my tale
be ended, my life shall be taken away. But (O Commodus) I give thee to
understand, that if thou will not give faith unto my words, the time will
come, when thou shall understand the truth, of all that I have said, when thy
mischief may have no remedy. Thou (Commodus) art there set and placed, with
the Empress Crispina on thy right hand, and on thy left hand thy private and
favored Perennius, but had thou certain intelligence, what he has ordained
against thee, with thine own hands you would bury him quick. Perennius has
not been satisfied, to put to death all good men, to be revenged of his
enemies, to have destroyed all thy servants, to have robbed all thy treasures:
but that now he practices to take away thine own life, to advance and exalt
him self to the whole power of this city and common wealth.

O Commodus, if thou know not, I give thee to understand, yt the sons of
Perennius, by fraud have ince^sed thy armies of Illyria against the. Pere^nius
him self cease not to corrupt the Senate, and secretly seeks to win the
minds of men, giving gifts, and large rewards unto the people: and all to
the end that upon the first news of thy death, without contradictio^, he may
possess ye whole estate of ye Roman Empire. And think not, that Perennius
does now be gin to attempt this treason, for yt of great certeintie I do assure
thee, that many days past he has put the same in practice, and is upon the
point, at this instant, to have it to be executed: in so much that if on this
day I had not adventured to give thee warning, be thou assured, that on this
present day before this feast had been finished, thy life had here been ended.

Until that poor man had said, that on that day Commodus death was prepared,
not only the people gave ear, but also Perennius: who presently rose out of
his chair with great fury, commanding the sword players to kill that
presumptuous and rash dizarde, who was presently slain, drawn, cut in pieces
and burnt.

Perennius of all men so deadly hated, by this poor man's tale, sunk into
suspicion of the people, and also Commodus conceived against him some scruple:
but that Philosopher being there slain, and Perennius in so great power,
although they had all suspicion of his treason, yet no man there durst speak a
word. The matter remaining certain days more suspicious then clear: there
came gentlemen from Illyria, and brought certain pieces of gold, wherein both
the name and also the Image of Perennius was engraven: which money Perennius
commanded his sons in great secrecy to be made.

The coyners thereof being advertised what the Philosopher had said, and being
in great doubt in process of time to be discovered, came unto Commodus and
manifested the whole matter, which were not only pardoned, but also largely
rewarded. The treason being detected, which the traitor and tyrant Perennius
had devised, it seemed good unto the friends of Commodus, and the enemies of
Perennius, to the end to deliver him from all suspicion, first and immediately
to cut off his head: for that Perennius being guilefull, and in great power,
might have prevented his own execution with the slaughter of others.

A great part of the night being past, and Perennius reposing in his own
house, Commodus commanded him to be called in great haste, aduertising him at
the instant of letters out of Asia: who entering the Emperors chamber, found
not Commodus, but yet wanted not that presently cut off his head. At the
instant that Perennius was put to death, a post with great speed was sent
into Illyria, by whom Commodus did write unto the sons of Perennius, that
all things set aparte, they should repair to Rome to visit their father
being sick in his bed: to the end that if the destinies should permit his
death, to succeed in his place. The sons of Perennius did well think that
all had been truth which was written unto them, and nothing doubting the
detection of their treason, presently departed toward Come: but at their
entry of the first city of Italy, they were made shorter by both their
heads. This in conclusion was the end of ye tyrant Perennius, which lost his
sons, his goods, his honor, and his life: not rather for any mischief, then
for his presumption and pride. Of this example, let all Princes take warning,
how they magnify their servants with too great wealth and power: and this
is said, because potencie ingendreth envy: and overmuch riches does breed
and bring forth pride.

CHAP. IX. Of the tyrant Maternus, and of his treason against Commodus.
EXceeding joy did the Romans receive of the death of Perennius, and his
sons, because his avarice and pride was more sharp and intolerable, then
the folly of Commodus. The offices of Perennius were divided amongst many:
because it seemed, that so great authority and power, to be placed and
committed in one person, were to put his life in peril, and his Empire to
commission. Incredible and innumerable were the richesse, jewels, and money,
that were confiscate by the death of Perennius and his sons: but they were so
wilfully and wickedly divided and spent, that whatsoever Perennius gathered by
extortion and briberie, Commodus spent and employed in vices. There was in
those days in Italy a certain man named Maternus, who from his childhood was
bred in the armies of Illyria: of nature bold and valiant, subtle, painful,
sharp or quick, proud, seditious, and stammering, in such wise, that as he
was filthy of his tongue, so was he soudeine of his hands. In all debates,
seditions, and mutinies which happened in the camps, or cities, this Maternus
was ever found one, either the chief author thereof, or else to be noted
above the rest, because they say, this was his common speech, that on that
day, wherein he shed no blood, wine had no good relishe. The captains of the
armies did partly bear with him for his valiantness, but on the other side,
they might not endure his continual quarelinges, and in the end his lewdness
being grown intolerable, they did not only dispatche him from the wars,
but also did banishe him the confines of Italy.

This Maternus being a ringleader of all wicked and desperate persons that were
in the armies, many did accompany and also follow him in that exile: not to
remain as bound to lead a better life, but to have liberty to committ much
evil. With those companions that Maternus had recovered from the armies, and
with others that daily joined with him, he obtained under his Standarde twenty
thousand footmen, and two thousand horssemen within the space of four
months: with which people Maternus committed so many robberies, burnings, and
slaughters in the cities and territories of Italy, as if an Hanibal had been
raised from the dead to conquer Rome.

Italy being robbed and sacked, Maternus departed into Lombardie, and from
thence into France, and after into Spain: in which kingdoms, he continued in
that courtesy which he used in Italy: and that which was most to be
marueiled, was, that his army daily increased, and no man attempted to resist
him, in such wise, wise, that with them which were present, he did yield
occasion to be busied, and with them that were absent, he ministered matter of
communication. This tyrant Maternus and his people, held no other trade but to
rob temples, to sack towns, to scowre the fields, to spoil corn, to burn
houses, to force women, to defile virgins: and that which was woorste, that
not contented for them selves to live at liberty, they brake prisons, and set
at large all malefactors.

It is amongst evils the supreme evil, and in tyrants the greatest tyranny,
that they of them selves will not live according to reason and justice, but
that also they will not consent that malefactors be committed to justice.
Maternus and his army remaining in Spain, Co^modus wrote unto all the Pretors
of those countries, to raise an army of great power, to destroy the tyrant
Maternus, and to make great promises by public proclamations, that unto him
which should cut off the head, or take the body or person of Maternus,
should have in reward all his goods, and his picture advanced and set up in
Rome.

The first proclamations were published in Saragosa, at which time Maternus was
resident in Taragon, who being advertised that they of Spain prepared an army
against him, and that amongst the captains great wagers were laid, who
should first rid him of his life: he determined to return into Italy with
determination to kill Commodus in Rome. Where upon Maternus most secreatly
conferred, with his chief and special friends and arrantest thieves and most
doughtie personages, to forsake the army: severally diuidinge them selves, by
sundry ways upon one certain and appointed day without fail to make their
meeting in Rome. Presently after Maternus was gonne out of sight, al ye remnant
of his army was dismaide and fell in pieces, whereof there were infinite taken,
strangled, drowned, drawn and hanged: in such wise, that in so great a number
of thieves, none had better adventure, then to be slain or put to death, except
he had friendly favor of fortune to be made a bondsman. Maternus and his
companions, the day, hour, and place, on which they had agreed in Spain,
jointly did encounter at Rome: which for a time went dispersed and disguised
by day, but joined by night to committ their theftes: being furnished for their
provision, but only with such provision as they might pick by day, and steal
by night, wherein they used so great shifts, guile, and skill, that although
they accompanied but by couples, yet, if the ward or watch by day or night
did attempt to arrest or offend any one, at an instant they were all ready for
his defense: in such wise, that although they were of great disorder in their
life: yet they used great conformity in agreement for the manner and fashion
of their robberies

One of the things wherein the malice of man most readily does show it
self is, that to do evil, we are soon agreed: but to perform a good
work, we consent with great difficulty.

Commodus was well persuaded, that the tyrant Maternus was now dead,
imagining in his own conceit, that at the forsaking of his camp, and
renouncing of his army, of extreme desperation and horror of him self, he
had desperately drowned or committed him self to the halter. But Maternus in
recompense of the loss of his potencie, and negligence of his honor, bent all
his study to deliver Commodus from his life. The Romans held a custom
upon the tenth day of March, to celebrate the feast of the Goddess
Berecyntha: on that day the Emperor and the Senate went unto her temple, to
offer sacrifices, which done and performed, generally all persons for the most
part disguised them selves, masking and feasting throughout the whole city: in
such manner, their faces being covered, the one was unknown unto the other.
Maternus and other his fellow thieves and friends, had agreed to wear
secret armor, with face disguised, that when the Emperor Commodus should
most chiefly be addicted to view and behold the plays, and his guarde most
careless of his person: by a cou^terfet braule amongst them selves, to find
ready mean to cut off his life. But notwithstanding Maternus had lost his
wealth, power, and honor, he ceased not to continue proud, hautie, and
disdainefull: seeking to be served and reverenced, not as a friend and poor
companion, but after the manner of a Prince, and as one that were very rich.
Whereupon certain of his companions, being not only weeryed, but tired, to
walk lurkingly in corners, and not able to endure to be handled with so great
servitude: and further, fearing some day to be discovered, they repaired unto
Commodus, and with great secrecy manifesting the whole matter, which is to
wit, that Maternus the tyrant was a live, and fully determined in those plays
and feasts to kill him. Incredible was the fear wherewith Commodus was
touched, when he heard that Maternus the tyrant was alive: and no less was
his joy, to consider the conspiracy to be detected: and notwithstanding
Commodus had intelligence thereof certain days before the feast, he
suspended the execution thereof until the day of the Goddess Berecyntha: to
the end that nothing should be revealed unto Maternus, of that which was
discovered unto Commodus. The manner that Maternus devised to murder Commodus,
the same did Commodus use to take and kill Maternus, that is to say: the great
day of the feast being come, as Maternus and his band came masked and armed: so
Commodus brought forth his men armed and disguised: and with a set quarrel the
traitor and tyrant Maternus was slain, and his men cut all to pieces. The
greatest feast of that feast was celebrate, in stra^gling, hewing, mangling,
drawing and burning of the bodies of these miserable thieves: because it is an
evident law for tyrants, that the hurtes, robberies, slaughters, violences,
and burninges, which they have committed in many days, they come to make
repayment thereof in one hour.

CHAP. X. Of the inexpected death of Cleander, a favored and most private
servant unto Commodus.
AFter the death of the tyrant Maternus, the Emperor Commodus passed his life
in great doubt and fear, imagining with himself, that some day they would
dispatch him, either eating or sleeping: for he did both know, and also would
say, that they were few which prayed for his life, but very many that sighed
for his death. Until Commodus died he ever walked warely: for he doubled his
guard, to guard him by day, and strongly shutt in his house by night: in that
which he did eat, in his lodging where he slept, on the palfrey whereon he
road, on the garments which he did wear, he set great watch: in such wise,
that he paid it but only with his life that durst touch his garment.

Very seeldome he went to the Senate, and much less did ride openly in the
city: he had not talk with strangers but by writing: with his subjects he
had no conference, but by a person intermitted: and that which was more
marvel, he had many times such conceit, not only to refuse to write,
aunsweare, hear causes, or dispatch affairs: but also in four or five days
would not speak only one word. In the xi. year of his Empire, Maternus the
tyrant was slain: on the next year there followed a great pestilence, and a
general hunger, in which hunger and pestilence, the third part of Italy was
consumed. Immediately after the pestilence had entered Rome, Commodus departed
unto ye city of Laurento, where were planted many Laurel trees, for which
cause the city was named Laurento: where also the Emperor more remained, then
in any other place: the Physicians giving him to understand, that to be under
the shadow thereof, was very proper and convenient for defense of the
pestilence. Notwithstanding the scarsitie of bread and wine that was that
year, further, a certain occasion of great hunger happened in Rome, which was
as follows. When the good Marcus Aurelius triumphed over the Argonautes, he
brought amongst other captives a young man named Cleander: who was openly
sold in the market place in Rome, and by chance bought by a clarke of the
kitchen, to sweep and make clean the larder at court. This slave Cleander
became so handsome in sweeping, serving, and pleasing his master, that not
many years after, he did not only make him free, and marry him with his
daughter, but also did advance him to the office of Clarke of the kitchen: in
such manner, that from the estate of a bondsman, he endued him with the
condition of a son. Now when Cle^ander saw himself free, married, and in
office in the Court, he traveled to obtain the good will of the Emperor
Marcus Aurelius, which he obtained by carfulness in service, and diligence in
his office: and used therein so great diligence and promptness, that he was
never noted, either slack in provision, or false in reckoning.

Marcus Aurelius being dead, Commodus forgate not to remove Cleander from the
affairs of the kitchen, and made him captain of his guard, and Lord great
Chamberlain of his chamber. Unto none of as many as did serve and accompany
Commodus in his youth that he was grateful, but unto Cleander: unto whom it
had bin much better, never to have risen to so great honor: for thereof only
proceeded the loss of his life. Although the favor of Cleander did rise in
jest or of small causes, he framed in few days to perform the same in
earnest, which was as follows: that as Commodus grew into disgrace, and was
abhorred and had no care of the government of the Empire, Cleander did press
and in such manner did thronge to entermedle with affairs, that for the more
part all matter were dispatched at his will and pleasure: in such wise, that
Commodus gave or firmed nothing, if Cleander did not sign or allow the same.
Commodus had never any private or favored servant, that in all points could
so win his will as Cleander: who affirmed to wish nothing, that Commodus
wished not, either to allow any thing that he said not: but aduouched also
that he did not think or dream, but that which Commodus did dream and
think: and with these and such like lies and flatteries, he wan the heart of
Commodus, and obtained service of the whole Empire. After Cleander beheld
himself the only private and favored servant of Commodus, he easily made
himself rich: obteyning the custody, not only of the whole common treasure,
but also the keeping of all the money and jewels of the Emperor Co^modus: and
further in giving offices, and receiving presents, his sincerity exceeded
not. But Cleander finding himself in so great magnificence, began not greatly
to regard so great favor, or much less the obteyning of so great wealth:
conceyuing in the end, that Commodus did use him as a vassal, and that he
must account him as his Lord: to cut off which opprobrie, and to give
contentation unto his heart, he determined to kill Commodus, and for himself
to usurp the Empire. Cleander did build at the port Salaria, most costly and
delectable bathes, and commanded proclamation to be made in Rome, to notify
unto all men, that would bathe therein, to be discharged of all cost, and
freely to use the same: and also added thereunto great pastimes, and
preparations unto all kind of vices: in such wise, that there they cleansed
their bodies, and defiled their souls. Many times Cleander did inuit the
Senate, and sent them particular presents home to their houses: The Pretors,
Censors, Questors, Tribunes, Prefectes, and other Roman officers, he caused
their duties to be paid: and all the men of war he did not only pay them,
but also did travel to hold them contented: in such manner, that some with
vicious delights and pleasures, and some by rewards, gifts, and money, in a
manner he recovered all men for his friends. In the year of great hunger and
pestilence in Italy, Cleander bought all the wheat in the countries adjoining
unto Rome: wherein his intent was, not to gain or make a profit thereof, but
to bring Rome into a necessity, to ye end that all men should come to his
house for wheat: and therein to have used so great liberality, in selling
good cheap, and giving plentifully, in a year so dear, that after the death
of the Emperor Commodus, they should not mislike to give him the Empire. And
as hunger increased cruelly, a great part of the year being as yet to come,
and the people not knowing Cleanders intent, who did neither give or sell any
wheat: soudainly al Rome did rise, exclaming death and treason against
Cleander, as an usurper of the goods of the common wealth. Cleander being a
man valiant, of great power, and Captain of the guard, commanded all the men
of his captaineship, to be armed: who did place themselves in the compass of
his house, for the guard of his person, and to resist that civil fury:
although it be most true, that he rather defended the sacking of his house,
then of fear to defend his life. The townsmen on the one side, and Cleander
on the other part, trauersed amongst themselves so long and perilous a
contention: that it seemed no other matter, but that Silla and Marius were once
more fallen into fight, for the seignorie of Rome. And as Cleanders party was
defended with men both armed and determined, in the first onset they executed
so great slaughter amongst the people, that scarsly a streate was to be found
in Rome, that was not bathed with blood: either any place great or little, that
was not filled with dead bodies. The townsmen perceiving the slaughter and
havoc which the men of war so cruelly did perform amongst them, retired
every man into his house: and fortifying their doors, they fought from their
windows and house tops, and from thence threw and whirld out stones, tiles,
spitts, potts, and caldrons: and in that so common danger, no less did women
fight then men: and Cleanders party so hardly handled, that scarcely remained
a hundred yt were not slain or wounded. Whilst these deeds were doing at Rome,
Commodus was recreating himself in an house which he had in an orchard, and
Cleander being of great power, of some feared, and of others beloved, no man
durst make report thereof unto Co^modus, because so strong was the friendship
betwixt them, that they feared the displeasure of the one, and the unkindness of
them both. There was in the Court a sister unto Commodus named Fadilla: whose
eyes being charged with tears, and tearing her hair from her head, as one in
great distress, said unto her brother Commodus. Most serene prince, and right
dear brother, if thou were advertised of the condition and estate of Rome,
thou would not be so careless solacing in this garden: because I give thee
to understand, that the yeome^ of thy guard in the favor of Cleander, and all the other people of the common wealth, have trauersed amongst themselves so
cruel a fight, that if presently at this instant thou provide not some
remedy, this day will be the end of the Roman people. The exceeding honor, the
great riches, and to to much favor which thou have employed upon Cleander,
has raised him into exceeding great pride, whereof although he be in the fault,
yet the occasion has been given by thee: for as thou make Lords of
bondmen, it is most certain that they will make slaves of Lords and noblemen.
The people be so furious against Cleander, and Cleander and his men so flesht
against the people, that thou haste to choose one of two things: which is to
wit, to yield Cleander unto the common people, or else to abide what fortune of
them and us shall be proved: for as the case stands now impoisoned, it is
impossible, that jointly thy life and his person this day may be preserved.
These words being spoken by the infant Fadilla, all men present recovered new
boldness, persuading Commodus to remove Cleander from amongst them, and so to
appease the whole people of Rome: and to hold the ease of the common wealth
more dear, then the friendship or life of Cleander. Commodus hearing these
matters, and dismayed with fear, forthwith commanded Cleander to come unto his
presence: and at the instante of his appearance, commanded his head to be cut
off, which being set upon a lance, and carried about Rome, immediately the whole
multitude was pacified. Cleander being put to death, his children, servants,
and friends, were executed, whose bodies after they were drawn by boys
throughout Rome, were thrown into sinkes and places of vile ordure. This was
the conclusion and end of Cleander, and the end of his children, his house,
goods, and honor: who though for many things, ought to be reprehended, yet
only for one thing he deserves praise, namely, that he had rather die a
gentleman, then live a slave.

CHAP. XI. The report of a fire which descended from heaven, and burnt in Rome
the temple of peace.
ONe of the most notable examples, wherein fortune has discovered the
inconstancy of her wheel, was in the discourse that she had and used with
Cleander and his house: who in short space, of a slave made a freeman, of a
freeman a Steward, of a Steward a Pretour, of a Pretour a Chamberlain, and of
a Chamberlain, in effect a Monarche of the world: and afterward in one day,
and in one hour, was utterly destroyed: whereby we have to learn, that While
we live in this life, with surety we possess nothing. He ought not to be
dismaide, that from an high estate, is descended unto a poor degree: neither
ought he to glory or grow proud, that from a base estate, is advanced to
honor: for there is none in so wretched condition, that hops not to grow
better: either is there any so set a loft, that needs not to doubt to catch a
fall.

The present day that Cleander was put to death, Commodus repaired unto his
imperial Palace, and never more returned unto his garden, neither to dwell,
either as much as to solace: and if in times past he had bin cruel, from
thence forth he was much more cruel, and also suspicious: for he conceived
that popular sedition proceeded not, to take vengeance of Cleander, but for
device to dispatch him of his life. His friends, his kinsefolks, his
counselors, his servant, his natural subjects, and also strangers, he held
them all his utter enemies: because he doubted that all manner of men, that came
to speak with him, came to deceive him: and such as repaired to visit him,
that by treason they would kill him. In the xij. year of his Empire on the
xvij. day of March, at noone the heaven was seen full of stars, as if it had
been midnight: and that which was most meruell, and never read in books, or
seen with eyes, that on the evening when the Sun naturally was accustomed to
be seen to set in the Weste, they beheld rising in the East. In ye month of
July next following, a Comet appeared in heaven, as large as a great beam, and
so flamed with fire, directing his sparkles unto the city of Rome. On the xx.
day of the month of August, soudenly the heavens being clear, neither raynie
or cloudie, in Rome there struck an horrible clap of thunder: and after the
thunder, there came a globe of fire, which burned the temple, named the temple
of peace. This temple in authority was most ancient, in buildinges most
stately, in riches most wealthy, with priests most published, and in devotion
most esteemed: because in all other Churches, the Romans might pray unto their
Gods sitting or standing: but there were forced to pray on their knees. All men
which had money, treasure, jewels, or rich stuff, laid it all up in the temple
of peace: not only thinking them most safe, by ye strong building of the
Church, but also of devotion to commend and offer their goods unto the God of
peace, to obtain permission to enjoy quietness. The loss which the Romans
received, by those flames of fire, did exceed all reckoning: for yt in a manner
all rich men had there their riches burnt and consumed: in such wise, that no
heart might endure, either yet dissemble, to hear the cries of men, and the
exclamation of women: every man recounting his loss unto his neighbor, and
jointly bewayling the burning of the temple. Now when the temple of peace was
burnt, visibly they did see it pass, unto the temple of the vestall virgins:
which wholly it consumed, leaving no sign of any building thereof. And yet
notwithstanding, better order was taken for the remedy thereof, then in the
other temple: for presently upon the kindling of the fire, they took out the
vestall virgins, which there were enclosed, and the relics which the Romans
had there reposed And for as much as we have said of relics, it is to
understand, that the Romans had in that temple the Palladium: that is to say,
the image of the goddess Pallas, which fell from heaven upon the walls of
Troy, and from thence was brought to Rome: which was holden in as great
veneration, as the ark of the Lord among the Israelites. The Romans held
that Image of the Goddess Pallas, so shut up, enclosed and hidden: that long
time after she was brought from Troy, of mortal man being never seen: either
of Consul, Emperor, or priest: for they had a prophecy, that in the year, in
which that Image should be seen, there should be great change in the
prosperity of Rome.

The Romans removed their vestall virgins, and the Image of their Goddess
Pallas, unto the house of Commodus: and so great was the lamentation amongst
the Romans, to behold their vestall virgins set at large, and their Palladium
discovered, that without comparison they did much more bewail the burning of
their temple of relics, then the other temple that contained all their
riches. After this globe of fire had burned the temple of Peace, and the temple
of Relics, it burned also many other sumptuous buildinges: not burning
alongest after the manner of other fire, but amongst many houses burnt one,
and far off from thence would burn another: whereof the Romans did gather,
that it was not the fire in use amongst men, serving only to burn: but a
fire sent from the Godds, to consume and chastise. These terrible fireinges,
and prodigious spectacles, of the Romans being considered, if until that time
they did wish the Emperor evil, from thenceforth they could neither endure
to behold him, either abide with patience to hear his name: for they held it
for certeintie, that all those evil signs wherewith the Godds did threaten the
Common wealth, were all sent for his foul and filthy life. This globe of fire
continued by the space of a xi. days: in all which time it ceased not to burn
temples and houses. On the xij. day Commodus rode out of the city, and at the
instante that he went out at the gates, soudainely the fire ceased: which
confirmed the Romans in their opinion, namely that during the life of
Commodus, the Roman people of the gods should always be scourged.

CHAP. XII. Of many cruelties, and not a few fantastical practices of
Commodus.
AS it has been said, Commodus continued certain days very sad and pensive,
when he considered how traitors sought occasion to take away his life, and the
terrible flames and burninges of Rome: but in short time after, he both forgot
the chastisement of the Gods, and conspiracies of men: and this manifestly
appeared, for that he so stoutly returned to all his vices, as if he had never
been vicious. Cleander being dead, he made Niger Prefect, and after six
hours he did revoke his power, and commanded him to be banished: and
provided also Galba Rufus for his Chamberlain, whom after four hours he
discharged of his office, and sent him in exile: and when Niger and Rufus
complained of their griefs, Commodus aunsweared, he did not banishe them for
that which they had done, but for that which they might do. He created Prefect
Marcus Dulius, a man (most certain) right generous and ancient: whom after
three days he removed from his office, and commanded him until his death, in
his house to be prisoner, the occasion whereof was, for that (as he affirmed)
Marcus was very old and spente, and therefore it were no reason he should be
troubled of any person: and also, that if any man should request any thing, he
might aunsweare him, that he was a prisoner, and might not go out of his
doors to do him pleasure. He gave the Senate to understand, that he would go
into Africa, and had necessity, for his navy by sea, and his army by land, of
a great sum of money: although the Senate did suspect it but a collusion,
they durst not but open the treasury, and divide with him the treasure: for
otherwise, he would both make hauoche of their lives and treasure.

In April the Senate gave forth their money, and when Commodus was in
possession thereof, he bruted his departing unto Campania, to take men of
war: where he remained ail that Summer, and also part of the next winter,
eating, drinking, fishing, hunting, playing, wrestling, running, leaping,
dancing, swimming, and such other vanities. All the Senate was much ashamed,
and all the Romans not a little touched, after they understood the money which
was given out for the wars of Africa, to be so vitiously consumed by Commodus
in Campania. After his return to Rome, Commodus was advertised, that Motilenus
Prefect for that year, had murmured more at him, then any other person: and
for very grief and despite did weep, to see their money provided for the
wars, spent in so wicked uses: Commodus confected certain figgs, and invited
Motilenus to dinner, who being fed with figs died ye third day following. One
day he clad himself as a priest, right pontifically, and placed himself aloft
on a choche of 4. furious horses: the Romans supposing he would offer
sacrifices at the temple, he mounted certain rockie cliftes and mountains:
and there against all reason ran his chariot, where his horses happened to be
all to torn, and his chariot rent all to pieces, and he brake his head, and
wrenched his foot: finally he made a narrow miss, in repayment of his folly,
that day to have lost his life. On a day he went to ye Senate, and said that
he would not have Rome named Rome, but Co^modiana: and the Senate answered,
they were both pleased to call Rome Co^modiana, and the Senate Co^modiano. That
which the Senators supposed to be demanded in jest, also consenting in jest,
Commodus did accept in earnest: and from thenceforth, the letters which were
written, the provisions which were made, and the seals thereto joined, in all
such instruments Rome was entitled Co^modiana, and the Senate Co^modiano: and
if by negligence any man happened to be obliuious thereof, and to use ye name of
Rome, presently he was banished from thence, to seek Rome: for that was not,
but Co^modiana. The priests of ye Goddess Isis were commanded to come into his
presence, and said unto them, that she had revealed unto him, that their heads
should be shaven, and that he was commanded as high priest to perform the
same: and with a blunte knife he cut their nails, and blunting his knife
upon stones, would dry shave their heads: in such wise, that as their hair
was dry, and his knife blunt, it might more truly be said, that he did
rather fley them, then trim or dress them. Such as guarded the temple of the
Goddess Bellona, he caused their right arms to be thrust out of ioynte:
alleging, that since they painted the Goddess with a broken arm, her
priests ought not to have their arms whole and sound. The Romans painted
their Goddess Isis with naked breasts: and Commodus on a day visiting that
temple, and beholding the image of Isis, painted with breasts discovered: he
caused the breasts of the priests to be scrat with combs of iron in his
presence, affirming that it were unjust for their Goddess to have naked
breasts, and they to hold their entrails hidden.

Commodus commanded all men to call him Hercules, which, to the end he would
resemble, he made a coat of Lions skins, and took in hand an huge clubb,
wherewith he went day and night killing men, breaking doors, and overthrowing
pillars, with such other vanities: in so much that a fierce cruel Lion would
not have done so great hurtes, as Commodus committed as a Lion, but
counterfect. With many other vain and wicked deeds unworthy to be written.

CHAP. XIII. A discourse of the provinces that rebelled in his reign, and the
prodigies of his death.
THere rebelled against the Roman Empire, in the reign of Commodus, the
Mauritanes, the Datians, the Sarmatians, and the Germans, all which were
only come by the Roman capiteines: for that Commodus did rather employ his
valiantness in vices, then in resisting enemies. He was not only in his
words and works, vain and frivolous, but also in his letters which he
wrote for the Empire: for that many times being advertised from countries and
provinces, of causes of great importance, he would answer them with matters
of vanity: and sometimes would send an whole sheet of paper sealed and
firmed, containing only one Latin word, that is to say, Vale.
Notwithstanding the days of his reign were the most unfortunate days, yet
would he needs command them to be termed ye golden world. Most heinous
offenses he would pardon for money: if any person being absent were condemned
to die, he would find out some other of his age and name, to be executed for
his offense: affirming that since he did resemble him in age and name, he
should not vary in the manner of his death: in such wise, that this tyrant did
kill innocents for the wicked, and let offenders escape for money. If any man
had an enemy of whom he would take vengeance, he needed no other mean to
perform the same, but to bargain with Commodus for a sum of money, which
being agreed he never wanted occasion to rid him of his life. At all the vile
and filthy deeds which Commodus committed, he was not grieved, but delighted
in the publication thereof: in so much that he was not only evil, but also
boasted himself to be evil: for that he entered so great folly or madness,
that all things which he either did, or said, whether allowed or misliked of
himself or all other men, expressly he commanded them to be written, in the
registre Capitoline. On a certain time he determined to burn ye whole city
of Rome: and being pressed to give fire to many parts, Letus a Consul came unto
him, and said unto him so many things, and put him in so great fear of the
hazard of his life, that he ceased that day to execute so desperate a deed: and
being demanded, why he would burn his mother Rome, aunsweared: that he would
not burn Rome, but his Commodian Colonel: because at that time it was named
Rome. These prodigies following did precede his death. There came out of his
house certain little birds, of the fashion and color of turtles: which were
never seen either in Rome, or in any the confines of Italy, and remained iij.
days upon his house, neither flying or removing to any other house: and their
note and song which they used, did rather give motion of weeping, then of
mirth. Soudeinly the ports of Ianus did open, the copper Image of the god
Mercury was seen to sweat, the Image of Hercules without approach of any
person was seen to move, and upon his chamber where he slept the skrich owl
nightly ceased not to houle. Commodus considering these causes, departed to
remain at mount Celius: affirming that he was feared by night, and might not
sleep. On the next day, being demanded for the celebration of certain
feasts and games, which were to be done before the gates of his Palace, what
garments his guard should wear, he answered and commanded them to be clad
with hooded capes for the rain, a garment much used in Rome for mourners: in
such wise that on the other day he was in such manner accompanied, that it
seemed rather they went to honor his obsequies, then to celebrate or magnify
his feasts.

CHAP. XIIII. How Commodus was slain by the device and counsel of his
Courtisane Martia.
THe time approaching, wherein the follies and wickednesses of the Emperor
Commodus should finish, and the sorrowful Rome obtain liberty from the
servitude of so cruel a tyrant: the occasion both of the one and the other was
after this manner.

The first day of the month of January, the Romans did celebrate the feast of
the God Ianus: on which day Commodus determined to show himself in the
habit, not of an Emperor, but of a sword player: whereof Martia his co^cubine
being advertised, with great insta^ce did humbly pray him, and with many
tears no less request and beeseech him, that it might please him to take some
other order, both to avoid the peril that might happen unto his person, as
also the blemishe unto his authority. This Martia was so loved and so tenderly
cherished and honored of the Emperor Commodus, that notwithstanding she did
serve him as a concubine, yet he brought to pass that all men did serve her
as Empress. To restrain Co^modus from that feast in the show and form of a
sword-player, neither were the abundant tears powered forth of Martia
sufficient, either her humble suit so instantly requested, either the fear and
hazard of his person so flatly informed, either the amorous intisementes so
exactly performed, remove his purpose: the which Martia considering, forgot not
to request others to be assistant in that suit: for as afterward she
reported, her heart did give her, that Commodus that day should pass great
peril. At that time Letus was his Chamberlain, and Electus Capiteine of his
guard, who were private and in great favor with the Emperor Commodus, and
friends unto Martia: these both she requested to be humble furtherers in her
former suit. But Commodus was so obstinate, and determined to celebrate that
feast of Ianus, in form of a fenser: that he was not only unwilling to hear
them, but also grew to be offended with them. On the eues eve of the great
feast of the God Ianus, Commodus commanded the Capiteines of the sword
players, to prepare him the arms and ensigns of a sword player: for that he
would celebrate those feasts not as an Emperor, but as a sword player. This
done and provided, Commodus commanded Letus and Electus to depart to their
lodging, to the end he might repose: and seeing himself alone in his chamber
enclosed with doors shut, he took paper and incke, and did write with his
own hands, the names of all such persons which he determined on the next day
should be slain with the sword players: for his meaning was not principally
to adorn those feasts and to honor them, but to dispatch many men of their
lives. This memorial being made, of al such persons as the next day should be
slain: partly of excess, and partly of weariness in writing, he was taken
with dead sleep: laying his memorial under his pillowe, not doubting that
any person should encounter therewith. Commodus had in his chamber a little
boy sufficiently fair, named Pugius, whom he did love and favor above all
the rest, not for his service, but for delight he had of him in bed. As
Pugius was but childishe, and in so great favor, coming and going always
into Commodus chamber, fortune would, or to say better, God so ordained, that
he should take that paper in hand wherein were contained the names of al such
as were appointed to the slaughter: and came forth unto the lodging, where
Martia received him to play, according unto the custom used with children: and
finding the paper in his hands, suspecting it to be some writing of
importance, took the child into her arms, imbracinge, kissinge, and dallying
with the child Pugius, and giving him another iuell wherewith to play, took
the paper into her hands, without all suspicion to find that, which therein
was contained. Martia could both write and read, and understood ye Greek,
and spoke the Latin tongue, and presently begane to read the contents thereof,
written by Commodus his own hands: wherein she found first her own proper
name, as appointed amongst the rest to be slain: the second was the
chamberlain Letus, the third the captain Electus, and so consequentely the
most ancient, wealthy, and the most noble personages of Rome, Martia being
astonnied and terrified to find what she found in that libell, began to sobbe
and weep: and saying with her self: what is this? may it be, that I am Martia
that read this writing, and shall be executed to morrow? Oh Commodus, joy and
take no care: for whereas thou had thought to have done vengeance upon
thine enemies: this day, they shall be revenged of thee, in such wife, as men
shall praise it, and the Gods allow it: that in thy rigorous chasticements,
all tyraunts shall obtain and recover both warning and example. If thou ever
in all thy life, did committ or perform any good deed, it has been to
place me amongst such persons as thou have appointed to be slain to morrow:
for that she deserves most justly to dye, that abandoneth her conversation
unto so vile a person. Since the Gods have so permitted, and my good fortune
would, that this matter should be discovered, full contrary to thy purpose,
it shall have success: because thou thoughtest to have slain me, and all
other virtuous, noble, and most wealthy of the Empire: but the case shall be
thus: that this day thou shall see the end of thy wicked life, and we all
shall behold our mother Rome set at liberty.

These and such other words being spoken, she sent for Letus and Electus,
to whom in great secrecy, she showed this writing: and when they
considered, that on the next day they should all be slain, they forgate not
to determine to kill Commodus that night: but hardely might agree upon the
device and manner of his death.

It was the even of the feast of Ianus, and also a great part of the day
already past, and not as yet determined with what manner of death they should
finishe Commodus his life: for that, if they should kill him on the soudeine,
he might defend him self, and the case discovered: and if their affairs were
deferred, on the next day they were judged to dye: but finally, they concluded
to dispatche him with poison, offered by the hands of Martia. The manner was
thus.

Martia persuaded Commodus that night to bathe him self, and coming from the
bathe, Martia bare him in hand that he was pale and colourlesse, and prayed
him to drink and to eat a morsel, and in that same which she gave him in a
colation to eat, in the same she ministered poison for him to dye.

Not long after this surfeting diet, his head began to ache: and being
counseled by Martia to take his bed, she provided to send forth all
persons that might seem either to hinder his rest, or her determined purpose.
He had reposed little more then an hour, when the poison began to come to his
heart, and taking occasion with his fingers to cast, Martia, Letus, and
Electus, doubting that by vomit he might throw forth the poison, and so they
by matter committed might justly be put to death, began to fear and dismaye
in their enterprise. But Martia more like a man then a woman, perceiving her
complaints to be daunted with fear, brought in Narcissus, a beardlesse and
shameless young man, fleshed in murders: to whom she promised a great
sum of money, who entering the chamber finished the murder. This was the end
of the unchaste and filthy life of Commodus, whose life and death may yealde
unto all Princes both example and terror: for, notwithstanding the wicked are
forborne for a time, yet Gods justice does not permit them to escape
unpunished. ()

The life of the Emperor Pertinax, compiled by sir Anthony of Gueuara, Bishop
of Mondonnedo, preacher, chronicler, and counselor unto the Emperor Charles
the fifth.
CHAP. I. Of the lineage and country of the Emperor Pertinax.
THE emperor Publius Pertinax was borne in the province of Apennia in a
certain place named Martos, in the second year of the Empire of Traiane: and
his father was named Lineotinus, a man that lived by his own proper sweat and
travail. Pertinax being a stripling, served his father with the carriage of
wood upon an ass, to be sold at the town, who used to sell so dear,
contentious, and pinching, that if they gave him not his first demand, he did
rather leave his wood unsold, then abate one blanke of his price. And being
noted of all men, and but for a packeman, it proceeded thereof to be named
Pertinax, that is to say, contentious: for that before time he was named
Publius. Pertinax perceiving that he was now called, not Publius, but Pertinax,
contentious and packman, he parted from his country in a great chafe, and
shamed, giving him self to write and read: which when he had learned, he
traueiled to atteine the Greek and Latin tounges, which also he obtained: in
such wise, that he became more handsome in science, then in selling of wood.
Now when Pertinax perceived him self to be instructed both in the Greek and
Latin tounges, he gave him self unto the wars, to learn the art of
warrefare, perceiving that from his study there proceeded much traueile, and
no profit: and that his life diminished, and his goods nothing increased. In
those days the Romans held wars with the Assyrians, against whom the
Consul Lolianus was captain, where Pertinax being repaired, made covenant with
a captain of Rome to serve him for his provision, in the condition of a cater:
who using his service in that office very faithfully, and in skirmishe and
encounter with the enemy no less valiantly, his master removed from his
said office, and advanced him to the state of a Soldier. Not long after
that Pertinax had served in the condition of a soldier, but he was raised to
an office of more honor and credit, which in these days, is termed Sergeant
of the hand, that is to weete, to give order unto the soldiers, to set in
arraye. Pertinax every day recovered fame in the wars, and his valiantness
and noble mind was notorious unto all men in the camp. It chanced at the
furious encounter of the enemy, the captain of his hand to be slain:
whereof the Consul Lolianus commanded him to take the charge, wherein he did
so behave him self, that not long after, he did not only with blood, revenge
the blood of his captain, but also brought to pass, to be loved of the
Romans, and feared of the enemies. The wars of Assyria being finished,
Pertinax remained as praetor thereof, and as he was feared of the Assyrians in
the time of war: so was he afterward beloved in time of peace: for if in
times past he had been rigorous, as unto enemies: so was he in process
without all comparison, more pitiful unto offenders. In the second year of
the Empire of ye good Marcus Aurelius, the king of Parthians rebelled against
the Romans, and amongst other Capteines that were called unto that conquest,
was Pertinax the Praetor of Assyria: in which wars, so straight and sound
frindship was planted betwixt Marcus Aurelius and Pertinax, that from
thenceforth they dealte not as master and servant, but as father and son:
because no matter, were it of most great importance which Marcus Aurelius
commanded, that Pertinax performed not, and exactly did not accomplish:
either any counsel ministered by Pertinax unto Marcus Aurelius, unto which he
yealded not. In those Parthian wars, Pertinax proved so provident in perils,
so doughtie in hazardes, so wise in counsel, so venturous in sallies, and so
valiant in battle, that by report of the enemies and judgment of the
armies, he only deserved more glory then all the rest. The wars of Asia
being finished, the Emperor Marcus Aurelius sent him as Praetor unto the
province of great Britain, which now is called England.

Two years after he arrived into Britain, war was raised against the
Germans, unto which wars Pertinax was also called, and there had the charge
of the Eagle, which was to be bearer of the royal standarde, and was called
the Eagle, because the Romans had always in that special standard an Eagle
bravely painted.

Pertinax being resident in the wars of Germany, his own mother from Rome,
came to visit him, for that ten years had passed in which she had not
seen him: and not ten days after she had inioyed the sight of her desired
son, she dyed and passed out of this world. Unto whom Pertinax erected so
solemn and sumptuous obsequies, and so generous a sepulcher, whereof was
diuined that she was the mother of some Emperor to come, and that the Empire
should fall into his hands. The affairs of Germany being settled, the
Emperor Marcus Aurelias sent his commandment unto Pertinax, to pass into
Datia, which now is named Denmark: and did assign him fifty thousand
sextercies for his stipend, which may amount to five thousand Ducates of our
money: whereat many did envy, no less for the great summies of money which
he gave him, then for the honorable government that he committed unto him.

Now Pertinax being grown very rich, and notified both valiant, hardy,
and in great estimation, he was there withal envied of many: which hatred
borne him by his contemporants and companions in the wars, they discovered by
their extreme publishing his negligences, darkening and infeebling his
heroical acts.

It is an ancient custom in the malice of man, to hold nothing for well
done, but that which we love, although it be evil: and to esteem nothing for
evil, but that which we hate, although it be right perfect. There came from
Datia certain soldiers to Rome, which gave forth so perverse and foul
information against Pertinax, that presently the Emperor did suspende his
office, and discharged him of his stipende, and that he should serve one whole
year at his own proper costs in Illyria.

This imperial commandment being notified unto Pertinax, presently with
great patience he obeyed, and departed unto Illyria to perform his
banishement with much constancy: and they say, that he said these words at
his departing.

I am not grieved for the honor whereof they have deprived me, either for the
stipende which they have taken from me, either of this exile which they have
sent me: but it grieueth me that this commandment should proceed from so
good a Prince, and I not heard, either he well infourmed: because mine
innocence being known (as shortly it shall be known) the Emperor, my Lord,
shall be noted of all men, as a Prince of light belief, and I shall obtain the
credit and fame of a gentleman, both sincere and patient.

And as Pertinax said, so it succeeded, which is to weete: the Senate
commanding inquisition to be made, and finding Pertinax free and clear from
all matters, whereof he was accused, and many things wherefore to be
commanded, he was by public sentence restored unto his honor, and to his
adversaries was given the pain that he did and should have suffered:
although, notwithstanding in short time after, by his own suit, they were
pardoned, because Pertinax naturally was pitiful, and not given to revenge.

CHAP. II. Of the variable fortune that Pertinax did pass before he obtained
the Empire.
THE emperor Marcus Aurelius held Pertinax in reputation of a man both
virtuous, valiant, silent, of a noble mind, and also fortunate: but after he
had by false report exiled him, he held him both for wise, and of great
patience, considering how mildly he endured so unjust banishment, and
afterward how friendly he sued for his adversaries. In recompense of the
injury which Marcus Aurelius the Emperor had done unto Pertinax, he made him
Praetor of Datia, and sent him jointly with his provision, the ensign, and did
also constitute him captain of the first legion: that is to say, to have the
vauntgarde of the army, which in the wars is a matter of most trust, and
also of honor: in such wise, that where as his enemies had thought most to
have confounded him, from thence he received occasion to be most advanced. The
province of Noricus and Retius rebelled against the Romans: against whom the
armies of Illyria were sent, unto whom they gave advertisement that they were
ready to be reduced unto the service of the Roman Empire, if the Praetor that
presently did govern them were removed, and in his place they might obtain
Pertinax for their Protector: saying and affirming, that they rebelled not, to
retire from the subjection of Rome: but because their officers did oppress
them with cruel dealing. Great joy had the Emperor Marcus Aurelius when he
understood those provinces to be reduced unto his service: but much more did he
rejoice, when he was advertised, how instantly they craved Pertinax for the
government of that country: unto whom presently he sent, both craving and
commanding: and to the end that Pertinax should accept his suite, and
condescende unto his commandment, he sent him the ensign and liuerie of
Consulship. Many days after that these matters had passed, the Emperor Marcus
Aurelius sent for Pertinax, which had been absent sixteen years, and as he
was in martial affairs, famous, so generally they came forth into the
streets of Rome to behold him, as it had been some monster, brought from the
deserts of Egypt: and being arrived at Rome, he was conducted by the Emperor
Marcus Aurelius unto the Senate: and after all sorts and fashions was praised
and honored as an assured friend does use to praise and honor his approved
friend, which was great novelty in Rome: that is to say, for one Prince to
speak for another in the Senate: for unto such like Capteines as unto
Pertinax, they did only hear what they would say, but used not to answer
any one word within the Senate. Presently in the Kalendes of January next
ensuing, Pertinax was created Consul: which the Emperor wished the Senate had
not performed, to the end he would have made him Praetor principal, because
he esteemed him to be in possession of great wisdom, for government of
matters of the common wealth, and very upright to administer justice. The
people inhabitant near unto Danubie, did write unto the Emperor Marcus
Aurelius, how they were robbed, lost, and evil governed: and that if Pertinax
were not sent to govern that province, er long the whole country would
rebel: which Marcus Aurelius understanding, framed and forced him to return
unto Danubie: and to the same end he gave him power and stipende so
accomplished, that he reserved unto him self but only the name of Emperor
his Lord,

One year after that Pertinax had governed Danubie, the Senate sent him new
provision for the government of Datia, by the occasion of the death of
Cassius: and that also he should use the residence of the Praetor of Panonia: in
such wise, that there was no matter, either in the inferior or higher
Almaine, that by the hands of Pertinax was not governed and provided. Two
years after the death of the Emperor Marcus Aurelius, Pertinax was removed
from the government of Germany, and assigned unto Syria: the government
whereof was the best, the most honorable, and also the most profitable that
was given by the Romans: for that it was not bestowed, but upon the most
ancient Consul, or the most valiant captain, or the most grave Senator, or
the ambassador that hest had performed his charge. All the life of the good
Emperor Marcus Aurelius, Pertinax in all his offices was found to be very
wise, very just, severe, and no less sincere: but after the good Emperor was
dead, he grew negligent, and also was noted with the blemishe of a nigarde,
and covetousness, because from thenceforth, he did rather imploye his forces
to gather richesse, then to govern the common wealth. Of this notable example
it may be inferred, of that which every day we see to chance: which is, that
good Princes, of evil men make good servants, and evil Princes of good men,
make evil servants: for that many times, notwithstanding the servant
naturally be evil, he does endeavor and enforce him self to be good, in
respect of his master which is good: and so by the contrary, if the Prince be
evil, the servant strayeth unto evil, although of his own nature he be good.

Now Commodus being Emperor in Rome, when Pertinax bribed, and gathered money
in Asia, against whom certain people did rise and mutine, exclaming that he
held them oppressed and robbed, he was constrained thereby to retire unto
Rome, to escape their pretented practices, to dispatche him of his life:
nothing displeasant unto Commodus, to the end he might inherit his goods.

Pertinax being come to Rome, and the tyrant Perennius in those days
governing the Empire, and commanding Commodus, gave him very evil
entertaynement, and worse conversation: not for that Pertinax had so deserved,
but the rather to give him occasion to depart from Rome: for that being (as he
was) very wise, and of great judgment, valiant, rich, and also ancient: he
doubted to be deprived by Pertinax from the favor of Commodus.

Pertinax beholding the follies of Commodus, the tyrannies of Perennius, the
loss and spoil of the common wealth of Rome: advised to depart from thence,
and to go unto the country of Liguria, separating him self to live in a
poor village, where in times past, his father had lived and kept shop: and
buying that poor dwelling, where his father had sold oil, fish, wine,
bread, and other victuals, buylt in the compass thereof a stately buylding,
permitting the old to remain in the midest without any addition or
diminishing thereof. Pertinax exceedingly delighted to behold that country,
wherein he had passed his life being but a child, and from whence he had
departed so abject, and now returned with such wealth and credit.

And being advertised of the foale of the Ass, whereon he had used to carry
wood, to be alive, he bought it, and did so use and feed it, as it had been
some ancient servant of great deserving. He there erected many and solemn
buyldinges, bought great and many purchases, gave great sums of money unto
his kindred, old friends, and acquaintance: and did so joy to see him self so
rich, where he had been so poor, and to obtain so great quietness, after
so much travail: that he said, and wrote unto his friends, that if Princes
had thoroughly tasted and known the rellishe of reposed rest: of them selves,
and of their own proper will, they would abandon their Empires.

Pertinax being settled in quietness, Commodus sent his commandment, that he
should depart into Britain to execute the office of Praetor: which he obeyed,
more for fear then of good will, and presently began to reform the armies:
which were in robberies very absolute, and of life no less dissolute. And on
a time a certain mutinous legion made commotion, not because they had
contention amongst them selves, but early to awake Pertinax, to violate his
life. The matter fell out after this manner, that Pertinax found him self in
so great peril, that all men thought he had been slain: yet amongst the dead
he escaped alive, notwithstanding cruelly wounded. After these matters were
pacified, and Pertinax cured of his wounds, he so seriously chasticed that
treason which they had conspired against him, that he ministered matter to
murmur at Rome, and to bewail in Britain. The Senate being advertised, what
had passed betwixt the army and Pertinax, sent a suspense of, and for his
pretorian office, and gave him charge of provision for victuals and munition,
which he would not accept, but sued for his discharge to depart: for that
the armies held him extreme and cruel, and he of the armies had great doubt
and suspicion. Pertinax being arrived at Rome, found that Perennius the
tyrant was now dead: and Pertinax being a man of authority and gravity, a
small time fell into the favor of Commodus, unto whom he commended the
prefecture or government of the city of Rome: and succeeding Fussianus who
used his office with great cruelty, Pertinax obtained great good liking of
all the people, who performed his charge with no less mildness and piety.

Commodus not contented that Pertinax had recovered so great favor in the
common wealth, and finding no occasion either to kill or banishe him, advised
to discover his evil will which he did bear him, both in word and deed,
that of him self he would seek occasion to depart from Rome: who finding apt
and sure means to renounce his office, retired unto his own proper house and
country, supposing never more to have been removed from thence all the days
of his life: partly, for that he perceived how Commodus sought occasions to
take away his life: and partly moved of old age, to repose the remnant of his
days.

CHAP. III. What was said, and what he answered unto those persons, that
offered him the Empire.
AFter that Martia, Letus, Electus, and Narcissus had slain the Emperor
Commodus, a great part of the night being passed, and all persons in ye
palace being couched under the government of profound sleep, Martia and her
companions took the carkase of Commodus, and wrapped it in an old Seron,
wherein the slaves did bear out the ordure of the stable: giving them to
understand, that it was a certain vessel, with a charge also to carry it
forth. After the body was removed out of the court, they laid it into a
carre, and conveyed it into a certain village named Aristro where Commodus did
use to bathe and solace: but on the next day his death being published, the
Romans pursued, and although he were dead, they cut off his head, and trailed
his body throughout all the streets of Rome. Martia, Letus, and Electus,
considering they had slain Commodus, and bestowed his carkase at their
pleasure, advised amongst them selves to seek out, and to name an Emperor
before day should come upon them: to the end the Empire should have an
owner, as also to have defense under his protection: and so it came to pass,
when the death of the one was manifested, the election of the other was
published.

the matter happened after this manner: Letus and Electus talkinge with them,
certain of their especial frindes departed straight unto the house of
Pertinax, knocking at the gate to have it opened with great haste: one of the
sons of Pertinax beholding them to come armed, at such an hour, and with such
have, was taken with so great fear, that when he would have made report
thereof unto his father, terror and trembling would not suffer him to speak.

At the instant that Pertinax understood how Letus and Electus were come with
armed men, he leapt from his bed and commanded his gates with great speed
to be opened, which proceeded of a noble and a valiant mind, for that he
held it for most certain, that for as much as they were both so private with
Commodus, who did bear him so mortal hatred, and coming unto his house at
such an hour, might be to no other end then to take away his life. And all
the time whilst these matters did pass betwixt the one and the other part,
Pertinax was neither troubled or altered: but after the manner of a man
determined to die, said unto Letus and Electus these words.

I do well understand that the Emperor Commodus, my Lord, has sent to kill
me, whereof I do not meruel: but wonder it is, that so long he suffered me to
live: because of all the old servants that were bred with his father Marcus
Aurelius I only am alive, a small remnant of all the rest which he has
slain. I may not with reason complain me, ye Commodus in my quietness and
security does send to put me to death, since certain days past, I have
atte^ded this last day and hour: for that abhorring, as I did abhor his
wicked life, I was most sure he would procure my death. It grieueth me not
to die, but for that I die before I see my country delivered from the hands
of so cruel a tyrant: for I swear unto you by the immortal Godds, that I
never wished any thing rather unto my self, either my posterity, then that
it might please them, before they would take away my life I might behold my
mother Rome set at liberty. I have been a right perfect and sincere Roman,
and zealous for the common wealth of my country, and do hope in the immortal
Godds, that I shall obtain that in their presence which they have denied me
in their absence, before whom, his malice and mine innocence shall be examined.
You Letus, and Electus, servants, friends, and favored with Commodus, do
that which he has commanded you, and dispatche me out of this tedious and
miserable world: for in the end to dye with the swoorde, or to dye with an
ague, all is but death.

Letus and Electus were astonnied to behold the constancy that Pertinax had,
and to consider the excellent words which he said: whereunto they made
answer.

Oh, how secret are the judgments of God, and how variable are the
thoughts of men. This we say unto thee Pertinax, because thou think
that we are come to take away thy life: and we are not come, but to the end
thou should give us life, and take wretched Rome under thy defense.

We may not speak or advertise thee at large, for want of time, the break of
day being at hand: but the case is thus, that the tyrante Commodus is dead,
the cause thereof proceeded, for that he had determined (as was found in
memorial written with his own hands) this day to have slain us all: and as
by a certain manner never hard of, the matter was discovered, we determined
to preserve our own lives, and give an end to his tyrannies. In this deed
which we have done, we neither think to have offended the Gods, or committed
treason: for that the life of this tyrant was odious unto the Gods, and
dangerous unto men. It was now high time that some man should give an end
unto his life, that had taken away the life of so many good men. We, as we were
in his favor, had perfect intelligence, whom he held for friends, or enemies:
and also we know right certeinely, that if thou Pertinax be now alive, it is
not, that he so wished it, or that he procured not to kill thee, but the Gods
gave him no place, but have reserved thee to the end thou should deliver
Rome, and restore the common wealth.

No man knows unto this hour that Co^modus is dead, but Martia and we that
have slain him: and as we have laid our hands upon him to finishe his days,
so have we fixed our eyes upon thee to make thee Emperor.

And believe us, Pertinax, that if we could have made choice of any better
then thy self, we would have chosen better: because they are so many and so
great evils which have been committed by this tyrant, that they may not be
amended or repaired, but by the hands of some most virtuous prince. That which
has moved us to elect and give thee this Empire, is, because thou art
ancient, wise, valiant, virtuous, rich, and of great experience, above all
the rest loved and desired of all the people: for that Prince which is not
acceptable unto his people, he shall of many be disobeyed and of many much less
duly esteemed.

These words being noted of Pertinax, determinatly did think them to be
spoken fainedly and with collusion, and thereto aunsweared. Oh Letus and thou
Electus, you ought to be satisfied, simply to accomplish the unjust
commandment of Commodus, without derision of these my poor ancient years,
yt is to say, first gilefully to flatter me and afterward to kill me. As I
have said, perform that which ye have to do, which the sooner ye shall
accomplish, the greater joy shall ye yield unto Commodus, and deliver me of
grief. I well know that Commodus now sleeps not, but carefully abides your
return, for at this present he atte^deth no better news, then the report,
that ye have given an end unto my wretched life. Letus and Electus considering
that Pertinax continued doubtful and suspicious, began to say and reply: there
is so small time for so great affairs as we have to do, that there rests no
time to contend upon our embassage and thy suspicion: and because thou shall
see the truth of that which we have said, and not as thou supposest, take and
read this memorial, written with Commodus his own hand, and there shall thou
see, how great reason we had to kill him this night, since to morrow he meant
to have slain us all. Pertinax receiving the memorial into his hands, and
knowing it to be Commodus writing, found himself placed in the fourth degree,
which is to wit, that on the morrow Commodus would have killed Martia, Letus,
Electus and Pertinax: and so by degrees, many other Senators and Consuls of
Rome. Pertinax having read ye memorial, stayed as one astonished again
demanding if Commodus were dead in deed: they aduouched no less, and
thoroughly affirmed the same: whereupon he began most pitiously to weep:
saying, that he wept not for the death of Commodus, but because the memory of
the good Marcus Aurelius in him was finished. And lifting his eyes up to
heaven, said: Oh unfortunate Marcus Aurelius, Oh unfortunate Marcus Aurelius,
Oh unfortunate Marcus Aurelius: (three times exclaming him to be unfortunate
and unhappy) because thou wast unfortunate in thy wife, which thou
possessedst: in thy daughters which thou nourishedst, and in thy sons which
thou begattedst.

CHAP. IIII. A certain notable speech uttered by Letus unto the army, in the
favor of Pertinax.
AFter that Pertinax had bewailed the death of Commodus, not for his own
condition, but for that he had been the son of the good Marcus Aurelius, he
said unto Letus and Electus, that he would not by any mean receive the Empire,
if the Senate did not command it, and the army consent unto it: because to
hold the Empire safe and established, and not to enter the same as a tyrant:
unto the Senate, it apperteyned to use their election, and the army their
confirmation. Letus made offer to finishe all that which Pertinax demanded:
that is to say, the Senate should elect and choose him, and the army confirm
and allow their election: and the hope that he had to obtain the same was,
that he had amongst them many friends and kinsefolke: and the joy that all
would receive upon the news of his death. Letus departing to talk with the
Capteines and leaders of the army, made unto them a compendious speech after
this manner.

His Oration to the assembly.
THAT which now I mean to say (right excellent Princes, and my martial
companions) will be very strange unto your hearing, although not far
distant from your desires: because of many things which we desire, the least
and fewest parts thereof we do obtain. Neither are the Gods so liberal to
give us all that we desire, either so niggard to deny us all that we crave: and
this they do, because we shall acknowledge them to be good, for that which they
give us: and confess our selves to be evil for that which they deny us. The
good and virtuous be not only known, in the good works which they do, but
also in their good desires which they have: because the evil and wicked, if
they durst, would never cease to commit mischief: and the virtuous if they
might would never grow cold in doing virtuous acts. The Gods never jointly
accomplished the desires of so many, as this day they have accomplished all
your desires: for being (as you are) noble, generous, valiant, true, and no
counterfect Romans: it is not to be thought that ye should wish or desire, but
the liberty of our mother Rome, and the reformation of our ancient common
wealth.

Ye have all seen what the Emperor Commodus has been, which is to wit,
how large in commandment, how cruel in killing, how careless in
government, and how filthy of life: through which cause, we not only held our
houses as consumed and lost, and our persons in peril, but also were defamed
throughout all strange nations. The Prince that is over youthly, foolish,
absolute or dissolute, loses his people, and defameth his kingdom. Since ye
have seen the evils and cruelties which he has done, I would have you see,
hear, and understand, what he me^t to do: for as it seems by this memorial
written with his own hand, he had a will to have slain all persons within
the Empire: and if he might have brought it to pass, it is credible, he would
have cut the throtes of so many as be in this world. It was never seen or
heard off in this world, of any tyraunte that has been of the manner and
condition of Commodus: for that naturally he delighted in loss of friends, and
did glory to have enemies. Commodus your Emperor is now dead, and if I be not
deceived, I suppose he dies with conformity of the whole Empire: because
there is nothing more certain, then that he which lives to the prejudice of
all men, should die to the conformity of all men. In as much as the Gods have
taken in good part to deliver us from the servitude of this tyrant, it is
necessary that another Emperor be provided and chosen, and this election may
endure no delay, but must be dispatched at this instant: because otherwise, as
the great dignity of the empire, is a thing that many desire, and few deserve:
so it might happen that at the time we would bestow the same upon some
virtuous man, it might be usurped by some strange tyrant. If unto every man
that is here present, we should have due respect, according to their deserving:
I swear by the immortal Gods, we should want Empires, and not Emperors: but
considering the Empire is but one, and is not to be given but unto one, in the
end none shall obtain the same, but he unto whom the Gods shall assign, and
the destinies permit. The prince that ye have to elect, ought (in my
judgment) to be native of your country: because the prince that is not native
but a stranger, he shall rather first finishe his days, then attain to the
love of his common wealth. Ye have also to elect and choose an Emperor, that
possesses age and gravity: for that it furthereth not a little the profit and
reputation of the common wealth, to have a beard on the face, and hoarie hairs
on the head. Also it is right necessary in the Emperor which ye shall elect,
that he be no fool, either a coward: but that he be wise, pregnant, noble
minded, and of experience: because in natural science, and long experience,
the good government of the whole common wealth does consist. Manifesting my
mind more clearly, I say again unto that which I have said: that if my
opinion might be taken in this case, we ought to determine and fix our eyes
upon Publius Pertinax, in whom concur all the conditions aforesaid: that is
to say, naturalitie, age, gravity, science, and experience: and that this is
most true, there needs no greater testimony for the credit thereof, then
that Commodus held him for his enemy. It is not to be thought, that the Gods
in vain, have conserved the life of Pertinax until this day, Commodus
procuring by a thousand means to put him to death: as it is most true, that of
all the old servant of his father by him slain, only Pertinax is reserved
alive. As we have all well known that be here present, that Pertinax has been
the man most afflicted, banished, envied, toyled, and persecuted, of all the men
that now are alive in this world: and surely it is a great argument, to think
that for him, and for no other the Empire has been reserved: because the Gods
do never preserve the life of any man amongst so many perils, but afterward
greatly they advance him. We ought all to hold it for great good hap, and
greatly to gratify the gods in respect of such and so many as have bin slain
in our common wealth, that we find such a prince for our mother Rome, whom
they shall not adventure to contemn, because of his gravity: neither be
dau^ted with fear, for that he is noble minded: either noted of simplicity,
in as much, as he is sapient: neither accused of vice, for that he is
virtuous: either reproved of feeblenes, because he is reposed: finally, no man
may deceive him in words, in so much as he has experience of all things. O
most excellent princes and my commilitants, I will say no more unto you, but
that, if ye may persuade your selves to the election of Pertinax, ye shall not
only yield a good Emperor unto your Common wealth, but also every man shall
obtain in him, a father for his family: for as he has bin a leader unto us
all, so he cannot deal with us, but as with his children.

All the time that Letus was reasoning these matters unto the army, they
stood all astonished and rapt: partly in hearing the memorial, containing the
treason that Commodus had ordained, and partly for the news of his death: and
also in considering how aptly and eloquently Letus had used his speech in
opening the matter. Presently at the instant that Letus had finished his talk,
the whole army began to say and exclame: Viuat viuat Pertinax Augustus, which
is to say, Long and many years may Pertinax live our Roman Emperor. All the
principal of the army departed to visit Pertinax at his own house, and found
him not, but in the temple of victory, and taking him upon their shoulders
they carried him about all Rome: and as it was then, as yet not thoroughly day,
the townsmen were abashed to hear such news: because not knowing that
Commodus was dead, they heard that Pertinax was proclaimed Emperor. The
Romans afterward did swear and affirm, that in long time past there was
ever any news diuulgate in Rome, that generally gave so great joy unto all
persons, partly for the news of Co^modus death, as also for that ye good old
Pertinax was made Emperor.

CHAP. V. Of an Oration made by Pertinax in the Senate immediately after he was
elected Emperor.
VEry great was the joy that was manifested throughout all Rome, because they
had obtained Pertinax for their Lord, and no less was the heaviness that
Pertinax discovered, to behold himself an Emperor: for he said, that this
name or title of imperie or regiment, was the thing that every man desired for
himself, and in others did most abhor. No sign of an Emperor would Pertinax
consent to accompany him, until he and the Senators had seen, conferred, and
saluted each other, and all jointly being mounted upon the height of the
Capitol, where ye imperial cloth of estate was placed, Pertinax would by no
mean sit down in that imperial seat, but took the Consul Glabrio^ by the
arm, and by strong hand would have set him in the same, seriously affirming,
that it apperteined much better unto his deserving. Glabrion was a Roman, in
age very ancient, in condition very mild, in government very wise, in life of
great sincerity, and in blood much esteemed: for that he was descended by the
right line of king Aeneas son unto Anchises, and son in law unto king
Priamus, and father to Aschanius. When Glabrion perceived Pertinax to persist
with so great instance to inuest him with the Empire, he said unto him in the
presence of the whole Senate: the humble humility which thou show Pertinax
in the want of merit of the Empire, the same makes thee of deserving
sufficient of the Empire, unto which election all we of the Senate do consent:
not moved thereunto by the election of the army, but to see thee make so small
account of thy self: in such wise, that this thy refusal yeldeth thy merit
sufficient. A great while was the whole Senate persuading Pertinax to condescend
to their request, which is to wit, to accept the Empire: but his repugnance was
so great, that in a manner by force they placed him in the chair: and that
which is more, the whole Senate perceived, that he did nothing feynedly: for it
was lamentable to hear the lamentation which he made, and to see the
abundance of tears which he shed. But afterward, when he was placed in the
imperial chair, Pertinax spoke unto the Senate after this manner.

His Oration to the Senate.
THAT which I will now speak unto you (fathers conscript) the God Jupiter, in
whose house now we stand, be my witness, I will not therein deceive you: for this
place being consecrate unto the gods (as it is) it should be great sacrilege,
for men to adventure to lie therein. For all weakness which men commit, they
may have excuse, except it be for lying: because unto other vices, humane
weakness does inuit or entice us: but to lie, we are not moved but with our
own proper malice. Fathers conscript, ye see how Commodus your Emperor is
dead, and the destinies have brought to pass that I succeed him in the
Empire: perchance, for as much as he did wish me evil, and his works of my
part not very well liked, it may be thought of you, that the manner of his
death was first notified unto me, and his life cut off by my device: wherein
thoroughly to satisfy you, I swear and protest by the immortal gods, that of
this fault I am not guilty: because I was so innocent thereof, that when they
said that Commodus was dead, at that instant I thought he had sent to have
slain me. Notwithstanding, that both he and we shall all die, I would not that
so strange a death should have finished his days: not because Commodus did
not deserve the same, but for the great bond which our mother Rome does owe
unto his father Marcus Aurelius: for it many times happens, that the errors
of the children, be recompensed with the merittes of their fathers. I was
servant and advanced of the good Marcus Aurelius, which is the greatest weal
that the destinies might have given me in this world, and I say it is to this
end, because it should be great grief unto me, if in my presence any thing
should be said, either in my absence any thing should be done, against his
son Commodus, although he be now dead: for that in my heart, I find my self
much more bound to acknowledge the great goodness which I received of my Lord
Marcus Aurelius: then to reueng the injuries that I suffered of his son
Commodus. Believe me (fathers co^script) that if ye shall do contrary unto this
which I have said, it may be, that observing time wherein I shall find my self,
it shall be necessary to dissemble it, but I may not cease greatly to feel it.
The providence of the gods is far different from the devices of men, and that
which moves me to this speech, is, that when I was a young man, I much desired
the Empire, and might not atteine it: and now that I am old and do abhor it,
they force me to take it: in such wise, they give us that which we hate, and
deny us that which we seek or crave. When I began to hold offices in the
common wealth, I thought it most certain, that it was no human matter, but a
divine dignity, to be a Roman Emperor: but after I tasted of the trauells of
commandments, and of authority, and understood the peril to reign: I did
clearly see that amongst all the travels of men, to be an Emperor is the
greatest.

Neither merueile, either be esca^dalized (O ye fathers conscript, to see me so
intractable, and with so many tears to refuse the Empire: for if I thought to
use my self therein as a tyrant, I would not cast it off, but would rather
procure the same: but as my meaning is to live and govern more to the profit
of the common wealth, the^ to the advancement of mine own house: respecting my
small strength, the Empire is to me, a great burden. Being, as I was, most
truly satisfied with the acquaintance and conversation of the travels of the
Empire, there were no reason to think, I should desire the Empire: because
there is none so foolish, as the man, that with the hope of a remedy, would
offer himself unto an hazard. Unto this day I have been esteemed in
possession of great wealth, but now that I am an Emperor, I am forced to
become poor: for yt a prince, in respect of such, with who^ he has to deal
and accomplish, has few things to give, and has a thousand necessities that
constreine him to bribe and rob. Until this day I have had some quietness,
but from henceforth I shall be constreined to live discontented: because from the
travel and disquietnes of the prince, peace and quietness does proceed unto
the common wealth. The office of the prince is not to sleep, but to watch:
not to be idle, but to travel: for that every excessive recreation, which his
person takes, forthwith redoundeth to the offense of the common wealth. From
my birth until this day, of any thing I have not had greater experience, then
to see, hear, read, suffer, and experiment travels: whereof many I beheld far
off: but alas of my self, that now am environed therewith: because the
appetite of the vulgar people is so feeble and variable, that if to day they
give and elect a good prince, to morrow they would relishe and have a taste of
the government of some other. Naturally, all men, in all things, and at all
hours, desire to hear and see novelties, and much more desire the same in the
estate of government, then in all other things: for that no prince governs
so well, but that they conceive an other should govern better. Until this day
I have been well liked, served, and reverenced, but from henceforth al men for
the most part, shall bear me envy and hatred: because the estate of princes is
so envied, that he shall want sand in the Sea to reckon his enemies: but the
number of his fingers of one hand, shall exceed to point out his friends.

All this I have said (fathers conscript) to the end ye shall not merueile, why
I have refused the burden of the Empire, but rather am escandalized, knowing
what I know, to see my self charged and over laden with ye Empire: because to
renounce it, a thousand things do move me, and to attempt it, nothing inuit
me. But since the gods have so willed, my destinies so permitted, and ye also
have so ordained: I determine to lode my self with this burden, although I am
assured it will cost me my life: but I yield it al for well employed, if it
performed to the benefit of the common wealth.

These words being said by Pertinax, the Senate received great pleasure, and
chiefly praised him, for that he forbad all men to speak evil of Commodus,
knowing (as they all did know) that he had been his mortal enemy. The
Senate received Pertinax in the midst amongst them, and did accompany and
attend upon him, unto all the temples: and every temple did offer unto the
Gods, notable sacrifices. And most truly this was a notable and also a laudable
custom amongst the Romans, which is to wit, that princes newly elected, did
first visit the Gods, before they permitted themselves to be visited of men.
As Pertinax had his person in so great authority, and being elected by the
army, and the Senate with so great concord: and further, being old and hoarie
headed, and so long time known in Rome, it was a monstrous thing to behold,
when he came forth into Rome, how al men hasted to see his face: for truly it
seemed little unto every man to obey him as a prince, but to love and serve him
as a father.

CHAP. VI. Of many things which he did after he was Emperor.
THe first thing that Pertinax commanded, or provided, was, that the men of
war were very well paid: and therewith practiced great discipline, in which
matter, more then in any other, he presently gave reformation: for that in the
Empire of Commodus, the army was abandoned unto great liberty.

Co^modus consumed so great sums of money in vices, yt there was not
sufficient to pay the men of war: and by this occasion they did filche by
night, rob on high ways, sack houses, spoil corn, oppress the poor, and
were bribers with rich men: finally, they were desperate, and so flesht, that
for fear of any pain, they never absteyned from offense. Not many days after
that Pertinax was published Emperor, and with great seriousnes on a certain
day, used familiarity with Letus and Electus, a Consul named Falcus said unto
him: what an Emperor (O Pertinax) thou shall prove, thy works begin to make
demonstration: since thou leadest after thee Letus and Electus, which as
traitors did kill their Lord Commodus: doing what thou do, and consenting
to that whereto thou did consent, it may be no less, besides the evil
example which thou yeeldest unto Rome, thou give also such scruple unto thy
fame: whereby we think, that if thou were not the inuentour of his death, at
the least thou delightest to cloak the same. Unto this Pertinax made answer,
it well seems, that although thou be a Co^sul, thou art but a yongling: since
thou know not to make difference of times. It makes no great matter, that I
do with Letus and Electus, as they did with their Lord Commodus, that is to
say, they obeyed him and followed him, and that which they most desired, they
most dissembled: and at the hour of opportunity, they dispatched him of his
life. The same day that he was created Augustus and Emperor, he was
entitled Pater patriae: this excellency unto none, either since or before,
was given upon that day. His wife was named Flauia Titiana, unto whom
likewise on the same day that he was invested Augustus, she was entitled
Augusta. The Emperor Pertinax did greatly travel, to allow all things that
his Lord Marcus Aurelius did favor, to finish that which he had begone, to
sustain that which he had left, to repair that which he had built and to
imitate all that which he had done: for he said, it was impossible to err,
in following the stepps of the good Marcus Aurelius. The fame being diuulgate
thoroughout the Empire, how Commodus was dead, and Pertinax chosen Emperor:
the countries, cities, provinces, and kingdoms, gave very large rewards unto
the messengers thereof, no less for the death of Commodus, then for the
election of Pertinax. As he had been in so long time in so many provinces,
Praetor, Censor, Quirite, Edil, Consul, Proconsul, and Censor, Pertinax was one
of the most famous Romans in the Empire: whereof succeeded, that after the
Barbarians were advertised, that Pertinax was Emperor of Rome, such as were
rebels, left their armor, and such as had taken truce, made peace. Pertinax
had a son, whom the Romans would have created Augustus, to the end he
should succeed him after his days in the Empire: which he could never like
off, or consent unto, saying: The Gods never grant, that with the hope of the
Empire, my son should be nourished unto vice and idleness. Commodus had
laid intolerable impostes and tributes upon his people, which Pertinax
commanded to be made frustrate: affirming, that of the will of princes in
charging their kingdoms with unjust tributes, there succedeth a wilful denial
of due and most just paiments. False witnesses he commanded to be punished
according unto the law named, Pena del talion, that is to say, they should be
executed by Justice, wherein they had accused others by malice. He ordained
that the testament which had been made by the husband and wise jointly, might
not be altered by the suruiuer. Also he did ordeyne, that any man dying
intestate, should not forfett his lands or goods unto ye fiscall, but that his
son, or most near kinsman should inherit the same: saying, there were no
reason or just law, where the dead for want of speech should loose his goods.
The Senators on a day said unto Pertinax, how the Questors of the treasury,
and the officers of the fiscal, had murmured at him, for the law that he made
in the favor for the dead intestate, unto whom he aunsweared: Fathers
conscript, I may safely say, there are not so many that complain of this law,
as there be that praise and allow it: but I recke not whether the one does
praise or the other mislike: but in my judgment, it is no work of Romans,
but the inue^tion of tyrants, of robberies, briberies and rapines, to fill the
treasury with riches. He made a law, that no fiscall should sue any person
for lands, or goods that were doubtful, saying: that the fiscall ought to
remove nothing that clearly were not his own: and that in case of doubt, more
sure and more conformable unto justice were it, to remain with him that does
possess it, tha^ with the fiscall that does demand it. He commanded all
things unjustly taken by his predecessor Commodus, to be restoared unto the
owners. When the Secretary came to firm this law to be proclaimed, and
Pertinax reading the same, wherein it was said: We command that all things
which our predecessor Commodus has robbed, which word robbed, he blotted out
with his pen, and enterlined this word gotten: saying, it is sufficient that
the law be in the favor of the living: without iniuring, with foul words,
Princes that be dead. All that which was known manifestly to be Commodus debt,
he commanded to be paid, and all which he had promised to be given: and
besides all this, the wheat, oil, and other things which particularly were
used to be given and divided amongst the people of Rome, he caused with great
diligence to be brought from all kingdoms, and in great abundance and
liberality commanded it to be bestowed. Many unjust tributs being taken away
by Pertinax, there succeeded a great necessity for the payment and relief of
the army of Africa: whereby he was constreyned to exact new impositions of his
common wealth, whereupon the Consul Gelianus took occasion to say, that he had
done contrary to that which he had begone in the Empire, and against that which
he had said in the Senate: Pertinax aunswering said. When I was Consul (as thou
art) I did marvel at the deeds of princes, and now that I am an Emperor, I
marvel of that which you Consuls do speak: thus much Gelianus I say to this
end, because thou shall understand, that Emperors at times, make laws as they
ought, and at other times not as they would, but as they may.

CHAP. VII. Of many things which he did ordeine and reform in the common
wealth.
THere was in Rome and in the confines of Italy, much roughe ground for corn,
which being barren for want of manuring, Pertinax commanded proclamation to
be made, that if any man would grub, manure, or till ye same, he should
freely for ten years, take the profit thereof. Before Pertinax used this
diligence in Italy, from Egypt, Spain, and Sicyl, they brought wheat to
furnish the same: for which cause Traiane did use to say, that Rome was more
tributarie then any place of the world: for that they could not eat, but if it
were given them from other kingdoms. There were many particular things said
to be the Emperors, namely, hills, herds, garde^s, rivers, palaces, and
houses: which he commanded to be altered, naming them hills, gardens and
rivers, not of the Emperor, but of the common wealth, for he affirmed, that
on that day, in which any whatsoever, was made Emperor, he might have nothing
proper unto himself: and said further, that if this name Prince be well
understood, it gives no other dignity to the person that uses the same, but
to make him defender of the territories of the country, and procurer of the
common wealth. In the days of his predecessors, they had attempted new
impositions, that is to say, in ports of the sea, at the ports of cities, for
passage of high ways, of barks upon rivers, and for baking in ouens: al
which were to the great detriment of the common wealth, and the ancient
liberty of Rome: the collection whereof Pertinax from thence forth, commanded
to cease. Being demanded of the Consul Tortelius, why he made frustrat laws
so profitable, aunsweared: because without comparison much more are the
displeasures which they give me, then the money which they bring me: and as me
seems, we may not say, that that money is very cleanely that comes imbrewed
with displeasures. He commanded that in criminal causes, offenders should be
very well heard: and if in case any should dye, forty days to be expired
before he should suffer. It was a matter very monstrous and scandalous, that
was consumed in expenses, in the days of Commodus: wherein Pertinax in such
wise provided, that they murmured no less against him for his frugalitie, then
against Commodus for his prodigality. They much blame Pertinax, who set
before his guestes which did eat at his table, half pigges, and half geese:
and many times sent two soppes betwixt two plates for a present, and sometime
the leg of a Phesant, and at other times the wing of a capon, and reserved
also in the morning somewhat to be eaten at night. Princes ought very much to
consider, and also to avoid, not to be noted miserable at their table: for it
is very small that in such trifles may be saved, and very much that they give
unto the multitude to murmur. He many times came forth unto the field of
Mars, and there he caused the whole army to exercise feats of war, rewarding
such as were industrious, and reprehendinge such as were dull and hartelesse.
There were many Romans, and others in the confines of Italy, which did owe
great sums of money, not only unto the fiscall, but also unto the treasury,
among whom, some in times past had been his friends, and others that were in
great necessity, he commanded both the one and the other to be delivered of
the fiscall, since it was due unto him self, and made payement of their whole
debt that was due unto the treasury. Amongst other virtues, the Emperor
Pertinax of twain was much noted and praised: which is to weete, of
clemency and gratefulness: for that he was pitiful unto the afflicted, and
thankful unto his friends. Pertinax had a son, whom, after he was
Emperor, he would not permit to come to the court, either as much as unto
Rome: but that he held him in his country, following his own affairs, and
the profit of his own house: whereupon the Consul Fuluius Turbone said unto
Pertinax, that he seemed rather the son of a labourer, then of an Emperor:
he lift up his eyes to heaven and with a great sigh, said: My mother Rome
has cause to be contented, that I offer and put my life in peril for her
cause, without venturing my son and house in like danger. Most surely the
saying was lamentable, and the more it is considered, the more profounde it is:
whereby it appears, that he held him self for most unfortunate, to be
established in the Empire: and that he left his son in greatest felicity, to
be deprived of the Empire.

Although Pertinax were old and grave, and was placed in the height of the
Empire, he always used great vrbanitie toward all men, in such wise that
no man did him reverence, unto whom he did not utter some courtesy: according
to the quality of the person. Fifty servants in Rome in one night and in
one hour, slew their masters, for whom the Emperor caused so diligent
search, that only five escaped: and the pain that he commanded they should
suffer, was, to carry the dead bodies bound fast back to back, in such
wise, that the stenche of the dead, did finishe the wretched life of the living.

In the school where Pertinax studied, a certain Roman named Valerius was
there also a student, and being always in company, and of age not much
unlike, and continuing in great friendship, did many times eat with Pertinax,
which during their repast were never heard to talk, but of science,
knighthood, repayring of Rome, or else the reformation of the common wealth.

It did well appear in Pertinax, that he took the Empire against his will:
for truly, neither in his diet, either in his apparel, either in his gesture
or speech, either in any other thing, did he behave him self as an Emperor,
in such wise, that he presumed not to represent what he was, but what he had
been, He said many times, that in this world he never made the like fault,
as when he accepted the Empire: and many times made motion to leave the same,
and to return unto his house: but that he did recomfort him self with this
saying: that for as much as he was of so great age, he might not live long,
but be delivered of his tedious life.

CHAP. VIII. Of certain vices wherewith he was infected, and of the prodigies
of his death.
AS the Emperor Pertinax was old, so was he charged with the infirmities of
old age: that is to say, with avarice, because in gathering and keeping of
money he was very diligent: and in giving or spending very dull and unwilling.

Also he was noted to be a man very flexible in his affairs: that is to say,
he was not stiff, either greatly did use therein any contradiction, but that
which one did counsel him, another might easily persuade the contrary: the
cause whereof was his good natural inclination, which could not without
grief, behold any man that was in sorrow.

Also Pertinax was noted, that he never denied any thing that was demanded,
although many his promises were never performed: for, at most times he
promised to give that which was impossible to be accomplished. And because the
majesty and greatenesse of Princes does consist to have and possess, whereof
to give: they ought much to be advertised in consideration, what is craved of
them, and what they promise: for having to do (as they have) with so many, and
to furnishe so infinite necessities: they ought, if their subjects be
unshamefast in craving, to be grave in promising. Jointly with this, Princes
ought to be advertised, that where they have once gaged their royal word, all
things set aparte, they ought to perform the same. Pertinax was twice
married, his second marriage was with the daughter of Vulpitianus, whom he
made prefecte when he was made Emperor. As concerning the unchastity of his
wife, also Pertinax was noted: which is to weete, of negligence in governing,
and remiss in reprehending her, for that truly she was both young and fair,
absolute and dissolute: and reported in Rome, to be more enamoured with a young
Musician then with Pertinax her old husband. Also Pertinax was much noted to
have used unlawful love with Cornificia his near kinswoman, whom he had
nourished from her childhood: for she was committed by her father unto his
protection: this matter was no less scandalous then foul and no less foul,
then scandalous: for that such like, and so great evil, was not convenient to
a man of so great age, either permissible in a Prince of so great gravity.
Some prodigious and strange signs appeared before his death, especially on a
time, offering certain sacrafices unto the Gods Penates, that when the
coals were most kindled and on fire, soudeinly they were seen all dead and
quenched: which did signify, that in the greatest certeintie of his life,
soudeinly death should assail him.

Not six days before he was slain, as in the temple of Jupiter he was
offering great sacrifices, with his own hands he offered a Pecocke, wherein he
found no heart when it was opened, and soudeinely the head vanished, when the
throat was cut. Eight days before he was slain, a Star joined with the
Sun, and did shine at noone days, as if it had been midnight. Three days
before he was slain, Pertinax dreamed that he fell into a fishepond: and that
there was a man with an huge knife to kill him, and would have fled and could
not. Iulianus which after succeeded Pertinax in the Empire, having a Nephewe
new married unto his Niece, and having repaired unto Pertinax to visit him,
Pertinax said unto the young married man: be good, and I shall hold and
esteem thee as my son: serve thy uncle Iulianus as a father, because he is
my fellow in office and successor. They had been jointly Consuls, and
afterward Iulianus in the proconsulship was successor unto Pertinax: and
although he spoke it of the succession of the proconsulship, yet they conceived
his speech to be a prognostication of his succession in the Empire. It was
discovered unto Pertinax, that the Consul Falconius desired and also procured
to succeed him in the Empire, and to that end had taken a devise to dispatche
him of his life, of which case Pertinax grievously complained unto the Senate:
the truth whereof being afterward tried and known, he as instantly
entreated that Falconius might be pardoned: saying, he had rather extol him
self by his clemency, then boaste him self of his vengeance: whereupon
Falconius was pardoned, leading his life ever after in his house: and for that
he had been in great honor, and amongst the Romans much esteemed, but by
that treason had lost his credit, within few days, mere sorrow gave an
end unto his life.

CHAP. IX. Of the occasion that the Pretorians took to murder him.
THE officers that Commodus used for his service in court, as Chamberlaines,
Secretaries, masters of household, clerks of the kitchen, porters, cooks,
and such other, Pertinax had not changed, staying that change until the day
of celebration of the buylding of Rome: for he held opinion, that before the
evil should be removed, it were great reason, at leisure to make election of
others that were good. That which Pertinax had thought to have done in his
house, he determined also to execute amongst the captains of wars, and
other officers of the common wealth, because they were so absolute in
commanding, and so covetous in robbing, that if the pain were recompensed
with the fault, it had been a small matter, from every one of them to have
taken away life.

When affairs of importance are deferred, the secreat thereof incurreth
great danger: and for this cause, as Pertinax deferred this matter from day
to day, all officers suspected what he would do with them, and therefore
determined to dispatche him of his life. Extremely was Pertinax hated of the
men of war, and of the particular officers of the common wealth: which hatred
proceeded not of any just offense, done by this good Prince, but for that he
consented not that they should rob and commit vile deeds. Many times the
wicked bear envy unto the good, not because the virtuous suffer them to do
well, but for that they consent not unto them to do evil: for so perverse is
the malice of some perverse persons, that they take more delight to do evil
unto others, then to receive benefit unto them selves.

Unto all the officers of the common wealth, Pertinax commanded that they
should enjoy intierly all fees and profits appertaining unto their offices:
and unto all the Pretors, and soldiers of the wars, he provided their wages
very well paid them: and besides all this he dealte not with them as with
vassals, but the chiefteines he did honor as brethren, and to meaner persons
he spoke as unto his sons: but all this notwithstanding, they lived in great
passion, and no less discontented: for that in times past, their
extraordinary robberies were much more then their wages. But thus was the
case.

On a day, certain Pretors of the armies did assemble at a dinner, with other
officers of the city, as also diverse seruitours of the court: and after they
had largely eaten, and abundantly drunken, they began to talk of the days
of Commodus: that is to say, how then they were at liberty, rich, and
honored: and now since Pertinax reigned, they were poor, captives, and
defaced: and that the fault thereof consisted more in their own cowardice,
then in any other person. And further proceeding in this matter, they concluded
to spoil Pertinax of his life, and to choose another Emperor of Rome at their
liking, which should renew the memory of their Lord Commodus, and violate
all acts that Pertinax had confirmed: and that it was a more safer way to be
governed by a wise young man like Commodus, then by an old dotyng fool, as
Pertinax.

Partly, for that they had their heads troubled with drink, and their
stomaches hoate with eating, but above all the rest, furiously inflamed with
talk, soudeinly they rose all from the boorde, and every man goes home to be
armed, with a determination to dye in that enterprise: or, that same day to
dispatche Pertinax of his life.

All the people being at quiet, and Pertinax rechelesse and without regard,
the pretorians of the armies, with a great number of armed men, some trayling
their lances, and others with swords drawn, march unto the imperial palace,
where Pertinax was reposing: for that it was but little more then past noone.
And as they approached the house, they began to exclaim: the memory of
Commodus live for ever, and the false old Pertinax is but dead. All such as
were present with Pertinax in the palace, neither knew what to do, and much
less what to counsel: some said unto Pertinax that he should send for
succor unto the people: others, that he should hide him self in some secret
place: others, that he should fight until his friends should send relief:
finally, the case contained so great confusion, that he which feared least,
did fear to lose his life: because all those deintie courtiers had excess of
garments to walk in the streets, but wanted armor to come forth to fight.
It seemed unto Pertinax that to demand succor, there was no time: and to
attempt to fight, they were too few: to put them selves to flight, there was
no place: to traueile to be hidden, were a great blemishe: the good prince
determined to come forth and to talk with the Pretorians, to see if with
words he might apease them. And as afterward they reported which were
present with him (...) that great conflict, Pertinax did well discover the
greatness of his mind, and how little he esteemed the Empire, and also, how
much he lothed the vanities of this world, because he neither showed any
appearance of fear, for that he heard, either change of countenance, either
was troubled in any thing that he had to say. Pertinax caused the gates of his
court to be set wide open, and came forth of his chamber, having no manner of
armor or weapon, and began to reason with them that did inuiron him after this
manner.

CHAP. X. Of a notable speech that the Emperor Pertinax used, when his
soldiers came to kill him.
IF this so great commotion, which this day ye have raised (O my friends and
commilitants) be for that I seem not worthy of the Empire of Rome: ye have to
remember, that I neither obtained the same by suite or request, either bought
it for money, but that forceably ye made me to take it, I of my part employing
my forces to resist it. And if it be, for that I have had no regard unto the
common wealth, ye know how often I have requested to cease from government,
and to depart unto my house: and since this is most true, I know not to what
end ye should remove me perforce from that which I would have left and
remitted with great good will. And if for that I have been ingrate unto my
mother Rome, or have used evil government in the common wealth, ye will take
away my life, then I cannot but confess it to be a work most just, albeit
thereby I should be pursued, not only with pain and grief, but also with
infamy: because such a death yealdeth more pain and shame to deserve it,
then to suffer it. And if ye think your selves disgraced, to have a Prince
that is not descended of the Fabians, of the Metells, of the Fabritians, or of
some other notable Romans: in this case impute the fault unto the Gods, which
so have created me, and unto your selves who with such conditions would elect
me Emperor: because in natural matters neither deserve we praise, for yt we
have, either reprehension, for that which we lack. It were more just (O my
friends and commilitants) in this case to have respect, not to the shadow
and vanity of lineage, but unto the virtue and gravity of the person: for it
stretches unto small purpose in good gouernemente, to be descended of generous
blood, and to be of filthy life. And if ye have been altered, for want of
pay of wages, for the whole or in part, presently give me to understand, and
I swear and promise, that presently every man shall entirely be paid:
which if it be so, I am utterly without fault: since until this present I
never heard thereof. And seeing ye be gentlemen of great power, and Romans
of noble blood, ye have to consider in this case, that according unto our
laws, innocence and ignorance of the fault mitigateth and diminishes the
extremity of punishment. And if in case ye be esca^dalized for yt ye see me
rigorous, hard, and extreme, and yt I am so reputed amongst the people: as
small reason have ye in this case, as in the rest, because universally they
crave that justice be done, and yet they abhor ye execution thereof. And if
ye would blame me for the death of Commodus my predecessor, and your Lord: ye
have seen by experience how much I am blameless, and that unto me, more
then to any man, his death was grienous: and that this is true, call to your
remembrance the day on which Commodus was slain: where in I saw you singe for
joy: and of great grief ye saw me to weep. You Romans, you may not deny
me, but that the death of Commodus was of you all desired, and my election of
you all allowed: and since it was so, I marvel that men of so great authority
and gravity, should inuente so strange a novelty as this that is to say, in
so short space, to hate that which ye procured: and to have an appetite to
that which ye loathed. I swear by the immortal Gods, I know not of any vile
deed which I have don against the common wealth, wherefore ye should abhor
me: neither know I any thing that Commodus has done since he died,
wherefore ye should love and desire him: for if we sighe for the dead, it is
not for their deeds done, after that they died: but for the good works
which they performed when they were living. If for no other cause then to
take away my life, ye have joined and armed all these men of war: certeinlie
it is a thing superfluous and vain, in as much as I am both sick and old,
and with the burden of the Empire so much discontented, and with my life so
much displeased, I esteem little to live, and much less to die.

It grieueth me not so much to lose my life, as it does of the slander and
infamy which ye lay upon our mother Rome: which is to say, that the Romans
which have been renowned for their loyalty toward their princes, should
have report throughout the world, to have slain their Emperor.

Ye know that ye being (as ye are) men of war, and to no other end so well
paid and relieved of ye tribute, but to chastise such as rebel in the common
wealth, and to defend the house and the imperial person of your prince: and
since it is thus, what may be more unseemly, impertinent, and scandalous, then
such as be admitted for my guarde and safety, that they and no other should
come to take away my life. And for as much as ye be men of war, ye are
bound to observe the laws there of: that is to say, even in the wars of
enemies, ye may not, or ought not to kill children or old men: and since I am
an old man, and a citizen of Rome, wherefore will ye do with me, that which
ye will not do with an enemy? In these words which ye have said, in the
disorder which ye have used, and in the hour wherein ye have undertaken this
matter, it clearly appears that to enterprise so great a matter, ye have
not used great providence: for if ye had considered and examined the matter,
ye should most certainly have found, that in your determination to kill
me, there is no other fruit gathered, but to raise in your mother Rome a
great scandal, and to thruste your selves in great danger. And since one
shall inherit the Empire, and not all: with what folly are you taken (ye
Romans) for ye al to hazard and lose your selves for one man's gain, and yet
know not, if afterward that one man shall be grateful or unthankful. I
may not flee that which the destinies have ordained, either what ye have
determined: but in case this be my last day, and my fatal hour be come: I
pray the immortal Gods, that the innocent blood which shall be shead of me,
that the vengeance thereof fall not upon my mother Rome: but that every one of
you do feel it in his person and his house.

When Pertinax came to the point, to speak these words, for the most part
all that were present let fall tears from their eyes, and began to depart,
turning their backs, and holding down their weapons: because they had great
shame, to offend and to want reverence unto so honorable horie hairs, and
to words so well spoken. He that most vilelie had spoken against Pertinax, and
he that most had moved ye men of war, was one named Tuncius of ye country of
Theutonio: this wretched caytiue when he saw that al men returned, and had
renounced to kill Pertinax, he thrust a lance, through the midest of his body:
with which wound, Pertinax fell to the earth, and thereupon gave him other
wounds whereof he presently dyed. Great sorrow was it unto the people of
Rome, when they understood that Pertinax was dead, and having reigned but
fourteen months and xx. days, he profited more the commonwealth, the^ others
in fourteen years. The traitor Tuncius was not contented to have slain
Pertinax, but he also and his companions forgotte not to cute off his head, to
fix it on a lance, and to bear it through the streets of Rome. Pertinax died
the fifte day of April Falconius and Clarus being Consuls, his head was
thrown of his enemies into Tiber, his body burieed by his friends and
kinsfolks in the sepulcher of his father in law, at that present without any
funeral pomp, because they slew all persons that uttered sorrow or grief
for his death.

The life of the Emperor Iulianus, that bought the Empire, compiled by sir
Anthony of Gueuara, Bishop of Mondonnedo, preacher, chronicler, and counselor
unto the Emperor Charles the fifte.
CHAP. I. Of the life, lineage, and country of the Emperor Iulianus.
THe Emperor Didius Iulianus, had to his great graundfather a Roman named
Salianus, who was a learned lawyer, twice Consul, Pretour of the city, and
died in the second year of the reign and Empire of Nero: and they say, he
died of pure sorrow, to see the common wealth in the hands of so furious a
tyrant, as Nero.

His graundfather was named Salbius Iulianus, who gave him self more to arms,
then to letters: and went unto the wars of Datia with Traiane, and was
captain of the second Legion, and long time diuider of the victuals, and in
the end dyed in his office, that is to say, in the wars against king Dacus.
His father was named Didius Petronius, who neither gave him self to science,
either followed the wars as his predecessors, but was residente and lived
always in Rome, following his affairs, and holdinge offices in the common
wealth: he was an assured friend unto Antoninus Pius, and dyed in the Empire
of the good Marcus Aurelius. His mother was named Clara Emilia, a generous and
noble Roman, a great friend and kinswoman of Domitia Lucilla, that was
mother unto Marcus Aurelius: so did she entreat and favor him as a son, and
he did obey her as a mother. The first office that Didius Iulianus did bear in
the common wealth, was Decemviriato, which is to weete, to be one of the x.
visitours of ye people: and though he wanted age to use it, yet he wanted not
favor to obtain it, because Domitia, mother unto Marcus Aurelius, did crave
this office for him in the Senate. He was also Questor two years together,
which office he held against the Roman laws, for that he was under the age
of xxx. years: but as he obtained the office of Decemviriato by the suit of
the mother, so did they grant the other, by the favor of the son, which is
to weete Marcus Aurelius. And after that Didius Iulianus was past the age of
thirty years, he never wanted offices in the common wealth: for until that
age, ye Romans had rather that yongemen should occupy them selves in
learning, then in commanding and government.

Iulianus was Edil, Praetor, and Censor diverse times, diverse years, and at
times much distant: but the office wherein he continued longest time, was
Roman Praetor: because he had learning to govern, and justice to execute. He
was naturally given to the wars, and with this motion he went one time into
Germany, where he neither obtained fame, either augmented his goods: for that
certeinely he was more handsome in gouernemente, then hardy in fight.

He governed by the space of three years, the province of Belgica, which now
is named Swetia, in which government, he behaved him self so venturouslie, yt
he obtained what he had lost in the war, which is to say, much reputation in
the common wealth, and great goods for his house.

In the second year of the Empire of Marcus Aurelius, the inhabitants near
unto the river Albo (which is in the kingdom of Bohemia) rebelled, unto which
commotion Didius Iulianus repaired: and as he was humble of speech, skilful
and advised in his affairs, so in short space he reduced them unto ye service
of the Roman Empire. When the Senate had intelligence what Iulianus had done
in Bohemia, the Emperor thought him self therein very well served, and the
Senate no less contented: chiefly, for that so exactlie he had performed
the same, without request or commandment: and in recompense of this so
singular a service, they sent him the Consulshippe, without his request, or
any other to solicit the same. When the news of Consulshipe came unto
Iulianus, they say that he said: I swear by the immortal Gods, that I
neither solicited the Consulship, either thought to have obtained the same: but
here in it clearelie appears, that the good does more solicit with his good
works, then the evil with his many guiles.

After he had accomplished the year of Consulshipe, he was sent unto ye lower
Germany as Praetor, which country is now called Flanders, where he remained
two years: and from thence returned to Rome, where he had charge of victuals
which office amongst the Romans was more profitable, then honorable. The
Emperor Marcus Aurelius being dead, his son Commodus reigning in the
Empire, Iulianus was accused for a traitor, for that he, and Siluius his
cosen, had conspired to have slain Commodus: his accuser was a noble
gentleman of Rome named Seuerus: but for that he might not prove his
accusation, they cut off his head, and set Iulianus at liberty. At one time
Iulianus was in favor with Commodus, and an other time in disgrace: but after
that he was accused of conspiracy, he did always bear him mortal hatred:
and when he understood this in Commodus, both in word and deed, most times
he keept his house and excused him self from the offices of the common wealth.
Iulianus was a lawyer, and in letters most learned: of whom it is said, that
few did surpass him in science, and none was equal unto him in eloquence:
for he did never plead any cause in the Senate, but he obtained the
victory. He was prompt in speech, sharp in propounding, and grave in
determination, of stature somewhat low, of sanguine complexion, and in his
youth began to be horeheaded: of whom in this case it may be said, that he
was a monster in nature: for that he had never a white hair in his bearde,
either any black hair in his head. His wife was named Malia Escantilia, and
had but one daughter named Didia Clara. In this also as in the other, nature
would be extreme: because the mother was the most foul woman that had been
seen in Rome, and the daughter was the fairest dame, that ever was seen in
Italy.

As Iulianus had governed many countries, had the charge of victuales, and was
chiefest advocate in law in all Rome, so he obtained the possession of many
iuells, and the hoording up of great sums of money: for which cause, all
the principal Romans sought to be his sons in law: partly to marry
with the daughter that was so fair, as also to inherit the goods that were so
great. Iulianus was slender, dry, and toward his later days he was grown
to be cholerik adust, he never drank wine, and therefore did eat much: and
yet notwithstanding, he was so curious and so costly in his manner to drink
water, that with less cost he might have druncke wine. Being now grown
old, and rich, and having but one daughter which also was married. Iulianus
gave him self to live in joy and pleasure, that is to say, used not but to
solace along the rivers, to haunte places freque^ted with people, to recreate
with friends, to talk of times paste, to seek exquisite and delicate meats,
and always to have new guestes: in such wise, that he did fly each thing,
that was displeasante: and did and procured what so ever might yealde pleasure.
Iulianus long time perseuered in Rome in this manner of life, according to
which life, he had neither faithful friends, or feared and cruel enemies,
because if any did love him, it was for that he gave them some of his money:
and if others did hate him, it was because they received no part of his riches.

CHAP. II. How the Empire of Rome was set to sale, and also soulde by
proclamation.
AT the instante that ye Pretorian bands had slain the Emperor Pertinax,
they advised to join in one, to seize the walls, to take the gates of Rome,
and that with an armed power: partly for that the people should not rise
against them, as also to choose an Emperor at their own liking. Although the
common people beheld the imperial palace besette, yet they did not think
that they would have slain the Emperor: because the fame went amongst them,
that Pertinax was come forth, and that with mild words he had entreated
them: but as it after chanced, though the great troops were retired,
Pertinax was slain by the fewer number. When ye death of Pertinax was notified
unto the common people, al Rome was ready in armor. Very great was the
confusion which was that day in Rome, both of the one part, to see Pertinax
slain, and also for that ye army was bent against the people, and every
hour ready to join and kill each other, but that they knew not against
whom to fight: because the people would have taken vengeance of the
traitors that had slain the Emperor, but the army would not deliver them:
in such wise, that they were all faulty in that fact, the one in the act,
the other for consent.

The most principal of the Senate, many matrones of Rome, most wealthy
persons, and such as loved peace and quietness, after that they saw the
walls besette, the towers taken, the gates locked, and the streets stopte
through out al Rome, they departed unto their inheritances, until they might
see the conclusion of that so perilous and scandalous a tumulte: for they had
had experience, that no man might be safe in his house, until there were a new
Emperor: and that the election of him, should be consecrated with the hands
of many persons. The Pretorian bands beholding the most part of the people
to be fled, and none left that durst revenge the death of Pertinax, or
resist their attempts: they lost al fear, and recovered a new courage, not
to amend the fault which they had committed, but to give and sell the Roman
Empire. The case was thus, that a man at arms mounted upon the wall at the
gate Salaria, who in the name of the whole army made proclamation, and said
with a loud voice: Is there any man that will give more for the Empire of
Rome? is there any man that will set a price? for unto him that will give most
money, we will give it for his own. Of all the injuries, disgraces, and
calamities, that the Frenchmen, the Assyrians, the Hunnes, the Goths and the
Lombards did unto Rome, none was equal unto this, which is to say, to set the
greatness and majesty of Rome in open sale. It was great grief to see it,
and also prese^tlie to write it, to see and hear proclamation, who will give
money for the Empire of Rome: unto whom a fore time the whole world had given
tribute. By this so notable example, princes and mighty Potentates are to be
admonished, what great mutabilitie is contained in things of this world,
since the same persons, that had seen Rome the lady of so many and great
kingdoms, did also see her sold, proclaimed, and bought for money.

All the gentlemen, ancient Romans, and Senators, could not fill or satisfy
them selves with weeping, when they beheld and heard the proclamations made
out at windows: and that which did more grieve them, was the great infamy
which always should follow Rome, in that she was set to sale: and of the
danger also of the common wealth, which was to be bought of some tyrante.
Those that would have bought the Empire, had no money, for that Commodus had
ouerviewed and ransackt their store: and those that could have bought, of
great grief and no less shame, would not deal therein: for in respect of
the injury that they should have committed unto their mother Rome, it might
not be said, that they bought it for money, but sold it unto some enemy. In
conclusion the segniorie of Rome, and the greatness and majesty of ye Empire,
passed in public proclamations, by the space of three days, in which no man
would buy it, or set it in price: in so much as the Pretorians were
despited that no man would give money, and the common people in great sadness
that they would sell it. The fourth day after Pertinax was slain, as Didius
Iulianus was at supper with great pleasure, and talking how the Empire
continued in proclamations, his wife, daughter, and son in law persuading
him to adventure to buy it since the Pretorians were grown to so great want
of shame as to sell it. Iulianus consideringe of the one part what was said
by proclamation, and on the other part, what his friends did persuade him,
left his eating, cast down his head, and gave him self profoundly to
consider of the matter, which is to weete, whether it were simplicity to
leave, or vilanie with money to buy the common wealth.

Iulianus being very pensatiue with him self, and indetermined, his wife,
daughter, and kinsfolk, yet again replied, saying, that it was not now time
to blind him self with study, but to profit him self by his money: and
that also he had to consider, that it were less evil to buy the Empire with
his own proper money, the^ as other, to obtain the same by loss of men's
lives: and that he should not care to defer the euente by delays, since the
Pretorians grew displeased, and proclamations to be cut off. As Iulianus
naturally was proud, found him self rich, and also importunated by his
friends, he determined to buy the Empire: and for the purpose presently goes
to the foot of the wall, and cries out unto the watch that was thereon,
saying: for blood, ye know me to be descended of noble Romans, and in riches
most wealthy: and that he would give them so much money for the Empire, that
they should be abashed to see it, and tired to tell it. The Consul Sulpitius,
father in law unto the Emperor Pertinax, in secret did solicit the
Pretorians to give him the Empire, not to the end he would buy it, but that
they should elect him: but the Pretorians although they saw that he was a
noble Roman, and not unworthy, but very convenient for the Empire, they
durst not put them selves into his hands, doubting that he afterward
remembering the death of his son Pertinax, would execute on them some rigorous
reuengement. Sulpitius was a man wise and sapient, reposed, and ancient: with
the good will of the Senate, and request of the people, to him and no other
would they have given the Empire: and doubtless had it not been for the
aliaunce which he had with Pertinax, who was his son in law, they would
rather have given it him franckely for nothing, then have sold it unto the
other for money. The Pretorians being much despited, that they might not
receive money for the Empire, since four days they had proclaimed the sale
thereof, and now finding Iulianus at the foot of the wall, who had offered
money for ye Empire, they put down a ladder, and took him up unto them. Now,
when Iulianus saw him self in grace with ye Pretorians, and ye Pretorians
having him in their hands, they demanded more then he possessed, and he did
offer more then he had. The case was thus: that they with him, and he with
them, did capitulate iiii. things, whereof none was to the honor of Rome, and
much less to the profit of the common wealth. Their first capitulation was,
that he should give them presently 300000. sextercies: the second was, that he
should neither revenge the death, or sustain the fame of the Emperor
Pertinax: the third was, that he should erect ye picture, and renew the
memory of Commodus: the fourth was, that freely they might do, under his
Empire, as they had done in the days of Commodus: in such wise, that Iulianus
did not only buy the Empire for money, but also gave them license to live
wickedlie. This done and concluded, the event of the Empire was stopped in
Iulianus, the Pretorians receiving him in the mids, and attending him
throughout all the city, publishinge with loud voices, Long life be ever unto
the Emperor Iulianus, Commodus always Augustus. Iulianus would take that
ouername of Commodus, to do the^ pleasure that had sold him the Empire: who in
their nourture were bred up with Commodus, and in their manners and vices as his
own natural children.

CHAP. III. Of the great and mortal hatred which the Romans did bear unto
Iulianus, for buying the Empire.
Iulianus being created Emperor, his first act was, to offer unto ye gods
su^ptuous sacrifices: being (as it was) the custom of all new Roman
Emperors, presentlye he sent unto his treasury for money, to pay them of whom
he had bought the Empire. It was a monstrous matter to see ye iuels that he
brought forth, and the diversity of money which he had: the cause thereof was,
that he had been a governor in diverse kingdoms, and from them al, brought no
small su^mes of their coin. Incontine^t after Iulianus obtained the Empire, he
brought his wife and daughter unto ye court, who took upon them ye names of
Augustaes, and began to be served, not as Empresses, but as Goddesses: because
in their stateliness and presumption, they sought rather to be adored then
served. The Consul Sulpitius at the hour in which he understood that Iulianus
had bought the Empire, departed unto a certain house that he had in the
country, giving his office unto Cornelius Repentinus his son in law, who
(as they say) did much resemble Commodus, namely, in disposition of person, and
corruption of manners. Iulianus gave unto the army most great thanks, not only
for that they had given him the Empire, but also because they had entitled his
wife and daughter Augustaes and without his request also, had given him the
name of Pater Patriae, father of ye country: which title was ye most famous yt
ye Romans gave unto their Emperors. On ye other day after he was entitled
Pater patriae, early in the morning they found these Latin letters written
upon his gates: P.V.E.P. sou^ding in this sense, Proditor, Venditor, Emptor,
Patriae: and thus meant in english: thou art the traitor, the seller, and buyer
of thy country. Unquenchable was the fury and hatred yt the whole people
conceived against Iulianus, only for yt he had bought the Empire, which rancor
and hatred they could not so cover within their breasts, but that they
published it with their tounges, and showed it with their hands: for on the
first day that he came forth into Rome, they not only blasphemed him in the
streets, but also from their windows threw stones at him: neither did they
dine, suppe, or walk in Rome, or in all Italy, but always their talk was of
ye treason which the Pretorians had committed in selling the Empire, and the
great mischief that Iulianus had done in buying the same.

The Senate going to the high Capitol, to visit the new Emperor, resistance
was made against them: which was not done with armed people, but by boys in
the streets hurling stones at them, and the women from their windows did
curse them: which being constoered by the Senate, they advised for that time,
to return to their houses, no less offended, then seared. Al men bewailed the
case with many tears, and offered unto their Gods many sacrifices, humbly
praying that it might please them, shortly to take away the life of Iulianus,
and to execute cruel vengeance on yt murderers of Pertinax. On a certain time
the Circen plays being prepared, and the seat imperial placed aloft upon
the Theater, when the Emperor Iulianus should have set, certain of ye people
rashly not only did remove it, but also did break it in pieces: and he as he
was wise and advised did feel it as a man, and did dissemble it as one that
was discrete. Besides that which they said in his absence, they despised him
in his presence: and he happened many times to hear with his own ears,
words not a little ouerthwarte and injurious: but he was so subtle in that
which he said, and no less dissembling in that which he heard, that all
the injuries which they said or did, either he took them in lest, or did
counterfete, not to hear them. Naturally Iulianus was a prince of great
vrbanitie, that is to say, courteous, affable, gracious, and pleasant, and did
honor and reverence every man according to the merit of his person and the
estate which he held: yet notwithstanding, he could neither get frinds, either
apease enemies. Neither Catiline with his tyrannies, either Silla with his
seditio^s, either Nero with his cruelties, either Commodus with his vices, were
not universally so much hated in the Roman Empire, as Didius Iulianus: and
their hatred was so extreme, that they shut their eyes, because they would not
behold him: and did abstain to murmur at him, because they would not name
him. When they saw his horse pass the streets where on he did use to ride,
generally they would pray unto the Gods that he might traile him: or if they
had seen his meats carried, they did wish it might choke him: finally, they
did all abhor his life, and wished his death. Iulianus his enemies bruted
among the people, that on the day, when the Pretorians had slain Pertinax, he
had made a generous and curious banquet, wherein he gave to eat oysters of the
Adriatike Seas, Capons of Capua, wine of Creete, and water of Cantabria: but
above all, had Music and daunceing after dinner. Others said, it was most
false, but on that day he kept his house, and of pure sorrow to see Pertinax
slain, did not eat, until they had given a sepulture unto the dead body.
Moreover they say, that although Iulianus was gladsome, pleasant, and also
vicious, yet he did not exceed in extraordinary expenses, and that it was
unlikely and also impossible, for him to have made so sumptuous a banquet: for
it was many times notorious unto al me^, yt he did eat in his house no other
flesh by the space of iii. days, but on Hare, which was sent him. He was such
a miser to spend, and so desirous to hoord and lay up money, yt had it not
been for some days of sacrifices, or his bidden guests, not a morsel of flesh
was eaten in his house: but only fed of his provision from his garden. Many
evil customs that Pertinax had removed from the common wealth, brought in by
Commodus, he consented yt the Pretorians and other vicious persons should use
them: not that he delighted therein, but to recover them to be his friends. At
all times when talk was moved of his predecessor Pertinax, he would say
neither good nor evil, but that either he changed into some other matter, or
else by dissimulation would seem not to hear. And being demanded, why he did
neither allow or condemn that which was said of Pertinax in his presence: he
answered, of the one part Pertinax was so holy, that there was not in him to
be reprehended: and of the other part, he was so hated of ye pretorians, that
he durst not in their presence give him his due commendation.

CHAP. IIII. Of two Roman Capteines named Seuerus and Pessenius that rebelled
against the Emperor Iulianus.
AT the time that Iulianus bought the empire of Rome, there was a Praetor of the
armies in Assyria, named Pessenins Niger: who although he was inferior unto
Iulianus in wealth, yet in virtue he exceeded Iulianus: this Pessenius was a
man, gross, rough, and of great courage, and naturally was more happy in
martial affairs, then fortunate in the government of the common wealth: all
which proceeded, for that in periles he was not daunted with fear, and in
travels had no patience. At the first letters that Pessenius received from
Iulianus, they say, he answered: the Roman Empire, does not use to suffer it
self to be governed by so evil a man, as is Iulianus: wherefore, if this
commandment be only from the Emperor, I obey it: but if it be Iulianus
commandment, I appeal from it: whereupon it followed, that from thenceforth,
when any commandment was sent unto Pessenius from Rome, Iulianus name was not
in the firm thereof, but only superscribed with the Emperor of Rome. After
this matter was discovered, in Rome, they laid great wagers, which was most to
be praised, the mind of Pessenius for his haughty attempt, or the patience of
Iulianus that could dissemble the same. Also at that time the armies were
governed in Illyria, by a captain named Septimius Seuerus, borne in Africa,
and bred in Rome, which in justice was very right, in condition sharp, and in
martial affairs most fortunate. This Septimius Seuerus from the hour he had
intelligence of the death of the Emperor Pertinax, and that in his place
succeeded Iulianus, would neither receive letter, either obey commandment,
that came from Iulianus, either else from the Senate: saying, that they for
consenting, and he for buying the Empire, were inabilitate of all power to
command or to govern: and further, an evil friend was Iulianus unto Pertinax,
that sold his blood unto enemies, and bought his Empire for money. But the case
was thus, that Pessenius in Assyria, and Seuerus in Illyria, revolted with all
their armies against Iulianus: whereof being advertised, they say that he
said: the gods be pleased to retain in my service, all such as be in peace:
small is my care, if the rest had taken their leave. Although Iulianus said
thus much openly, secretly he conceived the contrary, which was afterward
better known by his works which he did, then by the words which he said. If
Seuerus had deadly hatred unto Iulianus, most surely Iulianus was not in love
with Seuerus: for presently, when he understood that he had rebelled against
him, he framed and brought to pass in the Senate, that Seuerus was proclaimed
a public enemy of the people of Rome, and all his army dispatched and
condemned. The Senate provided at the request of Iulianus, that Vespertinus
Candidus, a man both old and a Consul should depart to Assyria and Illyria:
which was not only disobeyed in the armies, but also not so much as heard: the
cause thereof was, the infamous Embassage which he brought: and because before
time, he was much hated being a Praetor in the wars. After Vespertinus was
returned unto Rome, they sent again unto Illyria, Valerius Catulus, but to
small purpose: for if they disobeyed the provisions of Candidus, at Valerius
they ran with lances. Candidus and Valerius being returned to Rome, Iulianus
and the Senate sent again Aquilius Centurius, who had commandment to kill
Seuerus, and that by any manner yt he might: that is to say, either fighting with
him in the field, or secretly to give him poison. Seuerus being advised, how
the Emperor Iulianus and the Senate had sent the third time Aquilius against
him, determined to bring forth his armies from Illyria, and to come to Rome to
seek Iulianus: and marched with so great speed upon the way, that when
Aquilus came forth of Rome, Seuerus was then in the confines of Italy.
Incredible was the fear that fell on yt Romans, after they understood that
Seuerus was come against them with all his armies: and their terror was
increased, to consider that he was a captain of Rome, which until that time,
had been a defender of the common wealth, and also for that he had made so
great speed upon the way, and lead his armies with so great reformation, that
in one and the self same day, they heard of his arrival, and also beheld him
in the face. The Capuans sent a solemn embassage unto Seuerus, to be
advertised of the purpose of his journey, and to offer him their help and
assistance: whom Seuerus received with great benignity, and said these
words in great secrecy. I come not to destroy Italy, either have I taken
armor to go against my mother Rome: the end of my coming is for three
things: which is to weete, to rescue the Empire from the tyrant Iulianus, to
revenge the death of the Emperor Pertinax, that was old and honorable, and to
refourme the Senate, of such as dare amongst them to adventure to give evil
counsel: for that I conceive to serve my common wealth no less, in clensing
vices, then defending enemies. That which Seuerus said unto the Ambassadors
of Capua in secret, presently they discovered openly: which being understood
in Rome, the Senators received thereof great sorrow, and the people great
pleasure: because the one did hope to attain liberty, and the other did fear
chasticement.

Iulianus gathered all his men of war, to the uttermost of his power, and
sent them against Seuerus, under the conduction of Tullius Crispinus: the
which, after he was advertised that Seuerus had taken Rauenna, and all the
country adjoining, returned unto Rome: which feminine act gave dismaye unto
Iulianus, and courage unto Seuerus.

Iulianus also commanded a muster to be made in the field of Mars, of all the
Pretorian armies, and he him self came to take a view, and an account of them,
conferring such as came unto the muster, with the names that were written and
received money at the pay: of three parts, there appeared not one: whereof
Iulianus collected, that Seuerus came not only with confidence of such as he
lead with him, but also of them which remained in Rome.

Great pleasure was it unto the popular sort, to behold how Iulianus was
forsaken of his capteines, and not attended on of his Pretorians: because every
day their hatred did increase against him, and their love with Seuerus.
Notwithstanding Iulianus procured munition and victuals, repaired the walls,
made trenches, advanced engines, and sent scoutes into the fields: all which
devises smally profited the sorrowful Emperor Iulianus: for if he held the
walls of Rome, his enemies possessed the hearts of the Romans. Iulianus
suspecting that Letus and Martianus being two Consuls, and men of great
reputation, should practice with Seuerus, commanded them to be slain, without
accusation or judgment.

CHAP. V. How by the commandment of the Senate, the Emperor Iulianus was
slain.
Until Iulianus had slain the before named noble Consuls, the Romans reputed
him only covetous and ambitious, but from thencefoorth they published him to
be covetous, ambitious, suspicious, and cruel: for it was a law amongst them
much used, to take away the life of no citizen of Rome, before he were heard to
say for him self. After that Iulianus perceived the Senate to grow
sorrowful, and the people escandalized, for the death of Letus and Martianus,
he came to great repentance, although to small purpose: for it was past his
hands to give life unto the dead, either to reconcile him self into the grace
and favor of the living. Princes and ministers of justice ought to be very
much considered, and no less advised, in crediting their suspicions, and to
avoid either choler or rashenesse in their executions: to the end, that after
it happen not, that for the deeds of one day, they have to remedy and also
to bewail all the days of their life.

With great instance Iulianus requested the Senate, that they with the
Priests and vestall virgins would meet Seuerus and his army with procession,
to see if they might pacify with prayers whom they might not resist with
arms. This suite the Consul Faustius resisted, saying, that it were not
convenient, that the sacred Senate, either the Priests of the temples, or the
holy vestall virgins, should intend matters of war: for the office of such
was to solicit the Gods to give us peace: and further, the Consul Faustius
said: he that possesses an Empire, and knows not to defend an Empire,
contains the indignity of an Empire. This answer was no less displeasant
unto Iulianus, then pleasant unto the Senators, whereby he obtained not, that
which he desired, and they grew unbridled to speak at large. Iulianus not
contented with that which was done, but called in secret certain his capteines
and friends, whom he commanded soudeinly to enter armed into the Senate, and
to say unto the Senators, that of two things they had to make choice, that
is to say: to lose their lives, or else to obey his commandments. Amongst
the other capteines there was one named Crispinus, which said unto Iulianus,
he is to be thought no small enemy of thine, that gave this counsel: because,
if thou be well advised, for thy love the Senate have declared them selves to
be an enemy to Seuerus: and now, if thou attempt to kill them, they will
answer, that they will obey thee: and on the other part, they will declare
Seuerus to be a friend unto the people, and thou an enemy unto Seuerus: and
further, the Gods never permit, that thou should give forth any such
commandment, or that I should perform it: for, if he be evil that gives
evil counsel, more vile is he that executes the same. Iulianus changing his
conceit, practiced with the Senate, that he would yield up the Empire unto
whom it might please them: which they liked very well, but durst not at that
present to debate therein: for Seuerus at that time was so near unto Rome,
that it was rather in his hands to take the Empire, then to receive it at the
hands of the Senate. Iulianus forgate not to send his Captain Crispinus
against Seuerus: against whom, Seuerus sent another captain named Julius
Lucius, who overcame in the battle, and slew Crispinus.

When Iulianus considered how his enemies prevailed, and his friends did
forsake him, he purposed to take the advice of Witches, inchaunters, and
soothesayers, to understand his destinies, and the Fortune of Seuerus: and the
case was thus: that after he assembled many Sorcerers and Magicians in his own
house, he made them practice many sorceries and inchauntments, and to sing and
pray many filthy, terrible, and foul things. And (as they after reported
which were present) he him self changed countenance, and with staring
hayres, discovered him self to be in great terror. Iulianus came unto the
Senators, craving their advise, how he should provide and behave him self:
for that Seuerus approached, and favored of Fortune, who had him in contempt.

None of the Senators answered one word, but the Co^sul Geminus, which said:
neither art thou worthy of counsel, or deseruest remedy, since thou have
forsaken the Senators, which should have given thee counsel, and wentest unto
Sorcerers, who could not but deceive: for that in such a case, being environed
with sinister fortune it had been more sound and sure counsel, to have gone
unto the priests, to have pacified the Gods with their sacrifices, then unto
sorcerers which by witchcrafts should lead thee into their indignation.
Iulianus sent unto Capua, all his guarde, and the swoorde players of Rome,
whose capteines were Lelius Titianus, and Claudianus Pompeyanus, which he did
to the end Seuerus should think, that since he had courage to send to
offend him, he should have no less to abide him. The father in law of
Iulianus was named Aratmensis, whom Iulianus persuaded and requested to take
half the Empire, in such wise, that both should have been entitled
Emperors of Rome: and jointly therewith swear and affirmed, that he did it not
to remedy the necessity wherein he stood: but for great good will which he
did bear him: who answered, this which thou say, Iulianus, be thou
assured, that I will neither do it, either do I love, but yrketh me to hear
it: because to govern the Empire I am blind, to traueile I am weak, and to
inioye it am become old: and much more respecting the age which I possess,
and the travels which I have passed: I am more apt to make peace with the
Gods, then to take wars in hand against men.

All the men of war that were in Etruria, did pass unto the service of
Seuerus, whom he would not by any means receive, until they had sworn to be
innocent of the death of Pertinax. Seuerus at the break of the day, discovered
him self with all his armies, two leagues from Rome: which being known unto
the Senate, jointly they agreed to determine two things: which is to weete,
to remove Iulianus from the Empire, and to deprive him of his life, and in his
place to elect Seuerus Emperor.

Then one of the Senators came forth from the Senate, and published with open
voice unto the people, that they should hold it for certain, that by the
authority of the sacred Senate, Iulianus was deprived of the Empire, and in his
steed Seuerus elected Emperor. Great was the joy that the people received,
when they heard Iulianus to be deprived of the Empire: and presently at the
instant who best might, made most have to receive the new Emperor: and none
passed by Iulianus house, that threw not stones at the windows, and spat not
upon the walls. At the hour that the Senate went forth to receive Seuerus,
they sent a Gentleman to kill Iulianus, who expressing the sorrowful embassage
which he brought, with many tears Iulianus requested that he might not be
slain, before he had seen Seuerus: but the gentleman durst do no less, then
to cut off his head, because the Senate stayed at the port Salaria, and had
sworn not to proceed to receive Seuerus, until they were certainly
advertised, that Iulianus was slain. The unfortunate Emperor Iulianus being
dead, his wife Malia and his daughter Escutilia took the body, and buried him
in a Sepulcher of his great graundfather, on the right hand of the way of
Lauinia. Iulianus was noted to be a glutton, a gamster, covetous, and
ambitious: and on the other part, he was pitiful, amorous, eloquent, grave,
and subtle. He lived 56. years and 4. months: be reigned 11. months and
5. days. After his death they did neither give his body honorable funerals,
or contemned his Sepulcher. This was the end of Iulianus, who being old,
honorable, and rich, would for the exchange of the Empire, give his goods,
adventure his fame, and loose his life.

R.v.

The life of the Emperor Seuerus, compiled by sir Anthony of Gueuara, bishop
of Mondonnedo, preacher, chronicler, and counselor, unto the Emperor Charles
the fifth.
CHAP. I. Of the lineage and country of the Emperor Seuerus.
THE ancient lineage of the Emperor Seuerus was of Africa, his grandfather was
named Fuluius Pius, and his grandmother Agrippa, which came and died in Lepe,
an ancient city in Mauritania, and was destroyed in the wars of Iugurtha,
and Massimila: his father was named Geta, and his mother Fuluia Pia, a people
neither renowned in arms, or glorious in blood, either endued with riches.
Seuerus was borne in Etrutio, Clarus and Seuerus being Consuls, the 4. day of
April: and as his mother reported, she had with him a difficult childbirth, and
very tedious to nourse. In his first infancy, he chiefly delighted to play
with other children his fellows, the play of Judges: and when his lot fell to
be Judge, as sharply did he chastise their trifling faults, as he did
afterward chastise their errors in earnest. He learned the Greek and latin
tongues with such singular perfection, and was so prompt to speak, write,
read, and dispute in the said tongues, as if he had been borne in those
countries, and learned no other languages. At the age of xviij. years he was a
public advocate, and defended causes in law: in such wise, that if he had
followed Science, as he did Wars, he had been no less renowned in science
and letters, then he was famous in arms. He was not full xx. years of age,
when he first entered Rome: in which days, there reigned the right happy
Marcus Aurelius, and by intercession of his kinseman Septimius Seuerus, he had
the office to register daily such as either died or were borne in Rome: which
office, although it were not profitable, yet was it an occasion of great
acquaintance, and to be thoroughly known: because nightly he went to Court to
report who was borne, or had died that day. The first night yt he entered Rome,
by chance his host where he lodged was reading the life of ye Emperor Adrian,
wherein was relation of ye great perils which he passed, before he might atteine
the Empire: Seuerus said unto his host in jest. In travels and perils I
imitate Adrian: I hope also that I shall succeed him in the Empire. By chance,
as ye Emperor M. Aurelius made a general and sumptuous supper unto many noble
Romans, Seuerus was amongst them, and at the time that he should have taken his
seat at the table, without regard he placed him in the Emperors chair: and when
others derided him for his negligence and folly which he had committed, Seuerus
answered: Peace and gibe not, it is possible (my destinies may be such) that
as I now sit in the imperial chair in jest, so one day I may sit therein in
earnest. Seuerus dreamed on a night, yt he sucked the teats of the wolf yt
noursed Remus and Romulus, which dream he always held for a great good sign
of his future Empire. In ye time of his youth, he was both absolute and
dissolute, especially in women's matters, and other vanities: for which causes
he was many times taken, banished, and shamed. In the offices of war, he was
placed in them all, especially the office of Questor, which he held long time:
and it is said of him, that having by that office charge of money, he was
dilligent in recovering, and faithful in dividing and parting thereof. In ye
month of January, in the 5. year of the Empire of M. Aurelius, it chanced
him to be Proconsul of Betica, which now in Spain is named the kingdom of
Andoloizia, where he remained ye space of a year and a half: in which
government he was no less loved then feared, and feared then loved.

Seuerus being Proconsul in Betica, received news of his fathers death in
Africa: whereupon he presently passed into Africa, partly to execute the
obsequies, and to give his father an honorable Sepulcher, and partly to take
order for a sister that was left unto him, and goods which he did inherit.
The Consul that then was resident in Africa, sent Seuerus for his Ambassador
to the Sardinians, which were revolted from the Romans: and entering into
Sardinia with certain burning torches, according to the manner of an
Ambassador of Rome, there came unto him a townesman after the fashion of a
iester, and did embrace him, whom Seuerus commanded to be whipped, saying: In
the act of so great gravity, trifling gibes be inconvenient. For that which
this iester did, and for the disgrace which Seuerus received, they ordained in
Rome, that from thence forth, Ambassadors always should enter all cities on
horseback, as in times past they had used on foot. Continuing Proconsul in
Africa, he would needs understand of a Mathematicia^ or Astronomer, how far
his fortune exte^ded or did reach: and having received the day and hour, and
also the ascendent of his nativity, the Astrologian being amassed and terrified
of the Fortune which his nativity did promise him, said unto him: It is not
possible that this be thy nativity, and therefore were it meet thou should
give me thine own, and not the nativity of another: for were it true, that
thou wast borne under such a co^stellation, thou should be Emperor of Rome.
At the age of 32. years, he was in Rome elected Tribune of the people: more
for the pleasure of Marcus Aurelius whom he served, then for the service that
Seuerus had done in the common wealth: but afterward he proved so toward, and
was so upright in causes of justice, that it neither repented the common wealth
to have chosen him, either Marcus Aurelius to have procured the same. His
Tribunal office being ended, he was named Praetor of the people: and on the day
of his election, the more to advance his honor, the Emperor passing through
the streates of Rome, placed him with himself in the Licter: which deed was
not a little reproched, of some through envy, and of othersome thorough
disdain.

CHAP. II. Of the offices which Seuerus held in the Empire, before he was
Emperor.
THe affairs of Spain being dispatched, Seuerus failed into Asia: and as soon
as he had set his fool a land, he departed unto Athens: partly to behold the
government of the Greeks, and partly also to hear the doctrine of
Philosophers: because in those days, they talked not of any matter more in all
this world, then of the great Fortune of the Romans, and the profound
eloquence of the Greeks. Not a few days he remained in Athens hearing the
Philosophers, conferring with the Senators, visiting temples, and viewing
buildings: because naturally he was a friend of new inventions, and desired no
less the knowledge of antiquities. Although Seuerus of person was valiant, and
Captain of Rome, and also of indifferent eloquence, yet they gave him no good
interteinment in all Grecia: for which cause when he came afterward unto the
Empire, he straightly revenged the old unkindness which he bare unto the
Greeks, every day diminishing their privileges. Being returned from Asia unto
Rome, he was sent Ambassador unto the province of Lugdune, which now in
France, is named Lion of Sonorona: and being at that time a widower, they
practiced with him a marriage with a certain Lady of noble blood, in
countenance most fair, and gracious in gesture. That Lady was named Iulia, and
of royal blood: unto whom purposing to present jewels of great price, and
finding no goldsmith sufficient to perform the same: being also advertised of
a goldsmith in Syria that excelled all men in that faculty, and doubting all
messengers to be insufficient, traveled in his own person, to fetch the same:
and as he after made report unto his spouse, that with the rewards which he
gave unto the goldsmith, and the charge of that voyage, he might twice have
been married. The Senators sent to reprove Seuerus, not because he had married,
but for the great journey and large expenses which he had passed for a woman:
aduising him, that it was not convenient for a citizen of Rome, to employ his
person, but to advance his honor: either consume his goods, but for defense
of the common wealth: whereunto Senerus aunsweared, that for none of those
matters whereof he was blamed, he either deserved blame or punishment: because
without all comparison, much more was the merit of that Lady with whom he was
married, then the expenses or trauells which for her service he had suffered.
And further he said: it seems unto me (fathers conscript) that for this act
I deserve honor, and no blame, since thereby arises unto Rome, both honor
and profit: because strange kingdoms have seen, that Captains of Rome, to
obtain riches, have strength and skill, and to spend them have noble minds.
Seuerus stayed jointly 3. years in France, both loved and feared, and no
less reverenced of the Frenchmen: not only for that he was just in judgment,
and liberal in expenses, but above the rest, in that he was of a sincere life.
The Calends of January being come, (at what time in Rome they divide their
offices) the Proconsulship of Sicylia was allotted unto Seuerus, whereof he
received no small grief, partly for that he found himself very well placed in
France, and feared the condition of the Sicylians. Being resident in the Isle
of Sicyl, he was accused by his enemies of Rome, that he did not exercise the
government of the common wealth, so much as the search of southsayers, who
should be Emperor of Rome: because in those days Commodus was Emperor of
Rome, and all men held it for certain, that for his wickedness he should be
slain, or himself, for his great vitiousnes, should die. Commodus received
great displeasure when he understood, that being (as he was) alive, and but
a young man, Seuerus should seek for the succession of his Empire: for which
cause Seuerus was forced presently to depart from Sicyl, and come to Rome,
there to discover and make proof of his innocence: because the danger was no
greater, then loss of honor and life. Presently upon his arrival at Rome,
he did yield himself unto the gaile Mamortina, and would not depart from
thence, until by public sentence his innocence was uttered, and his
accusers deprived of their lives. Two months after these matters passed, the
Calends of January were come, in which Seuerus was elected Consul, jointly
with Apuleius Rufinus: the day that this was published, they say that Seuerus
said. This day it is manifested in me, that men neither know what prosperities
be convenient for them, either what adversities do impeache them: and I say it
for this cause, for that criminally I was accused in Rome, and my person
prisoner in the place of malefactors: whereof there proceeded, that I departed
from Sicyl, came to Rome, give safety unto my life, augment my goods, recover
fame, take vengeance of mine enemies, and obtain the Consulship of the common
wealth.

The time passed of his Consulship, he stood an whole year without any
office: and as he afterward said many times, the best and merriest days of
all his life, were contained in that year, wherein he had no office in the
common wealth. In those days, Letus the Captain of the guard was greatly in
favor with ye Emperor Commodus: by whose intercession they commended the
garrisons of Germany unto Seuerus, who so skilfully behaved himself in that
journey, that he returned 2. years after unto Rome with great honor, and no
small riches. At his return unto Rome, Seuerus bought a certain compass of
land wherein to till for corn, and to feed and breed cattle, and alongest
the river Tiber he bought certain stately and fertile gardens, where he
builte houses of great pride, which long time after were called Seuerians.

At a certain time supping in those gardens upon the grass, where the
freshness of the green was very great, and vigualls very small, the case was
thus. His own son, of the age of five years, did give and divide unto all
persons, of all things that were there, unto whom the father said: temper thy
hand (son) in reparting, because thou have no real riches to give. The
child made answer: if I have them not now when I am a child, I shall have
them when I am a man. All men present wondered, considering the age of the
child, that so grave an aunsweare should proceed from so tender youth.

CHAP. III. How the Pretorians did elect him Emperor.
IN the 10. year of the Empire of Commodus, Seuerus was sent in message unto
the province of Germany: in which Embassage, he obtained much honor, and no
small wealth: for naturally he was of great dispatch in affairs, and skillful
to gather money. He was resident in Germany the space of three years, that
is to say, until in Rome they had slain the Emperor Commodus: of whole death
he had great pleasure, and of the election of Pertinax no less joy: because
the living was his most special friend, and the dead his mortal enemy. Not
many months after he received news how ye Emperor Pertinax was slain by
the Pretorians, and that he (for very money) had bought the Empire, he was
much grieved with the death of ye one and the election of the other. Seuerus
was advertised how Iulianus was in great hatred of the people, for
merchandising of the Empire: presently at the instant the men of war that he
had with him, declared him Emperor: which was done in a city named Carunto,
on the xii. day of the month of August. That day whereon the armies did
advance him as Emperor, he gave and divided amongst them so great sums of
money, as never any Emperor had done before time: for he gave, not only all
his own, but also the treasure of his friends. With great speed Seuerus sent
unto ye armies of Illyria in Pannonia, in Spain, France, and Britain, and
gave them to understand how Pertinax was dead, that Iulianus had bought the
Empire, and that the armies of Germany had elected him Emperor: but that he
would not accept the same, unless they (as true defenders of ye Empire) would
consent unto their election: wherein all, with one conformity, did allow that
election which the Germans had made of Seuerus, and utterly did adnihilate
all consents and elections that had or might be to the advancement of the
Empire of Iulianus: and upon condition that Seuerus should first be sworn, to
revenge the death of the good Emperor Pertinax: and to give his favor unto
the men of war. Presently when ye Seuerus saw his Empire confirmed by the
men of war, speedily he took his way toward Rome: upon which way not only
he had no resistance, but in all places was received with great joy. Two
Consuls, 100. Senators, 30. Questors, 22. Judges, 14. Tribunes, 10. Pretours.
400. priests, and 50. vestal virgins, came forth to receive Seuerus: unto whom
he sent to give understanding, that if they would behold his face mild, that
all persons of al armor, either open or secret, should disarme themselves: for
that it was sufficient that he was of the wars, and they to receive him in
peace. They being persons of so great honor, riches, and ancient, that came
forth to receive him, were not a little despited, that Seuerus should command
them to be disarmed, but in the end they accomplished that which was commanded
them, and from thence forth conceived against Seuerus mortal hatred: because
if they disarmed their persons of armor, they did arm their hearts with
malice. And as Seuerus was proud with his Empire, and the Consuls and Senators
wise and advised, neither did he perceive them to be offended, either did they
discover themselves to be grieved or despited: for that, if they had patience
to suffer the injury, they wa^ted not wisdom to dissemble the same. As
Seuerus was subtle and skilful, he did two things before he entered Rome,
wherewith he greatly wanthe favor of the common people: whereof the first was,
that he publicly changed his over name, which is to wit, that as he before time
was named Septimius Seuerus, after he was named Seuerus Pertinax: and this he
did, to the end al men should perceive, ye taking the name of the good Emperor
Pertinax, he would likewise follow ye steps of his good life, and profit
himself by his good doctrine: for Pertinax was not only loved as a man, but
also adored as a God. And the second thing which he did, was, to command all the bands of Pretorians, which were the men at arms which guarded Rome, that
leaving all armor, they should come and do him reverence: which were the men yt
had slain the emperor Pertinax, not for his own deserving, but for that he
consented not to their wickedness. Seuerus secretly had agreed with his army,
that they should have regard to compass them round, in such wise, yt finding
them unarmed, they should stop al means to recover ye same for their defense:
either place of safety to fly unto. And now, when they stood all unarmed, and
compassed, Seuerus commanded a general silence thoroughout his armiees and
directed his words unto those homicides or mansiears, speaking after this manner.

CHAP. IIII. How he revenged the death of the good Emperor Pertinax.
ALthough al human things be subject unto vanity and mutabilitie: yet this
preemine^ce have ye gods above men, yt al things being subject to changing and
variablenes, they remain immutable: and al things perishing and finishing,
they for ever do continue: because there is nothing perpetual, but such things,
unto which the gods do give perpetuity. The great Roman Empire much
rese^bleth the immortal gods of heaven: because all the kingdoms of the earth
be finishing and have their ends, but she is perpetual: all are weak, and she
strong: all be subject, she at liberty: all vanquished, and she invincible:
finally, she is she, yt never suffered her better, or endured another yt was
her equal. And as it is most true, yt the gods never give reward without a
preceding merit: so do they not give punishment without some fault in him, whom
they chastise: where of it follows, yt since the gods have given unto the
Romans so many and so great triu^phes, there ought to be in them many and very
notable deseruings. There be two things which cause the Romans to hold
friendship with ye gods, and to be lords of me^, which is to wit, great
worshippers of temples, and conseruers of people in justice: for that country
where temples be not honored, and the wicked chastised, may be better termed a
den of thieves, then a kingdom of good men. Ye all understand that be here
present, how ye have slain the Emperor Pertinax, a man most surely both holy
and most holy, because the greatness of the Empire, being conferred with the
sincerity of his deserving, it had not been much for him, but rather a small
reward, to have been Lord of the whole world. In this deed ye have offended
the gods, escandalized men, committed treason unto your Lord, defamed your
country, troubled your common wealth, and brought all Rome unto confusion, in
such wise, that your fault being so exceeding, it may not deserve any
parcialitie in punishment.

Now that ye have slain him, is it as if ye had slain Caligula, Nero,
Sergius, Vitellius, Domitia^, or Commodus? no, but Pertinax, which was one of
the princes most without reprehe^sion, that ever reigned in ye Roman Empire.
As princes be few and wilful, so it is a venture, to chance on such as be good:
and so much the more deserve ye the greater pain, as the good Pertinax was
profitable unto the common wealth. Unto whom shall Rome adventure to commit
her trust, since they which were appointed for her guard, have set her a sale?
O treason never thought of! Oh wickedness never heard of! to kill the Emperor,
and to sell the Empire. After the vassals have slain their Lord, and the
natives of the country have sold their common wealth, I know not why the gods
command not the ground to swallow you up, and presently put not fire into Rome
to consume it: for, after so great an infamy, Rome ought never more to be
named in this world. Who should have said to Quintus Cincinatus, Numa
Pompilius, Camillus, Marcus Fabritius, Mutius Scaeuola, Silla, Marius, Scipio,
Julius Caesar, Augustus, Germanicus (who with great and many triumphs did both
beautify and magnify Rome) that ye should have set Rome in open sale? I
firmly believe, and am out of doubt, that they would have died of pure
sorrow: or else would have slain your progenitors from whom ye are
descended. From the time I departed out of Germany, I came musing upon the
way, what punishment I should give you: for of the one part, if I suffer every
one of you with his life, it redoundeth to the scandal of the common wealth:
and if I would take the same from you, the pain is very small, in respect of
your extreme fault: for unto one that is evil, they do him no small benefit,
to rid him out of this world. I command your noses to be slit, your tongues to
be boared, your garments beneth the wast to be cut off, and your beards half
shaven: ye shall live without honor, credit, or liberty as slaves and
bondmen in the common wealth: in such wise, that ye shall not die as the good
do use to die, to the end to live: but ye shall live as the wicked do live, to
the end to die. Neither do I suffer you to live, because ye deserve life: but
for that I will not stain my fame with your filthy blood. If in giving you al
death, I might give the good Pertinax his life: not only yours, but also right
willingly would I offer mine own: because there is no vent more just, then yt
one good life (by ye exchange of many wicked lives) might be bought and
redeemed. If the gods would permit, that at the hour I should command ye to
be slain, ye should revive and recover life, a thousand times would I take
away your lives, because the horror of your offense deserves a thousand
deaths: but since loss of life, in a moment, does deliver the malefactor of
his scourge and torment, and afterward no other mean remaining to take
vengeance: it is more just that ye should live every day desiring death, then
that ye should die abhorring life. There is nothing more just, then to kill him
that kills: but I command not that ye be slain, although ye durst kill the
good Pertinax: and this I do not, to the end to do no justice, either to do
you good or pleasure: but for that many years ye shall have time to bewail
your wretched life, and his innocent death.

CHAP. V. Of things that he did in Rome, presently after he was Emperor.
AFter that Seuerus had said and finished his speech, and condemned and
banished the murderers of the Emperor Pertinax, he determined to enter Rome,
and his receiving was mixed with joy and sorrow: because of the one part seeing
him so great a friend of justice, they rejoiced: and on the other part to see
him compassed with so great armies, they feared him. Presently upon his entry
into Rome, he visited ye temples (according to the custom of the Roman
Emperors) and there he offered no small, but generous and sumptuous
sacrifices. Although in his receiving, a great part of the day was spent, and
in visiting temples the rest was consumed, and now when it was night, he was
requested of all men to take his ease, and to withdraw unto his palace: yet he
would in no wise consent, until he had visited the Sepulcher of the good Marcus
Aurelius: where he remained a great space upon his knees, and poured forth
many lamentable tears. The next day he went unto the high Capitol, where all
the Senate was assembled, and there he spoke unto all the Senators, Consuls,
and all other Roman officers: to whom he said many good words, and gave them
great hope of many rewards. All the people of Rome were astonished, and
terrified, to behold the great audacitie and fortune of Seuerus: which
proceeded of consideration how without danger, and less travel, he
obtained the Empire: for that he gat it not by sheding others blood, neither by
the exchange of his own proper goods. The first day that Seuerus spoke in the
Senate, he made a solemn vow before them all: Never to kill any Roman, if he
were not judged by justice: or to take the goods of any person, if by the
fiscal he were not condemned. If it had been found in Seuerus works, which
he swear that day in words, namely, that they might not accuse him of
cruelty, either note him of covetousness, it had been a great weal for the
Roman Empire: for there is nothing wherewith princes do more destroy their
common wealths, and also stain their persons, then to be given to revenge
their own proper injuries, and covetous of other men's goods. Forthwith at his
beginning, Seuerus did show himself mild, benign, pitiful, liberal,
valiant hearted, affable, gracious, and human, embracing his familiars, ioying
and laughing with strangers: in such wise, that the Romans went after him,
hearing what he said, and praising what he did. If in human affairs he were
provident, in divine matters surely he was not negligent: for that every day
he visited temples, honored priests, offered sacrifices, repaired edifices,
heard orphans and afflicted: in such wise, that in victories they compared him
unto Julius Caesar, in human policies to Augustus, and in divine things to
Pompilius. The old Senators and ancient Romans, that had been bred with
Seuerus from their youth, were amassed to see how his evil condition was
changed: and on the other part they thought with themselves, that all which he
did was but fained: for of his own natural condition, he was subtle, wary,
mild, and double: and did know how to deny his own will for a time, in that
which he wished, to do afterward with all men all that he desired. It is a
point of wise and skillful men, to overcome their own wills in small matters:
afterward to draw others after them for causes of greater importance.

Although there be more credit to be given to that which we see, then unto
that which we suspect: yet in this case they were more deceived, that praised
Seuerus in his good works, then those which did suspecte him for his old
subtilties: for that in short space they understood in him great cruelties,
and no less disordinate covetousness. Those that from their youth be not
bredd in virtuous works, or that naturally of themselves be not of good
condition, they may for a time deceive some persons with their guiles: but in
the end their malice comes to the notice of all men: all which was
experimented in Seuerus, who used violence with his own proper nature, until
he saw himself in possession of the common wealth. The first office that he
gave in Rome, was unto Flauius Iuuenal, whom he made Praetor of the people: of
which provision of the one part he pleased all men, because Flauius was a
virtuous person: and on the other part it did grieve them, because he was
servant unto Iulianus. The whole army that Seuerus led with him, he also
brought into the city of Rome: and being in quantity great, and of condition
proud, they might not be contained within the city: for which cause they
lodged not only in houses priuileged, and in sacred temples, but forceably
brake up doors and entered houses. The Romans received the same for a very
great injury, because they only felt not the despite done unto their
persons, but also did bewail the breach and loss of their liberties. Three
days after Seuerus entered Rome, the captains of his armies sent to demand
of the Senate, to have given them an hundred thousand pesants of gold, which
were due unto them: for that in times past, so much was given unto them that
first entered with the Emperor Augustus. At the hour when ye captains sent
these words unto the Senate, presently and jointly they armed themselves, and
marched unto the field, swearing and forswearing, by the life of Seuerus, and
by the world of Marcus, that if it were not given that day, at night they would
sack Rome. After that Seuerus heard, that his army was in readiness in the
field of Mars, and without his commandment, he was not a little escandalized,
thinking there had been some treason against him amongst ye people: but the
truth being known, he requested them to be pacified, and to disarme
themselves, saying: that it proceeded not of wise Captains, but of seditious
persons, to demand with threatenings, that which would be given by request.
Seuerus saw himself in great travel, to finish agreement betwixt the one and
the other: but in the end giving them some money out of his own coffers, and
some from the common wealth, he brought them all to a unity: which was, yt
unto the Captains was given less then they demanded, and the Romans paid
somewhat more then they offered. Before all things, Seuerus did celebrate the
obsequies of Pertinax: whereat all the Romans were present, and offered that
day unto the Gods great sacrifices, accompting Pertinax amongst the Gods, and
placeing Priests to do sacrifices upon the sepulcher, that for evermore should
sustain his memory. When Seuerus entered the Empire, he found many rents of ye
treasury morgaged, which is to weete, the royal patrimony, wherein he gave
order for the redeeming thereof, to be reduced unto the royal crown. Seuerus
had two daughters of ripe age, the one of xxv. the other of xxx. years, whom
he married within twenty days after he came to Rome, the one with Prolus, and
the other with Laertius, men of great wealth and riches, and generous in
blood. Seuerus offered his son Prolus the office of Censor, which he refused,
saying, that he fought not to be son in law unto the Emperor, to be a
scourge of evil men: but to be served of good men. Seuerus made both his
sons in law Consuls, and about Rome he bought them great rentes, and also
gave them large sums of money to spend, and to his daughters he gave Jewels,
wherewith to honor them.

CHAP. VI. How the Emperor Seuerus passed into Asia against captain
Pessenius that rebelled against him.
ONe of the famous capteines that rebelled against the Emperor Iulianus, as
has been recounted in his life, was Pessenius Niger, who with the armies that
were in Assyria, did govern and rule all Asia. Seuerus rose in Germany, and
Pessenins in Asia: and notwithstanding they were both traitors unto their
Lord, the difference betwixt them was, that Seuerus for his coming unto Rome,
they advanced unto the Empire: and Pessenius for remaining at his ease in
Asia, was condemned for a traitor. At the hour that Iulianus his death was
published, presently Pessenius invested him self with the title of Emperor
and Augustus: in such wise, that Seuerus in Europa, and Pessenius in Asia, had
divided betwixt them selves all countries and provinces: and much more the one
from the other had divided their wills and minds. Pessenius was very well
advertised in Asia, how Seuerus had entered Rome with a great power: and was in
state of government as natural Emperor of the common wealth: but neither for
letters that were written unto him, or for any thing that might be said unto
him, would he obey Seuerus, or much less show any fear of him, Pessenius
was gross of person, valiant, warlike, and of al men, with whom he dealt,
very well liked: and surely, if he lost the Empire, it was not for want of
friends in Rome, but that he abounded with vices in Asia. After that Seuerus
saw, that neither for threateninges, either for promises that he made, or for
letters that he wrote, he might not draw Pessenius Niger unto his service, he
determined to conquer him as an enemy: although (as he afterward said) he
wished not with him to come in contention: because Pessenius was a friend in
earnest, and no enemy in jest.

Seuerus commanded a muster to be taken of all the men he had, and took the
names of all persons that he might have with him out of Italy, commaundinge
them to prepare, and to pay his officers, and that all things should be done
with most speedy diligence: for his intent was to enter with so great haste
into Asia, that his arrival, and the news thereof, at one instant, might
appear unto Pessenius.

All the armies of Illyria which he had left in Thracia, he commanded to pass
into Asia: and all the Senators, all the warrelike officers of Rome, all the
rich men, and all the sons of mighty and great Lords that were in Italy,
he led with him in that war. He armed in the Sea Mediterrane an hundred
galleys, and also rigged forth two hundredth ships, fifty barks, and
innumerable foystes: all which went laden with men, armor, and victuals: in
such wise, that in respect of his greatness and potencie, there was none that
would encounter with him by land, either abide at the Sea.

Only xxx. days Seuerus was in Rome, dispatchinge with the Senate, he
departed unto the port of Hostia, to behold his navy, and from thence he
departed to Nola in Campania, where his army was assembled, where he added
many things that wanted, and also removed many things that were superfluous:
because in things of great importance, he was not satisfied to give them in
charge to men of experience: but that he would see and behold them with his
own proper eyes. When Pessenius Niger heard the news, how Seuerus came
against him by sea and land: they say that he said, these words: If the
destinies be bente against me, small may it avail me, that men favor me: and
if Gods be pleased to help me me^ may little hinder me. And further he said:
Seuerus is not satisfied to have slain his Lord Iulianus, and to usurp the
Empire, but has made me an enemy unto the people of Rome: but I beseech the
immortal Gods, that if it shall not please them to give me victory in this
war, that Seuerus may be conquered, when he most desires to overcome.
Although Pessenius commended his fortune into the hands of God, not
withstanding he left not to seek the aid of men: and to this end he did
write and send Ambassadors, unto the king of the Parthians, to the king of
the Arthabanes, and to the king of the Armenians to succor him with men and
money, because Seuerus came with a determinate mind to destroy them all.

The king of the Armenians aunsweared the Ambassadors of Pessenius Niger,
that he would neither help the one, or offend the other, but defend and
conserve his own kingdom: moved thereunto, for that Pessenius was his
friend, and Seuerus not his enemy.

The king of Parthians, presently sent his letters throughout his kingdom,
commanding them to repair unto Pessenius, and refuse Seuerus: which he did
not for the narrow friendship that he held with Pessenius, but for the
ancient enimitie that he did bear unto the Roman Empire. The king of
Arthabanes sent unto Pessenius, ten thousand archers with crossebowes, all
natives of the provinces of Bersezana, which throughout the world were much
renowned, and in the wars no less feared, because they were of valiant
minds in fight, and exceeding ready in shooting. Further, Pessenius Niger
commanded his army to be renewed with twenty thousand footmen, and six
thousand horsemen, whereof the most part being taken out of Antioche (where
the people be most feeble) their names being registered, and receiving pay,
never afterward came to the wars. Unto all them that used this guyle,
Seuerus afterward gave great punishment: not for that they had been
traitors unto Pessenius, but for example to terrify others. Upon the mount
Taurus part of Cappadocia and Sicyl, Pessenius, as a man of experience in
martial affairs, provided that the woods were feld upon the tops of
mounteines, and in streightes, and most perilous places made strong watch and
ward, in such wise, that no enemy might approach, that was not seen: or
pass, that were not slain. In those days, there was not in all Thracia a
city more opulent then was Byzantio, now named Constantinople, which in
buildinges did exceed all cities of Asia, and in fertility was equal with
the best in Europa. Amongst other things contained therein that was fair to
behold, and much to be praised, were the walls, the stones whereof were
brought from Mylesius, curiously squared, as if it had been timber sawen with
a saw: which was the cause that the wall being made of many stones, the whole
wall seemed but one stone. Although with the calamities of time, the walls be
now ruinated: yet notwithstanding, of the same there remains some steps
and signs: in the view whereof there is none but will praise the wit of them
that made it: and curse the hands of them that did subvert it. When Pessenius
saw him self a Lord so absolute of all Asia, and accompanied with so many
and so noble men of war, he thought him self sure of the victory: but as in
such cases, that which Fortune guydeth, is far different from that which the
person desires: so, very contrary to his former purpose it afterward
succeeded.

CHAP. VII. Of the wars that passed betwixt Pessenius and Seuerus in Asia.
IT was great grief unto Seuerus, when he understood how Pessenius was in so
great readiness, that thought not only to defend, but publicly to offend.
Seuerus being certified that Pessenius was in possession of ye great city
Byzantio, marched with more speed, with intent to batter the same, before
Pessenius might come to the succor thereof: for that by secret practices,
Seuerus had within the city new friends: and Pessenius in government had
recovered some enemies. Neither the intelligences which Seuerus practiced
secretly, either the diligences which he used publicly, might profit him
to obtain Byzantio: which when he understood, he traueiled to recover another
city not far from thence, named Cyzica: which was both rockie and compassed
with marrishes, that is to say, it stood upon a rock, and environed with a
river. Pessenius had for his captain general of all his hosts, a certain
knight named Emilianus, in whom he reposed confidence, not only for matters
of war, but also for expedition of causes of peace, for that he had both
wisdom for the one, and fortitude for the other. The captain Emilianus put
him self into the city of Cyzica, when presently after, the soldiers of
Seuerus came to besiege it. There was betwixt both the armies at diverse times,
diverse encounters, and repulses, wherein Fortune indifferently discovered her
self unto either party: for at all times, when they fought at the wall,
Seuerus side had the worse: but when they fought in the field, Pessenius
bands had yt repulse. Two months after the city of Cizica was besieged,
they made a salle, and as they would have retired, Seuerus capteines pursued
and entered pelle melle with the capteines of Pessenius: and notwithstanding
there was betwixt them great slaughter for the recovering of a gate, and to
fortify a certain place: in the end Pessenius lost the city, and Seuerus
obtained the victory. Pessenius greatly complained, and so was it bruted
amongst the people, which is to weete, that the captain Emilianus had secret
practice with Seuerus: for, considering the stately walls wherewith the city
Cizica was compassed, and the valiant people wherewith it was defended: al men
judged it impossible to take it, and folly to besiege it. The cause that moved
the captain Emilianus to do this unworthy deed, was: that his sons, who
were left at Rome, Seuerus brought with him into that war, under great guard:
and it is to be thought, that to give liberty unto his sons which he had
engendered, he made a breach of his fidelity and oath which he had sworn. The
Emperor Commodus, as he was suspicious of them, with whom he had to deal:
and so evil wished of all such as did serve him: so it was his fashion, for the
most part, when he sent any noble Roman to govern any province, presently to
place their sons in a fort: and this he did, to the end their fathers should
not be traitors, respectinge their children that were kept under ward. From
the time that Commodus reigned in Rome, Emilianus governed the provinces in
Asia: by which cause Seuerus recovered the children, and Pessenius lost the
father. The fame being diuulgate throughout all Asia, that the city Cizica was
sacked, and that Seuerus kept the field with victory: all Pessenius knights
that escaped from thence, and all other their companions that heard thereof, gave
them selves to flight: to seek places of fortificatio^ wherein to hide their
persons. Seuerus not only recovered honor and profit of this victory, but
also planted both fear and discord almost throughout all Grecia: for some
rebelled against Pessenius, and others did obey Seuerus. Although the people of
Grecia have ableness to learn science, they are no less mutable in martial
affairs: for in wars which they prosequute, they follow not the Prince that
has most justice, but him that most is favored of Fortune. The citizens of
Bithynia sent Ambassadors unto Seuerus, saying, that they and their children
were at his commandment: and on the other side, the people of Nicena gave
Pessenius to understand, that if he sent his army thither, they would not
only receive them, but also maintain them: which offers they presented not
unto these two Roman princes, for love or friendship that they did bear them:
but for the ancient enimitie which they had betwixt them selves. Seuerus with
his army entering Bithynia, and Pessenius into Nicena, from thence, as from two
fortes, they did issue to fight: and in the end betwixt the two armies upon a
certain day, they trauersed so fierce a skirmishe, that in blood and slaughter
it was no less then a battle: where the field remained unto Seuerus, and
Pessenius bands were put to flight. Pessenius neither for the loss of the
city Cizica, neither for that he was beaten out of the field at Bithynia, did
show either fear or weakness: but dividing his army that remained in two
parts, he sent the one to mount Taurus to defend that passage from Seuerus,
and the other part he led with him self unto Antioche, partly to take
money out of his treasury, and partly to renew, as also relieve his army.
Seuerus marched with his army from Bithynia unto Galatia, and from Galatia unto
Cappadocia, which stood in defense on the behalf of Pessenius, where Seuerus
soldiers with great fury did assault the same: in which journey the Seuerians
received no small loss, because the city was situate upon the side of an
hill, from whence to execute slaughter amongst their enemies, they needed no
other defense, but to whirle stones.

The affairs standing in this estate, there chanced two cities of Phoenicia
to revolt from Pessenius, and to yield them selves unto Seuerus, that is to
say, Laodycia and Tyrus: of which news Pessenius took great grief, and no
small hatred, which passions conceived against those cities, he not only
uttered in the foul words which he sent to be said unto them: but also in
the cruel acts which he commanded to be done unto them. Pessenius had in his
army fifteen thousand archers, which were called Mauri, people that naturally
of their own inclination were given to blood, and without al fear of death:
these, Pessenius commanded to go unto Laodycia and Tyrus, utterly to burn and
consume both city and people: with a warning confirmed by an oath, that if
they took any prisoners to give any man life, the person that used that pity
should be slain. These fifteen thousand archers named Mauri departed unto
Laodycia and Tyrus, and many other that joined with them: and as they took
them at the soudeine being unprovided, and having no time to demand succor of
Seuerus: so cruel and inhumane was that barbarous people, to those so generous
and noble cities, that they left not upon the walls one stone upon an other,
either house that they subverted not, either the head of man woman or child
that they did not cut off. When these matters passed in Assyria, the knights
of Seuerus were in Cappadocia, traueiling greatly to possess the mount Taurus:
but as it was naturally of great height, and rockie, and Pessenius possessing
all the passages, so they might not by any mean assail them, or conceive hope
of any profitable or honorable attempt. Upon the top of this mount Taurus,
Pessenius his people had brought an huge number of great stones and rocks, to
throw down upon Seuerus soldiers, if they should attempt to climb the hill:
but as on the side of the mounteine, there grew many trees, both high and
great, which Seuerus soldiers cut down in great heaps and multitudes to stay
the stones before they tumbled upon men, that might be thrown In having ready
captains to fight, and skillful to defend none of the armies had cause to
complain, either of their enemies to have envy, except that Pessenius was
more virtuous, and Seuerus more venturous,

CHAP. VIII. Of a cruel and furious battle, betwixt Pessenius and Seuerus,
wherein Pessenius was slain.
IN certain broken, worn, and hollow places, as in such grounds the waters
do use to make, Pessenius soldiers had fortified with stones and boughs, which
served them to blind and stop the way for passage, as also from thence both
to defend and offend their enemies. Neither for travel to climb the hill,
either for fear of death, did Seuerus his captains cease any hour to
attempt the recovering of the mount: but the waye^ and passages were so
narrow, and the mountains so rockie and maccessible, that ten defended an
hundred, an hundred a thousand: and a thousand ten thousand. The case was
thus, that the Seuerian armies more daunted with despair, the^ advanced with
hope, soudenly on a night there fell upon Pessenius soldiers retired from
their rampires, and fortified rocks: and that which was worse, many persons
and beasts were there daungered and also lost, and their victuals all cast
and carried away. By time that should do the deed, and the sorrowful
destinies of Pessenius that should conduct the same: it chanced upon the
third day after the snow had fallen, the sun did shine with as hot a glome
as in ye heat of summer, wherewith all the snow being thoroughly thawed, the
violence of most furious waters that descended the hill, ouerthrewe and carried
away all bulworkes and rampires that Pessenius had made in that mountain: in
such wise, that nature framed in one hour yt Art might not bring to pass in
many days: that is to say, the snow drove away the people, and soon opened
the way. When the Seuerian armies found, that Pessenius soldiers had
forsaken the mount Taurus, and ye thawed snow had opened their way: they not
only recovered great courage, but also presumed to have obtained divine
favor: saying, that Seuerus did govern them, but that the Godds did guide
them. Upon the fifte day after the snow, Seuerus soldiers mounted upon ye
top of Taurus, and all the snow being thawed and gonne, and trackes and
ways being dried up, in every place they found dead men, drowned beasts,
broken armor, and victuals scattered: in the view whereof they took no
small pleasure, because they had now set their feet, where before they
employed but their eyes. Pessenius being advertised, how his soldiers had
forsaken the mount Taurus, departed with all his host from Antioche, and took
the way unto Sicyl: the multitude of people that he led with him was
marvelous and terrible to behold: and yet truly notwithstanding, more
fearful in view, then in fight: for admitting they were many, and young men
well armed, yet they were more accustomed to have peace with vices, then war
with enemies. Seuerus with his armies, and Pessenius with his hosts incountred in
Sicyl, not a league one from an other, having betwixt them a great plain
which was named by the men of the country, the field of Ysico, where was given
the last and most famous battle betwixt Alexander and Darius, in which the
great king Darius was ouerco^e, and the great Alexander remained monarche of ye
world. In memory of which notable battle, there is situated at these days,
the renowned city of Alexandria, wherein there is is a picture of brass, so
natural a counterfeite of Alexander, that to behold does partly terrify, and
also gives motion of great reverence. Two days after these princes came to
this place, with conformity they determined to give the battle, since either
of the^ had joined their whole powers, with the presence of their proper
persons: until which time, betwixt them there was but small difference, for
that either of them had great hope to have the victory. The night before they
fought, Seuerus and Pessenius were both sad, and their armies in great
watch: for as the fatal hour of fight drew near (although their generous
hearts gave them hope to overcome) their mortal bodies did fear to die. At the
break of ye day all the captains made ready to ye battle: continually two
hours before the charge, both of the one part and the other, they played upon
instruments of music, which with their melody did yealde such dolefulness,
that exactly it discovered the sorrowful success that should follow in that
cruel battle. The hosts being joined the one with the other, there was
trauersed betwixt the^ so cruel a fight, and of every part so traueled to
obtain the victory, yt the day ended, and ye battle not finished. That
battle was so bloody, wounded, and of both parts so much contended, yt
within the compass of two leagues, there was not iii. foot of ground, yt was
not covered with man's blood. If the two armies were valiant in fighting, surely
ye two princes, their lords, were no cowardes: but in the end, when night was
come, the Pessenians turned their backs: and the whole conclusion was, that
Pessenius fled wounded, and Seuerus remained lord of yt field. Upon an horse
of great swiftness, and accompanied with few persons, Pessenius took the way
unto Antioche: as the enemies did pursue him, at the door of a poor cottage
where he neither had time to rest, either place to hide him self, but
groueling upon his breasts, drinking with a pitcher, at a blow his enemies
cut off his head. This was the sorrowful end of Pessenius Niger, upon whose
sepulture they placed this Epitaph: Here lies Pessenius Niger, an ancient
Roman, which in merit was equal with the virtuous: but in misfortunes
exceeded the most unfortunate.

When Seuerus saw him self advanced to so great victory, and that in all
Asia, there was not one lance in the Rest against him, he procured to seize
upon al principal persons, that had escaped from the camp of Pessenius: and
commanded not only to kill them all, but also to execute them with great
torments. Many were found in the camp of Pessenius, which did follow him
against their wills, whom also Seuerus commanded to be slain as the rest:
which in deed was rather the act of a cruel tyrante, then a virtuous
prince. Seuerus had with him the mother and the sons of Pessenius, whom he
sent (both mother and sons) banished unto an Islande.

All things set in order, that were conueniente for the provision of the good
government of Asia, Seuerus moved talk amongst his most familiar friends,
for the conquest of the king of Parthia, and the king of Thebes: not because
they held him as an enemy, but for that they were friends unto his enemy
Pessenius. Seuerus friends did counsel him, that by no means he should
publish any intent of war against the king of Parthians, or the king of
Thebanes: for ye notwithstanding Pessenius was dead in the East, Albinius was
alive in the kingdoms of the Weste: and that he was not so sure of the
Empire, but yt it were better counsel for him to seek new friends, then to
awake old enemies. Seuerus dealt cruelly with the inhabitants of Antioche,
because they had received and obeyed his enemy Pessenius, and with them did
not only use injurious words, but also did discharge them of al their
ancient liberties. He slew all the Senators of Rome, that is to say, such
as followed Pessenius and took the name of captains and Tribunes: and of other
persons he slew but one, and would never say, wherefore but he alone, and
none other was put to death.

CHAP. IX. Of the Consul Albinius, and how he rebelled against Seuerus being
in England.
Amongst the most extreme young gentlemen, that were bred in the house of the
good Marcus Aurelius, were three, which in those days were placed for captains
in the most famous and dangerous places of the empire, that is to say, Seuerus
in Illyria, Pessenius in Asia, and Albinius in great Britain. Their Lord
Marcus Aurelius had brought them up so expert in science, so accustomed to
virtues, so ready in arms, so skillful in perils, and so made unto travels,
that if they them selves, had not warred and destroyed them selves, all the
world had not been sufficient to have defeated the^. Above, it is said, how
Seuerus came to Rome to take the Empire, and how Pessenius was overcome in
Asia: there rests now to speak of Albinius, who was in Britain: a man in
his life right venturous, and in his death no less unfortunate. Albinius was
native of Rome, and as soon as he was of age sufficient, he was made a
Senator, being of most ancient lineage, and did inherit of his predecessors,
great wealth, which he wanted no skill to conserve, as also to increase, and
excellently to enjoy: for, notwithstanding his degree was but a Senator: yet
in service of his house, and behavior of his person, he was after ye manner of
an Emperor. In the days of the empire of Pertinax, Albinius was sent as
captain and governor unto great Britain: in which government he was very
well loved, and no less feared: for by his great justice he was feared and
with his great liberality he was beloved. When Seuerus departed unto Asia, to
war with Pessenius, understanding how renouned the name of Albinius was
throughout all the world, and how well liked of the Roman Empire: he
greatly doubted to advance him self with the Roman Empire: and the rather,
for that he perceived the principal Romans, to fix their eyes upon Albinius.
Seuerus advised him self to use a certain cautele with Albinius, which was:
before he departed from Rome, to write unto him into Britain, aduertising him,
that he would have his fellowship in the Empire, from thence forth intituling
him Augustus: and since his departing to ye wars of Asia, requesting him to
take the charge of the government of the common wealth. With these and such
like words which he sent him, and with a letter written unto him, and
certain iuells which he gave him, Albinius did endure to be deceived, though
void of all misstrust to be deceived.

Albinius had with him an ancient knight named Cypro Albo, who (as it is
reported) said unto Albinius: thou art not so near a kinseman, either so
dear a friend unto Seuerus, that without thy request, he will with thee
divide the Empire: for that truly, even betwixt the father and the son, it
were very much: but that I think he will now be assured of thee, to the
end when he returns from the wars to destroy thee: because from a man so
noble as Seuerus is, so amorous letters, and iuells so precious, may not
proceed, but wrapped in malice. Albinius would give no credit unto Cypro Albo,
but openly did read his letters, and showed his iuells: which when Seuerus
understood, he received great pleasure thereof: and the better to finishe
his guile, he made money in both their names, placing Albinius his picture in
the Senate. The mind of Albinius being won and obtained, to the end to
hold safe and sure the kingdoms of Europa, he departed into Asia: and sundry
times did write unto Albinius, and not unto the Senate: giving account of yt
which he had done, and demaundinge counsel in that which he mente to do.

Fifteen months Seuerus stayed in the wars with Pessenius: whom, after
he had overcome and slain, he determined to destroy Albinius: and because he
had no occasion, either great or small to make him public war, he advised
to kill him by guile. Many Senators and noble Romans did write him letters,
and also persuaded Albinius in words, that he should advance him self
with the Empire: and to the same end, they did swear and affirm unto him,
that although Seuerus were far from his country, yet without comparison, he
was much more distante from their wills. The case was thus, the wars of
Asia being finished, Seuerus in great secrecy conferred with certain
Purseuantes by whom he was accustomed to write letters: whom he commanded
to depart unto great Britain, and to present their letters openly unto
Albinius: and further, to give him to understand, how they had secretly to
say unto him: and that: if with them he should separate him self, presently
to kill him: promising them, that if they performed that enterprise, he
should make them the greatest men of Rome. He gave them also a box of fine
poison, and therewt this instruction, that if they might not by chance
dispatch and kill Albinius, by such mean: they should travel in some meat to
give him of that poison.

Albinius was gro(...) ^^mewhat suspicious of Seuerus, partly for that so
rarely he did write unto him, and also because he was advertised, that in
secret he used evil speech of him: wherefore he lived more warely, not only
with such as he had talk, but also of his meat which he should eat.
These Purseuaunts being arrived in great Britain, delivered their letters
openly unto Albinius, saying, that they had to tell him in secret, and being
now in doubt and suspicion of Seuerus his matters, he commanded these
Purseuauntes to be taken, and grievously tormented: which presently confessed,
that Seuerus sent them, for none other purpose, but either with iron or with
poison to take away the life of Albinius.

Presently Seuerus was advertised, yt Albinius had taken, tormented, and put to
death his Purseuantes: where upon followed, that the one did publishe the
other open enemies: and for such they exclaymed them selves in words, defied
in letters, and also uttered in works.

Seuerus had great sorrow, for that Albinius had manifested him self his
enemy: and the greater was his grief, for that his enemies made common
report, that he would have slain Albinius as a cowarde, and not deal with
him openly as a man of a valiant mind. Seuerus also had great grief, of the
general report of Albinius boaste, before all men that would hear the same:
of the great numbers of people and armies of men that did obey him in great
Britain: and much more, that did love and wish him in Rome. Seuerus not able
to endure with patience, the reports that ran of Albinius, advised to
assemble his armies, unto whom he did speak after this manner.

CHAP. X. Of a famous speech that Seuerus uttered unto his armies, to bring
them in hatred with his (...) Albinius.
IT were not just, that any prince should be noted unstable, if by chance
they be seen to abhor at one time, that which they did love at an other
time: for that subjects changing their custo^es, it is not much that Lords
alter their opinions. As much as a friend shall be virtuous, so much and no
more, he shall be loved of his friends: for if it be a thing commendable to
love the good, it is no less vituperable to love the evil. Admitting that
princes deal hardly with some, and favor others, neither for the one are they
to be praised, either blamed for the other: because reward, or punishmente, is
neither given or ought to be given conformable unto princes wills: but
agreeable unto the subjects merit. Ye all understand, how Albinius and I,
being young men, were bred in the house of the good Emperor Marcus Aurelius:
and truly, unto this day, I have entreated him, not as a companion, but as a
brother: which seems no less true, for that I parted with him the Empire,
which sildome is divided betwixt the father and the son. I did not only
deal with him as with a brother, and with him did part the Empire: but also
at my journey unto the wars of Asia, unto him only I reco^mended the
government of the common wealth: respecting the possession which I had of him,
and the confidence which I committed unto him, when I did trust him with the
commonwealth: I would have parted my soul with him, if it had benepartible.
Being (as I was) wounded in the wars of Asia, and he placed in the
government of great Britain: notwithstanding the distance that was betwixt
them, there passed few months wherein I did not write unto him, giving large
account of that which was done, and hideing nothing of all that I determined
to do: In such wise, that in him was registered al my triumphs, and he was the
hoorde of al my profound secreats. Betwixt me and Albinius, there was never any
thing yt was not common, in my house there was never door shut against him,
the letters which he wrote I did with great joy read, that which he requested
me I always performed, whereof he warned me I ever corrected: finally, he
never desired any thing of me, that he obtained not: and never had travel, but
I was present, and pressed to succor him. After all these things, his sorrowful
destinies would, and no less has my fortune without al felicity performed,
that our friendship is turned to enimitie, our felicity unto treason, our
benefits to ingratitude, our love unto hatred, our communion to divorce, our
confidence to suspicion, in such wise, that at this day there is nothing spoken
more commonly throughout the Roman Empire, but of the great friendship which
we have had, and the cruel enimitie which now we have. That Albinius
desires to be Lord, and procures to be Emperor, I neither wonder, either is
it to be marueled: but that which makes me amassed, is, that I placeing him
with confidence in government of the common wealth, he should procure to rise
or rebel with Rome: that speaking according to the law of a good man, yt if
Albinius had thought to attempt so foul a deed, if I had requested him to
take the charge, he ought not to have consented: for there is not the like
traitor in this world, as he to whom I committed my house, to rob me of mine
honor, and spoil me of my goods. A greater fault in less magistrates has
Albinius committed the^ Pessenius Niger: for that Pessenius from the time that
I was elected Emperor, presently manifested him self mine enemy: and more,
yt I never held him as my friend, either did he accept me as his Lord: and
to say that which I had thought never to have said, Pessenius Niger did write
unto us, that if we would perpetuate the principality of Asia unto him, he
would utterly yealde unto us all obedience: and for that we would not grant
it him, speaking without passion, although he had no reason to rebel, he had
occasion to be offended. The matter has not so passed betwixt Albinius and me,
but that without his own suit, or any other man's for him, besides the
government of Britain, I gave him the principality of al Europe, sent him
the ensign of the Empire, commanded him by proclamation to be entitled
Augustus. and yt which is not smally to be esteemed, I caused with his image and
mine, money to be graven, and with mine own proper hands I placed his statuie
or picture in the Senate. In repaimente of these so notable benefits, he has
committed an hundredth thousand insolences, namely, he has mutined the armies,
altered and offended the people, robbed our treasures, taken our castles,
escandalized me with the Romans, and now of late has slain my Purseuaunts:
and that which grieueth me most, is, that he made them say in their
torments, that which never was in my thought. I having slain the prince
Pessenius, and being (as I was) triumphant of the field, no man has to
believe that I have so small estimation of my honor, that he being my
detected enemy, should be slain in secret at my commandment.

In what heart may it be conceived, that I having (as I have) armies of so
great power and dexterity, here in my presence, should procure to kill him
with poison. For to have slain Albinius by treason, it had been blame to me,
and shame unto you, but to him glory: for as his name is renowned, and his fame
spread throughout the Empire, his person to have been so invincible, that we
durst not give him battle as an enemy, but murder him as traitors.

The Godds never consent, neither my venturous destinies permit, that the
slanderous renown of a traitor, which he has recovered with his evil
life, should cleave unto me by his secreate death: for that (to conclude) I
had rather hold him as an enemy all the days of my life, then to fix any
scruple in my fame. Albinius did swear by the simulachre of Diana, not once,
but thrice: not with one hand, but with both hands: not in one temple, but in
many: for ever more to hold the gods in great veneration, the people in
justice, the temples in reverence, and to me obedience: all which the perjured
Albinius has broken, and neither has fear or shame for that which he has
done: but I hope in the Gods, it shall not come to pass as he thinks, that
is, to die with poison: but the time shall come, that he shall pay in the
field, that which he has sworn in ye temple. If this infamous deed had been
done against any particular person, they should both hear and see throughout
the world, the amends that I would take thereof: but in as much as it touches
none but my self, who at this present am had in suspicion, Albinius being held
as innocente, it suffices that it is not in me, but to advertise you thereof:
and to you it appertains to revenge the same. In ye wars against Pessenius
Niger, ye followed me: in this against Albinius, I will follow you: and I hope in
the immortal Gods, that they will give you the victory: and in my behalf on
Albinius will take vengeance.

CHAP. XI. How Seuerus departed from Asia to France, and fought with Albinius
and slew him.
AT the instante that Seuerus had finished his speech, all the army exclaming
with loud voices, again confirming Seuerus in the Empire, manifested Albinius
an enemy unto the Roman Empire. And for as much as none that was present,
understood the treason that Seuerus had attempted against Albinius, they gave
him credit in all that he said: and so in general they conceived as great
hatred against the one, as love unto the other: proceeding no less by the
presence of Seuerus, then by the absence of Albinius: for (according to the
old proverb) the absent is never without blame, nor the present without
excuse. When Seuerus saw that he had won ye hearts of his armies, he
recovered new hope to be revenged of Albinius: and to the purpose he made a
general muster of his men of war, and found ten thousand horsemen, and
xl. thousand foot men: all which he presently paid, not only that which he
did owe them: but also gave them many and great rewards, adding thereunto
many fair promises. The first journey that Seuerus made, was to besiege
Bizantio (for thither the captains repaired that had escaped the mortal
battle of Pessenius Niger) and in the end took it, not by force, but by
hunger: and having the city under his power, he displaced the bulworkes, made
plain the towers, ouerthrewe the Theaters, subverted their bathes, burnt their
houses, strangled the strangers, and the natives he did captiuate: finally, he
behaved him self not as a Roman prince, but as a most cruel tyrant.

With the riches that he recovered in Bizantio, and the abundance which he
robbed in other parts, he commanded the cities to be repaired, that Pessenius
soldiers had sacked: and charged the fortes to be erected that they had
thrown down: and leaving officers necessary for government, and men of
war to defend those countries, he departed with great celeritie unto great
Britain, with a determined intent to make furious wars against Albinius.

His desire was so disordinate to encounter with Albinius, that he traueled
night and day, thick and thin, foul and fair: and that wherefore they most
blamed him, was, that he neither observed the solemn festival days, or had
compassion of the tired. Traueling on those ways when it snowed, many times
he was bare headed: and in the mire, he would travel one foot: when it
rained, he would march in his doublet and hose: and wanting victualles, he
would eat bareley bread: and (as he after reported) to be revenged of his
enemy, he thought it all well employed. He sent before him valiant captains,
and men very light and of great swiftness, to clear the ways upon the
highte of the mountains, and to defend the most perilous places: chiefly when
he passed the Alps of Italy, doubting that Albinius might have in that place
some hidden ambushe. Now, when Seuerus saw him self and all his armies in
Gallia Transalpina, and that in so long a journey he had incountered with no
stumbling block: if until that time he went with hope, from thence forth he
marched in certeintie to obtain victory: for the fear which he had, was,
that his army trauelinge both weary and spent, Albinius at the souden might
discover to give him battle. In all this time Albinius remained in the Isle of
Britane, which now is England: but presently after he understood that
Seuerus had passed ye Alps, he brought forth all his army out of ye Isle,
and sent them into France, rather to defend the frontiers, then without any
commandment to make war: because Seuerus was so souden in his arrival, ye
he was then in France, when they believed him not to be departed from Italy.
With great speed Albinius did write unto the cities adjoining, requesting
their help for money, and commanding them to be strong and valiant in his
service, of whom many disobeyed, and other rebelled against him:
notwithstanding, they all confessed, that they rather did it for fear of the
potencie of Seuerus, then for the hatred which they did bear unto Albinius.
But in the end, the two armies being joined, and all the cities divided into
parcialities, every day betwixt them there was incounters, and daily meetings
to skirmishe: and for the most part, the soldiers of Seuerus departed with
broken heads, and Albinius his bands returned victorious.

They trauersed on a certain day so furious a skirmish, that it was necessary
Seuerus should come forth armed unto the same: and as he was not able to
make his soldiers to retire, neither constrain his enemies to fly, thinking
to enter to have parted the fray, he was urged to fight in his own person: in
which fight he received so great a blow with a plummette of lead, that he
was feld down to the ground, and lay for dead so long space, that many did
kiss the hands of his son Geta, as Emperor. After Seuerus had escaped that
danger, and was cured of his wound, in great secrecy he called into his
presence certain Sorcerers and Inchanters that he brought with him, both
requesting, threatening, and promising them many things, if they would tell
him the end of those wars: for if he should be conqueror, he would
prosecute the same: and if he should be overcome, he would return into
Italy. The Sorcerers and Inchaunters answered, that his army should receive
great hurt, but in the end his enemy Albinius should be overcome: and that
he should not obtain in this case, that which he desired, that is to say, to
kill Albinius with his own hands: but that he should see him dead before
his eyes. The tenth of March, Seuerus received this answer of his Inchanters,
and presently on the next day, he took muster of all his men, commaundinge
them to shoe their horse, and amend their armor: and the third day he gave
battle unto Albinius, near to a city named Lugduno, which now in France
is called Lions Sonarona, which on both sides was so extremely contended,
that a great part of the day it might not be known, unto whom the victory
would incline.

When all the day was passed, and dark within night, the one army fighting with
the other, in the end Albinius was overcome. This battle was so bloody,
that of so great a number of people, as both the hoastes did contain, there
escaped not a man, that was not slain in the field, or returned unto his
tente unwounded. Albinius remained to keep the city, and sent his capteines
to give battle, who being beaten out of the field, the Seuerians entered
into the city, spoiling goods, burning houses, and slaying people. Seuerus
had a captain named Letus, which was the cause of the conquest of that
battle: for yt Seuerus his soldiers being in a manner overcome, and Seuerus
ready and pressed to fly, he relieved the battle with a fresh band of
soldiers: Letus of skill and industry would not fight that day, until he
saw Seuerus fled, and also fall from his horse: thinking, that if Seuerus
should die or be slain, and he ouercomminge and conquering the battle, to
advance him self with the Roman Empire. Seuerus was not ignorant of the
good service which his captain had done him at that instant, either did he
hide the intent wherewith he performed the same: for which cause the wars
being finished, he commanded his head to be cut off: not for that which he
did, but for that which he would have done.

When the Seuerians destroyed the city of Lugduno, amongst the rest they
slew the sorrowful Albinius, who so slain they brought unto Seuerus,
commanding to cut off his head, and to dismember and mangle his body all
to pieces: which being done, he riding upon a rough horse, all to trampled
the body of Albinius, which was hackt and hewed to mamocks. All men that
beheld Seuerus use so great inhumanitie with the body of Albinius, wept: and
all men that heard the report thereof, were escandalized, and not without
great reason, for The office of a prince of most perfect piety, is, to
pardon the living, and to bury the dead.

Seuerus treading and trampling the body of Albinius (after the manner of a
fierce Lion) his horse grew fearful, and gave him so shrewde a fall against
the ground, that he remained a great space astonnied and in dismay, in such
wise, that he missed very narrowly, presently to have paid with life, so
enorme an injury. These matters being finished, Seuerus dispatched his
Purseuaunts into all parts, with the news of this victory: and the head of
Albinius unto Rome, and his body, as it was all to pieces troaden, trampled
and drawn, he commanded to be thrown into the river Rhodanus, to the end
that as he had taken away his life, so by no means any memory should remain
of Albinius

CHAP. XII. How after the death of Albinius, Seuerus returned to Rome, and
there slew many.
SEuerus not satisfied with slaying his enemy Albinius, treading his body
under his horse feet, casting the pieces thereof into the river Rhodanus, and
sending his head unto Rome to be set in the pillorie: but commanded search to
be made for the bodies of all the noble Romans, which had been slain in the
service of Albinius: and for that he might not chastise them in time of their
life, he advised to vituperate and defile them after their death, causing their
bodies to be drawn, cut in pieces, and burnte: some thrown into rivers, to
the end they should never more appear: and othersome unto beasts to be
devoured. In all cities that received, obeyed, or succored Albinius or his
soldiers, Seuerus did great hurt, robbing their goods, and punishing their
persons. Many cities and people made their excuse, saying, they had not served
or followed Albinius, for that they had a desire so to do: but because they
were not succored of Seuerus, and yet ceased not to chastise and rob them.
Albinius had three sons, a daughter, and a wife, generous in blood and
beautiful of face, whose throat with his children he commanded to be cut,
and their bodies also to be cast into the river Rhodanus. And as Albinius was
of great power in all the Empire of Europe, and of him self very gracious,
liberal, valiant, and noble minded: so in a manner all the nobles of Spain and
France, had followed his part alike: the throtes of all which, Seuerus (after
the battle) commanded to be cut: and though he slew the fathers, yet he
did not therefore pardon the wife and children. Albinius his wife and his
children being slain, and execution done upon all persons that followed his
opinion: Seuerus applied all their goods and riches, for his own chamber,
which were so great, and of such value, that it was doubted whether any
Emperor had ever attained unto the like. The provinces of Spain and France
being ordered, and two governors placed in great Britain, Seuerus departed
unto Rome, and led with him all his army: not for that, in all Italy he had
any enemy bent against him, but to terrify the common wealth of Rome. Seuerus
of his own natural inclination was so quarelous, proud, unquiet, bloody,
and doubtful, that although he had peace, yet he would go always after the
fashion of a warrior. Seuerus was received with great joy of the Romans,
although most certainly many of them stood in great fear, for that they had
wished that Albinius might have prevailed, whereof Seuerus had certain
intelligence: whose condition was so hard, that to give a cruel chasticement,
a small occasion was sufficient. After that he had visited the great temple of
Jupiter, he divided amongst the capteines that followed in the wars, many
jewels and great riches: and further, gave them certain liberties, which is
to weete, that they might wear rings of gold upon their fingers, and
entertain Courtisans within their houses. It was no small grief unto the
Romans, that Seuerus had given such liberties unto his men of war: saying,
that from thenceforth for ever to wear ringes of gold, they would spend
their own, and rob others: and to use concubines in their houses, would
cause dissension amongst the people, and also debilitate their persons. In
Rome there was a Consul named Claudius, which had his picture placed in the
Senate, and was praised before all the people with a public Oration for his
worthy acts done in Asia: whereof Seuerus took great despite, because this
Claudius was kinsman unto Albinius. Seuerus did not know how to be revenged of
the Senate, but publicly by proclamation, commanded (upon pain of death)
that al men should call Commodus a God: for confirmation whereof, he did not
only place his picture in the Senate, to the end they should reverence him, but
also in the temples to be adored. To command the Romans to adore and
reverence Commodus, as one of the Gods, being (as he was) the woorst of all
men, it was unto them so grievous to hear, and so hard to perform, yt they
determined, not to go to the church, either to offer sacrifice unto their Gods:
because no part thereof should be allotted unto the God Commodus. Seuerus
upon a day went unto the Senate, and made there a long and truculent Oration,
wherein, after he had spoken many threateninge and malicious words, he
commanded certain letters to be read, which he found amongst Albinius
writings, made by many Consuls, Senators, and other gentlemen amongst ye
people, unto Albinius, offering him their persons, sending their goods, and
that he should not be dismayed in those wars: for that in the common wealth he
was much desired. The reading of these letters being ended, he commanded them
presently to be torn: and for the time did dissemble the matter, or to say
better, did defer the chastiseme^t: for yt after wards, as well of such as
were absent, as of them yt were present, he took so great reuengement, yt as
ye streets were bathed in blood, ye fields filled with carcases, ye ways
scattered with quarters, and the pillories beset with heads: they said in
Rome, ye Silla was revived, and Nero was not dead. Seuerus made a memorial of
all the rich men, valiant, and of power, that were in all the Empire: the
greater part whereof he charged to have been the servants, friends or
favorers of Iulianus, of Niger, or else of Albinius, his mortal enemies: for
which cause, of free men, he made them slaves: of lords, servants: of rich,
poor: and also of living, dead men: in such wise, that he slew many, not for
offenses which they had committed, but to rob them of their goods, which they
had gathered together. Seuerus slew some, with some reason, and others upon
small occasion: but all these which follow, he killed without all reason or
occasion: that is to say, Munius, Sellius, Claudius, Bitalius, Papianius,
Elius, Julius, Lolius, Aurelius, Antoninus, Posthumous, Sergius, Fabius,
Nenius, Amussius, Casperius, Seyonius, Sulpitianus, Coceyus, Eructus,
Assilonius, Claudius, Honoratus, Petronius, Pessenius, Cestus, Aurelianus,
Materius, Iulianus, Albinius, Cerelius, Faustinianus, Herenius, Valerius,
Nobius, Arabianus, Marcus, Fabatus. These men were glorious, both of blood and
also for noble deeds and riches: for they were either Consuls, Censors,
Pretors, Senators, Ediles, Tribunes, or capteines: whose goods he employed not
unto the public treasury, but did incorporate unto his patrimony, for him
self to enjoy the days of his own life, and to leave unto his children after
his death. Seuerus defamed Cincius an ancient Consul, affirming, that he had
procured poison to kill him, wherefore he commanded him to be slain: but the
truth being known as Seuerus afterward reported, but ye Cincius did much
delight to go on hunting, and had a fine yeark to kill the Bore and other
venerie in the mountains. He commanded also Narcissus to be cast unto ye
Lions, who at the request of Martia choked Commodus: it was nothing to command
them to be slain, but yt with his own eyes he would behold them executed,
which was wont to be so strange unto Roman princes, that they never used to
see any person put to death, neither so much as in the city to be resident: but
they used, if any suffered, to ride or go forth on hunting.

CHAP. XIII. How Seuerus returned into Asia, and conquered many provinces.
AFter that Seuerus had conquered and slain three Emperors, that is to say,
Iulianus in Rome, Niger in Asia, and Albinius in France: it seemed unto him,
that since he had chasticed and triumphed over the Romans, he ought also to
make his name glorious amongst the Barbarians: because all the wars that he
held unto that day, were more to make him self Lord of the common wealth,
then to magnify his name. Seuerus advised him self to go in his own person
to make wars with the Parthians, the occasion of which enterprise was: for
that the king of Atrenoes had favored ye parcialitie of Niger, but had
deferred the reuengement thereof, to make conquest of Albinius being in great
Britain. If Seuerus in this case had taken the opinion of the people, either
the counsel of the Senate, he would neither have taken those wars in hand,
or made account of the injury: because at that time, those kingdoms were
neither friends or foes with Rome. And as the Romans were fatigated and tired
with wars, so they were contented (for the time) to cease the recovering of
them for their vassals, to obtein them for quiet enemies. Seuerus departed unto
Asia, and in the way would first take the kingdom of ye higher Armenia,
whereof the king of Armenia being advertised, and that he came with an army of
so great power, and so determined to take his kingdom, met him upon the way,
not armed as a man of war, but clad with the garments of peace: his truce
being set down with Seuerus, presently he gave him much money, and offered to
send him succor: for the accomplishment whereof, he delivered unto Seuerus his
two sons in pledge: Seuerus did not only confirm him in his kingdom, but
also took him under his protection. The affairs of Armenia being dispatched,
Seuerus departed toward the kingdom of Hosdroenos, whose king was named
Anguaro, both crooked and same, but yet no fool: for he had such skill to
recover the good will of Seuerus, that he neither admitted him as a vassal,
took no money, demanded no hostages, or did his country hurt, but received
him to his familiar friendship, and made him a confederate with the people of
Rome. Having passed the kingdom of Hosdroenos, Seuerus entered the lands and
countries of Albanos, and being then the month of April, and spring time, he
found the fields full of flowers and grass, and commanded his horses for
the space of fifteen days to be fed, and his army to be recreated and
refreshed: because his horses were grown lean, and his men tired. Seuerus
being departed from the fields of Albanos, entered the country of Arabia
Felix, where they found that, which they found not in all the kingdoms of the
world: namely, the trees that hare the precious Aromatike spices, and the
boughs whereof they gathered the most fine and excellent baulme. Seuerus
sacked all the towns of Arabia Felix, cut down their fields, spoiled and
oppressed all people, and as he afterward said, he would not have entered
therein: for that being (as it was) so rich, so joyful, pleasant, and
delectable: but because he found him self in great cumber, to withdraw his
soldiers from thence: for that they felt them selves more delighted with the
vices of Arabia, then with the hazardes and dangers of the wars. Having
passed the delectable country of Arabia Felix, Seuerus entered the country and
kingdom of Athrabanos, against whose king principally he made that journey.
Athras was a great city, situated upon the top of a most high hill, and
chiefest city of all the kingdom: and for that cause was named the kingdom
of Athrabanos. Seuerus went presently to the siege thereof: but as the king had
enclosed him self therein, with great readiness and provision, the wall being
strong, the city rockye, the people warrelike, and furnished with munition and
victuals: small was the hurt that Seuerus did unto them within, but which the
Romans received was very great. And as Seuerus gave forth no other brute,
when he came from Rome, but to be revenged of the Athrabanos, he performed
that war so exactly, that there was no day but he battered the city of
Athras, and occupied his warlike engines, devised and practiced all manner
fights and offenses, that might be against the enemy, and the most notified
Romans, that there did not notify them selves: but in the end, might neither
take the same, either as much as a captain, or overthrow one window. Those
that were besieged within that city, to jest with their enemies, tied very
subtily, little earthen pottes, unto a kind of birds like unto Crows, which
flying over the armies of Seuerus, let fall their pottes upon their pates: by
which jest many had their heads broken: but much more were the Romans
despighted, to consider how little they did esteem them, not fighting with
them in armor, but with pottes, and tankardes. The air of that mountain was
very subtle, the waters very thin, fruits in great abundance, and the
Sun very hot, and the ground somewhat moist: by which occasion Seuerus his
whole camp fell into the disease of the flux, and there died amongst the
rest seven notable capteines, two of Seuerus cousins, and a little bastard
son, which all men likewise thought to be his cousin: but by his great
sorrow and tears, he discovered the child to be of his own proper flesh.

Seuerus considering the city of Athras to be inexpugnable, the people therein
invincible, and his camp also weakened through great sickness, advised to
raise his siege, before his army were utterly lost, which he did, not without
great grief, and no less despite, being as he was, given unto so many
triumphs, and victories, he thought him self vanquished, since he might not
overcome: but fortune yt naturally discovers her self to be variable, the
victory which she denied Seuerus in fighting, she in his flight gave
afterward more largely. The case was thus: that sailing on the Sea with all
his army, it was his chance to encounter with a tempest, and being forced to
follow the disposition of the weather, and not as his heart desired, they
brought him to rivers of the kingdom of Parthia, not three leagues distant
from the great city of Tesiphont, where the king was further entered into
feasting, then compassed with armor. Seuerus entered into the field of
Tesiphont, committing so great spoils and robberies, that he put the people
into great fear, which as Seuerus did take at the soudeine and unawares, and
being amazed, neither able to say or answer, if they were demanded: for
that to fly they had no time, and to resist they had no force: and that which
was woorst of all, to make agreement, it was not in their hands: neither might
they endure to submitt themselves unto the Romans. Seuerus arriving at
Tesiphont did subvert it unto the ground, slew all that made resistance, and
did captiuate man, woman, and child: he took all the treasure and riches,
both of the city and royal palace: finally all the country, treasure, goods
and persons came to the hands of Seuerus, except the king Arthabanus, who
escaped on horseback. Seuerus led with him certain skillful painters, which
as he went traueiling, they went drawing and painting, all cities, castles,
rivers, mountains, nations, kingdoms, and provinces, by and through which he
passed: and all the battles and victories which he had made and obtained.
Seuerus sent a great Embassage unto the Senate and people of Rome, with whom
he sent many captives, much riches, and the tables wherein his victories were
set out at large: the Romans gave great thanks unto the Gods, and also
great praises unto Seuerus: although most true, that all men were pleased
with the victories, but would not, that they should have been obtained by
Seuerus. Departing from the kingdom of Parthia, he divided amongst his armies
all that he had taken from the Parthians: and for himself reserved nothing but
that which he sent unto the Senate, and a ring of Unicorn, a white parat or
popingay, and a green horse: the which things he took not for their value, but
forth straungnes of their colors. Seuerus came through the kingdom of
Palestina, and gave them many laws conformable unto the laws of the Romans:
commanding upon pain of death, that none should name himself a Jew, either
call himself a Christian, or observe the law of Christians. From Palestina he
came through Assyria, unto the city of Alexandria, where also he placed new
customs, and also made new laws, which he caused them to write and observe:
howbeit, they endured but the life of Seuerus: for after his death, they did
not only break them, but also burnt the tables wherein they were written.

CHAP. XIIII. Of Seuerus his sons, and of their evil inclination.
THe kings that were enemies being overcome, new co^federation made with old
friends, and all the provinces of Asia reformed, he came unto Rome, and as the
Romans had prepared the Parthicke triumph, he might not enter triumphing: for
that he came so weak of a quartane, and so lame of the gout, that he might
neither endure the chariott, or suffer the intertainement of the people. It had
chanced to none of ye Roman Empire, as it fortuned unto Seuerus, that is to
say, that had slain so many princes, and obtained so many victories, and yet
never entered triumphing into Rome: which was not for his demerits, or
repugnancie of the Romans: but for his three first victories he might not
triumph, because they were Roman princes, and to his other victories of Asia
his disease gave impediment.

Seuerus had two legitimate sons, ye elder was named Bassianus, the other
Geta, who notwithstanding they were brothers in blood, yet were they much
different in conditions, which infirmity was not only manifested in their
infancy: for that in their childish plays they could never agree, either in
weighty affairs yield one consent. It was much noted amongst the Romans,
that ye two brethren being but children, might never agree in their childishe
plays and devises, that is to say, in making houses of clay, running at base,
driving topps, meating strawes, trilling the bowl, striking the drum, and
other such like childishe trifles. That the one delighted, the other lothed:
that which the elder affirmed, the younger denied: and if it happened their
tutours to command them to play together, if the one did win, and the other
loose, they tare their hair, scratched their faces, whirled stones, struck
with their fistes, in such wise, that as from their teeth and face they drue
blood, and rent off their locks, so they seemed rather to kill each other as
enemies, then to jest as brethren.

It was no small grief unto Seuerus, when he understood of the evil
condition of his sons, and that always they were divided amongst
themselves, who traveled (by all means possible) to bring them to conformity,
which he might never (by any means) bring to pass, although he requested:
either would they obey, although he commanded: for his sons were so
wilful, that they ceased not to execute their own wills, notwithstanding
their fathers gentle suit, or his extreme commandment. Seuerus also had a
brother named Geta, a person of great bolonesse, and warrlike, who in all
wars followed Seuerus, and if Seuerus had hautie thoughts, truly Geta his
thoughts were not humble: for he held it for most certain, that unto him
Seuerus should leave the Empire. Besides that Geta was valiant and warrlike,
so was he also guilefull and diligent, that is to say, in serving Seuerus,
contenting the Senate, and pleasing the people.

The hatred and brabbling that passed betwixt Bassianus and Geta his cousins,
usually he reported it unto all men, in such wise, that Geta supposed to
obtain by guile the Empire, that Seuerus had gotten with arms. Seuerus well
understood, how Geta went thus anglinge for the Empire, and therein to take
away all occasions, in the fourth year of his Empire, going against Albinius,
at that time in the city of Millaine, before he passed the Alps, he created
his elder son Caesar, and his younger Consul: whereupon a certain Captain
said unto Seuerus: it well seems Seuerus, thou remembrest not the
displeasures that Bassianus and Geta thy sons have done thee, either the
service which thy brother Geta has performed on thy behalf.

To this Seuerus aunsweared, it well appears that thou speak by hearesaye,
rather then by any experience which thou have in this case: for, as thou
haste no brothers, either have been married to have any children, no more
know thou, what difference of love is beetwixte the one and the other: For I
give to understand, that without all comparison, we fathers do more love the
thwartes of our children, then the service of our brethren.

The elder brother which was named Bassianus, changed his name, and commanded
all men to call him Antoninus Aurelius, in the memory of Antoninus Pius, and
of Marcus Aurelius: because these Princes were very glorious in their lives,
and in their Common wealths no less beloved.

When Seuerus returned from the wars of Parthia, his sons Bassianus and
Geta were then men: and for that he understood that the Romans were thereof
then very doubtful, he requested his sons, that notwithstanding the
variaunce betwixt themselves, they would be in peace with the people: but
heerewith might he not tame the condition of the young men, either persuade
them to be in friendship with the Romans: for as much as he soldered with
his good words, so much did they esca^dalize with their lewd works. Seuerus
finding himself infected with infirmities, compassed with enemies, and his
sons so evil inclined, was always sad, pensive, melancholy, and (in a
manner) in despair: not only doubting, they would diminish the estate wherein
he left them, but also lose the honor which they did inherit. Seuerus
considering the daily complaints made of his sons in the Senate, and the
continual displeasures which they gave him, advised to banishe them the vices
and pleasures of Rome: the one he sent into Germany, the other into Panonia:
but if they were evil in his presence, they were much worse in his absence: for
that aforetime, by their subjection, they absceined from some vices, but
afterward with liberty they committed all mischief. The parents that with
their own hands, and in their own houses, may not frame virtue in their
children, will hardly atteine it at the hands of others: for that virtue is not
obtained in seeking strange countries, but in the amendment of old errors.

CHAP. XV. Of a favored servant of Seuerus named Plautianus.
JN the days of the Empire of the good Marcus Aurelius, there came from Africa
unto Rome, a gentleman named Plautianus, poor, blind in sight, crafty and
subtle in condition: and being (as he was) mutinous and quarelling, and
wheresoever he went, moving some debate, Marcus Aurelius commanded him to be
banished Rome: for he was a prince of such patience, that he suffered not in
his common wealth a man that was vicious, or any young man that was quarellous.
Plautianus being banished Rome, departed unto the garrisons of Illyria: and
from thence also being cast as a seditious person, repaired at last, into the
company of Seuerus, of whom he was very well handled, and also honored, and
in all things placed above all men: some said that it was done of Seuerus, for
that he was of his country: some for kindred, and some durst say that he
served not only for martial affairs, but also to do him service in the
chamber. After that Seuerus came to be Emperor, he gave so great credit unto
Plautianus, and so strictly did follow his counsel, that he neither read
letter, but he did see it, or signed commission that he liked not, either
gave any reward that he craved not. In the Senate, he was placed in the most
honorable seat: when he came forth into Rome, all the Gentlemen did
accompany him: when he came out of his house, all Ambassadors did attend on
him: in time of war, all captains sued unto him: if there were plays and
pastimes, they were always represented before his palace: if they had to give
or receive any money, all did pass through his hands: in such wise, that it
was never seen in Rome, that any man without the title of an Emperor, enjoyed
so great portion of ye Empire. Plautianus naturally was proud, ambitious,
covetous, and cruel: and the more to show his fierceness, cruelty, and
magnificence, he always had a drawn sword borne before him: and when he
passed through the streats, he would that none should dare to behold him in
the face, but cast down their eyes to the ground: and when he traveled upon
the way, he had always one that went before, to give warning to all persons to
give way, where he should pass: in such wise, that he neither would behold
strangers, either be seen of the country natives.

Seuerus gave in reward unto Plautianus, the goods of al persons that were
condemned and confiscate in the Empire: and as he was of a greedy and
covetous nature, so they were infinite that he caused to be slain in ye
Empire: not because they had so deserved, but for their goods which they
possessed.

The elder son of Seuerus named Bassianus, being come to ripe understanding,
and perceiving how al things went, was greatly grieved, to se Plautianus have
so great power in the government of the common wealth: and Plautianus
presently finding ye hatred of Bassianus, practiced with Seuerus that Bassianus
should marry with his only daughter: and inco^tinently, the elder son of
Seuerus was married unto the daughter of Plautianus. Plautianus beholding
himself not only the alone favored, but also father in law with Seuerus, it
seemed unto him but a trifle to be Lord of the whole world: and most truly,
Plautianus in heaping honor upon honor, and estate upon estate, bredd his
own destruction: for that men never surfeit to eat that which is necessary,
but in eating and drinking more then the stomache will bear. Though Plautianus
daughter was very fair, of good condition, and brought with her a most rich
dowry, yet did her husband Bassianus, most cruelly hate her: which he
discovered both in word and deed, affirming her to be the daughter of a base
and vile person, and that he would one day kill both her and her father: and
yet not therewithal satisfied, they did neither sleep in one chamber, or dine
at one table. Bassianus aunsweared certain Romans that requested him to be
friend with his wife, and to honor his father in law: I give you Romans to
understand, that I did not marry, but my father did marry me, which I would
not have done if he had commanded me, but to defloure the daughter, and enjoy
the treasure of her father: and since it is done, let her seek an husband, for
I will seek a wife. Plautianus understanding what his son Bassianus had
said, and that his daughter was not married, but dishonored, that Seuerus was
old and sick, and that Bassianus held him not as a father in law, but as an
enemy, determined to revenge that injury: either else to loose both life and
honor in the enterprise.

Bassianus informed his father Seuerus, of many tyrannies which Plautianus
committed in the common wealth, and Plautianus also complained how evil he
used his daughter: and thus they went on co^firming their enimitie, and giving
every day new passions and tedious complaints unto Seuerus: but in the end,
he gave ear unto the complaints of Plautianus, as unto a servant: but unto
Bassiaaus, as unto a son. Seuerus considering the continual displeasure
given him by Plautianus, the tyrannies he executed in the Empire, the enimitie
betwixt him and Bassianus, and that also with his great favor he estaeemed him
little, conceived that some day he might rise with the Empire: wherefore, from
thenceforth he neither showed him good countenance, either gave him so great
authority in the common wealth.

Plautianus did well perceive, that he had not only Bassianus unto his enemy,
but also stood in disgrace of Seuerus: and thought with himself, that to
escape best cheap, either they would take away his life, or cast him out of
favor: and to deliver himself of so great an infamy, he determined to kill
them, to quite himself.

CHAP. XVI. Of a certain treason that Plautianus had ordained against Seuerus,
and how it was discovered.
THe order that Plautianus used, or to say better, the disorder that he
practiced to kill Seuerus and Bassianus, proceeded as from a passioned tyrant,
and not as a man advised: and so it afterward redounded to his loss and
destruction. The case was thus, there was in Rome a Tribune named Saturninus,
native of Assyria, who was the greatest friend that Plautianus had, with whom
he did most communicate, to whom he did most commend his secrets, and also
for whom he did most pleasure. Plautianus sending for this Saturninus an hour
within night, and enclosing themselves within a chamber, said in great secrecy
these words following.

Plautianus his Oration to Saturninus.
Saturninus, thou know how great love I have borne thee, and how many good
deeds I have done to thee, and thy house: whereof there needs no other token,
but the beholding of thee so highly advanced in the Court, and so accepted in
my service, many with me be offended, and at thee al men have envy. Friends,
parents, acquaintance, recommended, and servant, I had for whom to have
done: unto some of whom I was much beholding, and of others I was to have
considered for service: all these notwithstanding, on thee only I fixed mine
eyes, to magnify thee: and in thee I employed my heart to love thee. I sent now
for thee, to recompt unto thee my travels and sorrows, to the end thou
should help to deliver me from them: and herein thou shall perceive, the
affectionate love which I bear thee, in that I repose my confidence in thee,
wherein I would not trust mine own proper son: for sons think not, but
how to inherit their fathers goods, but very friends have care to deliver
their friends from grief and sorrow. Thou well know, Saturninus, what
great service I have done to Seuerus, and since my youth have followed him in
the wars. I say, I served him so young, that I alone am his most ancient
servant: although I be now the most forgotten and abhorred. Setting a part
all services which I have done for him, and all great dangers that I have
passed to deliver him from peril, I have borne so tender affection unto my
Lord Seuerus, that I left to like him as a man, and did adore him as a God and
that this is true, it appears most clear, in that I gave my daughter unto
his son Bassianus, and my self to be his perpetual slave. After I spent my
youth in his service, and followed the father throughout the world, his son
Bassianus nourished in my arms from his infancy, I did yield him my goods, I
gave him my only daughter, I governed his common wealth in peace, of his evil
life I framed in all men an opinion of great virtue, his cruelties and tyranny
I made all men believe to be zeal of justice: in such wise, that they never
committed vile deed, that I soldered not: either at any time commanded any
difficult matter, that I accomplished not. The matter is thus come to pass,
the Gods permitting, or my sorrowful destinies procuring, I am fallen into so
great hatred of Seuerus, and in so cruel contempt and enimitie with Bassianus,
that in recompense of al my service which I have done them all the days of my
life, they are now determined to take away my life. Thou see now,
Saturninus, whether it be reason that I endure the same, whereunto if I should
give place, I should perish, my house should be lost, the gods unserved, the
whole Empire escandalized: and therefore it is convenient, that I execute on
them that which they would execute upon me: for that it is more consonant
unto reason, that the evil be corrected of ye good, then that the virtuous
should come under the power of the wicked. Behold Saturninus, what affection I
bear thee, that have laid up in thy breast so great a secret, this terrible
deed I will put into thy hands: therefore presently thou must depart unto the
Court, and go into his chamber, where Seuerus sleeps, and cut off his head:
and from Bassianus his son also thou shall take away his life. Thou shall say
unto ye guard, at Court, that even now there came unto me a post out of Asia,
and art sent by me, to give Seuerus intelligence thereof, and go at such an
hour, for that danger depends thereon. And since thou have not been
abashed to hear it, be not terrified to perform it: for that I swear unto
thee by the immortal gods, that after Seuerus is dead, and I in the possession
of the Empire, conformable unto the great peril wherein now thou do
adventure thy self, shall be thy rewards that then thou shall receive.

These and such other things Plautianus said unto Saturninus: who aunsweared,
that he was ready to do his commandment, upon condition, that he would
give him in writing, in what manner he would have him to kill Seuerus, and
Bassianus his son: which he desired to this end, that if in time he should
forget the recompense of so great a service, he might show him that writing,
both to remember the service past, as also the reward unperformed. Plautianus
doubted not to give Saturninus a writing signed with his own hand, wherein he
commanded to kill Seuerus, and Bassianus his eldest son: the contents of the
writing was thus.

J Plautianus do request as a friend, and command as a Censor, that thou
Saturninus Tribune, do kill the Emperor Seuerus, and Bassianus his elder
son: and for the same I promise thee, and by the immortal Gods swear unto
thee, that as thou art only in peril, so to make thee singular in the Empire.
Saturninus, as a man skillful and subtle, for more assurance unto Plautianus,
upon his knees kissed his hand, as though already he had been sure of the
Empire: and then being in ye deep of the night, he departs unto the Court,
the guard presently giving place, and the cha^berlaines in like manner: who
placing himself directly before Seuerus as he lay in his bed, said these
words. O Seuerus, how careless art thou of the embassage that thy greatly
favored Plautianus does send thee, whose messenger I am, not to give thee
warning (as I do advise thee) but to kill thee and thy son Bassianus: for
that as thou have trusted him with thine honor, and given him of thy goods,
it seems unto him also, that thou should serve him with thy life. Great
was the admiration of Seuerus, when he heard what Saturninus said: and yet
most true, that presently he might not believe the same, or could think
that so vile treason might be contained in Plautianus: but rather yt his son
Bassianus had been the inuenter thereof, to lead him into disdain and hatred
against Plautianus. Bassianus being lodged within his father, at his voice did
awake and came forth, whom his father Seuerus reproved and blamed with words
very sharp, for the invention of so great evil: and swear (by the immortal
Gods) to receive him from thenceforth into his further grace and favor, in the
way of revenge, for so great an impiety: for Plautianus was not a man to have
any such thought in his heart. And as Bassianus had not heard the beginning of
Saturninus speech, so was he abashed to see his father so grievously offended:
wheruppon Saturninus seeing the incredulity of the Emperor Seuerus, and how
entirely he loved Plautianus, pulled forth his writing, wherein he was
commanded to kill both him and his son: and further, did humbly crave, that
Plautianus might be sent for, with advertisement, that Seuerus and his son
were slain, and then it should be seen that he would come apparelled not in
silk, but in iron. One was sent as from Saturninus, unto Plautianus to come to
Court, where, at his arrival finding all in silence, Saturninus met him at the
chamber door, and receiving him as new Emperor, upon his knees did kiss his
hands, and taking him by the hand in ye dark, said he would direct him where
Seuerus was strangled, and his son Bassianus slain. Plautianus thinking all
safe and sure that Saturninus said, entered the chamber alone, where Seuerus
and Bassianus with certain assistants were ready to receive them: whom, when
he beheld living, that he had thought to be dead, he changed countenance,
and lost his speech.

A long time was Seuerus reprehending Plautianus, putting him in remembrance
of all things which he had done for him, and in especial, so many and great
displeasures which he had passed for his sake, and had advanced him above all
persons in the Empire, and above all the rest, had revenged him of all his
enemies. After Plautianus had a little recovered himself, he bowed his knees
before his lord Seuerus, and with tears began to crave pardon for his offense,
promising amendment in time to come, saying: that for his own cause, he ought
to pardon him, although he wanted all deserving for any mercy, but to take
away all occasion of report in the Empire, that ever he had favored so wicked
a person. Beholding Plautianus tears, the promises which he made, the hoarie
head and beard that he so tare, and the great love that he had borne him,
Seuerus was in a manner determined to pardon him: but in the end, being found to
be clad in a shirt of male, whereon Bassianus laying his hand, said. Tell me
Plautianus, into princes chambers at such an hour as this, do servants enter
apparelled in silk, or armed with iron: I swear unto thee by the immortal
Gods, since thou bring iron to kill us, thou shall here die with iron. And
hardly had ended these words, when he began to stab him with his dagger, who
presently fell down dead, and was beheaded: whose head was fixed upon a
lance over the port of Hostia, the body delivered unto boys to trayle
alongest the streates of Rome.

This was the end and conclusion of the favored and private Plautianus, whom
Fortune s^^st advanced, and folly afterward cast away.

CHAP. XVII. Of the particular vices and virtues of Seuerus.
THe news being spread throughout Rome, that Plautianus was dead, all the
people took great pleasure: and no less would have ioyed, if Plautianus had
slain Seuerus and his son Bassianus: for that all three were so evil wished
in the common wealth, that the least evil which they would them in the common
wealth, was but death. The offices that Plautianus held in the common wealth,
Seuerus divided amongst the Tribunes, simple and plain me^, and not given to
trouble: but the love and favor which he had unto Plautianus, he never after
committed unto any person: for as afterward he said, he knew not whom to
trust, since his private and favored servant Plautianus would murder him.
Plautianus being dead, there was none that might suffer or endure ye cruelties
of the prince Bassianus, or follerate his tyrannies: for Bassianus stood in
awe of Plautianus, partly for that he was his father in law, as also for that
he had bred him from his infancy. Seuerus considering his sons Bassianus and
Geta to increase in age, and decrease in wit, caused wild beasts to be brought
for them to kill, horses to run, inuenting new plays to practice, and
therein to occupy their persons, diuerting their minds to those games, to
reinoue them from vices. Finding no profit to lead his sons to virtue by
those warlike exercises, he would call them in secret, and tell them of many old
examples how such and such princes were cast away by discord: and that the same
mischance must happen unto them, if they did not behave themselves as friends,
and favor each other as brothers: for that with concord small things increase,
and by discord great things came to naught. Besides that, ye two brethren were
overthwart in manners, and perverse of conditions, (as before has been said)
their tutours did them much hurt: that is to say, in dissembling their vices,
and inciting them to greater enimities: whereof Seuerus being advertised, some
of them he banished, some he dispatched, and some he drowned in wells:
affirming that they deserved more punishment that kindled enimities, then the
persons that did execute them. Plautianus left a daughter, that was wife unto
Bassianus, and her son nephue unto Seuerus, and son unto Bassianus: as well
the mother that was young, as ye son which was a child they banished into
Sicyl, giving them of all that which they had, no more but to serve them wherwt
to eat: which Seuerus did, not for envy that he bare to his nephue and
daughter in law, but not to offend his son Bassianus, Seuerus did vaunt
himself, yt his predecessors had bin of a city in Africa, named Tripol, which
he did nobilitate, not only in buildings, but also in rents and privileges, and
planted there and orchard of Olive trees, which did yield so great quantity of
oil, yt it was sufficient for a great part of Africa and Italy, Seuerus was a
friend of wiseme^, favored, studious, and dealt very well with such as were
learned: but jointly with this, he did most abhor them, if they were either
overthwart, or troublesome: for he used to say, that fools set neighbors at
variance, but men that were wise and malicious brought kingdoms together by
the ears. He was also inclined to read books, and to understand antiquities:
and if he might not by his important affairs read himself, he made others to
read: and further, if he chanced to be so busied, yt he might not read
himself, either hear reading at such times they read unto him when he was
eating or when he went to bed. He himself did write his own life, and did
write it as truly as if he had been a chronicler that is to say praising his
victories, and reprehending his vices: and also most truly, made report of all
men that he killed, but not of the small reason yt he had so to do. Seuerus was
much blamed for his great couetise of goods, and for want of care and
negligence of his honor: for yt his wife Iulia was a common adulteress, whom
he did neither chastise, or put away: neither is it written, yt ever he did
advise or blame her. It was sufficient for Seuerus to know his wife to be evil,
to be named Iulia, which name was ever infamous amongst ye women of Rome.
Although he were an enemy of vices, and of vicious me^, much more was he
enemy of thieves, above all other kind of wicked people: and so is it said
and found of him, that he did bear with many malefactors, but never pardoned
any thief. In his apparel he was not curious or costly, but always was
apparelled as a man of great sobernes: especially, much commended, that in his
Empire he never beheld any person in Rome clad with silk or purple. Also in
his feeding he was not disordinate, and yet truly of certain fruits of Africa
given to feed somewhat overmuch, and used to say, that they had a better
relishe then others: for that being a child, he was bred with them. He
delighted also more to eat fish then flesh, and sometimes passed an whole
month without the taste of any flesh: the flesh that he best loved was mutton,
and of fish, the Trout. In many cities of ye Empire, they made by his
commandment very notable works: especially in the city of Tripol in Africa,
where he was borne, he made there a fort, and an house, and compassed it with a
very strong wall. He was a prince very careful, that the city of Rome should
always be well provided, which was manifested at his death, at what time they
found vij. years provision in wheat and oil.

CHAP. XVIII. How Seuerus passed into great Britain, where he died.
SEuerus being settled in security, and intending certain buildinges in Rome,
received letters from ye governor of great Britain, which now is named
England, yt a great part of the Island was revolted from the service of Rome:
and to appease and force them to obedience, his presence was right necessary:
because the Prefect himself was not only denied al obedience, but they sought
means also to kill him. Seuerus was not displeased with this news, although
he were both old and sickly: for that he always desired the offer of great
things to magnify his fame, and perpetuate his memory. Seuerus also was
pleased with those wars, to have occasion to withdraw his sons from the
vices of Rome: and so it came to pass, that his elder son Bassianus he made
captain of the army that he led by land: and to his younger son Geta, he
gave the charge of his army and navy that passed by sea. Seuerus at the
soudeine and unprovided, assailed the Britains, who at that instant they
understood of his arrival in the Isle, sent their Ambassadors: partly to
yield account, and partly to discharge themselves of their rebellion, as also
to set down betwixt them a certain concord, which Seuerus would neither yield
unto, or abide to hear off: for he vented rather to obtain ye renoune of
Britain, then for any reason to make them war. His armies being disimbarked,
and the Ambassadors dispatched, every man prepared, the one to offend, and the
other to defend: Seuerus first provided bridges, wheruppon his horsemen might
pass, and his foot men avoid occasion to swim. The Britains of that part of
Britain, in those days, had a custom in time of war, to encounter their
enemies in lakes and waters, where they did place themselves up unto the arm
pits, and from thence did fight and show their skill: and when their enemies did
shoot or whirle their darts, they would stoop or diue under water: in such
wise, that it cha^ced three sundry times, that never happened in any part of
the world: which is to wit, that 100. naked men, overcame 1000. armed persons.
When at any time they would fight in the field, they used certain targets
after the manner of bucklers, and half swords girt upon their bare flesh. All
matters apperteining unto the wars brought unto perfection, Seuerus confirmed
his younger son Geta, governor of a certain place of the Island that had
not rebelled, and kept his elder son Bassianus near unto his own person:
executing cruel wars upon the Barbarians, who upon determination to do
hurt, or offend their enemies, dyed with great hardiness: and upon other
determination, would put themselves to flighte: in which flight their enemies
always had the woorsse.

The wars being trauersed after this manner, the gowt did grievously increase
upon Seuerus, in such manner, that he could neither go out of his camp,
either sit in counsel with his capteines: in so much, that he was constrained
to commend the whole charge of the army unto his son Bassianus, who more
did practice secreately to frame hatred amongst the armies unto his brother
Geta, then to make conquest of the enemies. Bassianus so much rejoiced of his
fathers grief, and had so great care to inherit, that he saw no hour,
wherein he wished not his fathers death. Not meaning to leave any evil
unperformed that touched an evil nature, adding evil unto evil, he suborned
the Physicians that did cure him, and the servant that served him, in such
wise, the one to serve him, and the other cure him, that if the gowte did not
finish him, poison should dispatche him. Although no man said unto Seuerus any
one word, he did well perceive what his son Bassianus desired: and so it
came to pass, that beholding the disobedience which his son did bear him,
and how evil his servant served him, and how slenderly his Physician did
visit him: although he were old and sickely, he died of pure sorrow, and
melancholy. The last words which Seuerus said, before he dyed, they say were
these. When I took the Empire, I found the common wealth throughout the
world in trouble, and now I dye, I leave it in peace: and although I dye
without power to testar ny firmar, yet I leave the Empire firm unto my two
sons Antonines: if they shall prove good, they remain exactly made princes:
and if they shall be evil, I leave them nothing. Before Seuerus dyed, he
commanded two Fortunes of gold to be made, for either of his sons one:
because it was the ensign of the Empire, to take away all occasion after his
death, for any of them, by him self, or for him self, to be advanced with
the Empire, but equally to remain in power and estate. This was the end of
Seuerus, whom his enemies might not kill with arms: and yet with grief and
sorrow was slain by his sons. Seuerus lived three score and fifteen years,
and reigned two and twenty years: his bones were burnt, and the ashes carried
to Rome.

Of this Emperor Seuerus, the Senate determined that, which of no other prince
was determined, namely, Illum aut nasci non debuisse, aut mori: which is to
say: It had been good (in respect of his cruelties which he did) he had not
been borne: and since that he was borne, (in consideration of the profit
which he did in the common wealth) it had been good he had not died.

The life of the Emperor Bassianus, son unto Seuerus, compiled by sir
Anthony of Gueuara, Bishop of Mondonnedo, preacher, chronicler, and counselor
unto the Emperor Charles the fifte.
CHAP. I. How Bassianus and his brother Geta did inherit the Empire of their
father Seuerus.
PResently after the death of the Emperor Seuerus in great Britain, his two
sons, Bassianus and Geta, did succeed him in the Empire, betwixt whom there
was extreme discord and cruel hatred: for, notwithstanding in blood they
were brothers, yet in will and works they dealt as enemies. As Bassianus was
elder brother, and also more cauillous and troublesome, so he began secretly
to practice and subborne the capteines of the army to him only to give the
Empire, and to exclude Geta his younger brother from the inheritance: and to
draw them unto his purpose, he spoke sweet words, blinded them with fair
promises of great hope, and also gave them rich Jewels. Nothing might
Bassianus attain with the capteines of his army, for that every one in
particular, and all in general, made him answer, that since they were sons
unto their lord Seuerus, and both brethren, and jointly had sworn unto them
as their Lords and Princes, it were not just they should be traitors in their
promise unto their father: or should make a breach of their oath, that in the
temples they had sworn unto the Gods.

After that Bassianus might not corrupt the army with words, deeds, or
gifts, he took peace with the Britans, to the end presently to depart
toward Rome: and his brother Geta being advertised that Bassianus sought the
Empire unto him self, which the father Seuerus had left unto them both, grew
into great hatred and disdain with his brother: in such wise, that from
thenceforth, the two brethren behaved them selves, not only as utter enemies,
but also the court was divided into bands. Bassianus and Geta were brethren
by the father, but not by the mother: for that Bassianus was his son by his
first wife, and Geta by Iulia which was the second wife. Geta his mother, and
the ancient and honorable Romans that were remaining after the death of
Seuerus, did not a little travail to confederate and set them at agreement:
but in the end, they were neither convinced with the infinite bears of the
mother, either might be persuaded by the great requests and instant
intreatance of their friends. The affairs of Britain being set in order, the
two brethren much without order, departed toward Rome, carrying with them the
relics of their father Seuerus, that is to say, his bones made ashes, which
in all cities, as they passed, were received with as great reverence, as if
Seuerus had been alive.

From the time that Bassianus and Geta departed from Britain, until they
entered Rome, they never lodged in one lodging, or fed at one table, or had
conference upon the way, but had of each other great suspicion: yea in meat
and drink to have received poison. To go in so great doubt and suspicion, was
cause of small stay upon the way, although it were very long: and before
their coming unto Rome, either of them had sent their secreate messengers, not
only to take up the best lodginges in Rome, but also to solicit and to win
the wills of the common wealth, because they conceived, that they might not
jointly be conserved in their seigniorie, but that one must remain with the
Empire. That day on which Bassianus and Geta his brother should enter Rome,
all Rome came forth to receive them, which was mixed with joy and sorrow:
sorrow, for the death and burial of Seuerus: and joy, for that his children
were come alive to reign in his stead. Entering into the city, the two
brethren and new Emperors went before, appareled in purple, on horssebacke:
after them, came the Senators all on foot, who bare on their shoulders, a
chest of Unicorne, wherein was placed the ashes of Seuerus: such persons as
attended the dead went weeping: and those that accompanied Bassianus and Geta
went singing. Being entered into the city, and the day far spent, they went
unto the temple of the great Emperor Marcus Aurelius, where the two new
Princes fell on their knees to adore his sepulcher, as a most holy man, and
there bestowed the ashes of their father Seuerus. Before Seuerus departed unto
the second wars of Britain, he had begone a most sumptuous sepulcher in the
field of Mars: amongst other ornaments that it had, were seven pillars
polished very high and stately, wherein was graven all his acts and
victories: but his life first was finished, before his sepulture was ended.

CHAP. II. How in Rome they bury their Emperors, and of great ceremonies
which there they used.
After that Bassianus and Geta his brother had reposed the body of their father
Seuerus in the temple of the Emperor Marcus Aurelius, presently they began
to consecrate his body, and to place his soul with the Gods, according to the
custom of the Romans: which ceremony was not done, but unto dead Emperors:
and the order thereof was thus. Presently upon the death of an Emperor, the
Senate did assemble to determine, if he deserved to be buried with the Gods,
either else after his burial to leave him to oblivion as other men: and if he
had been evil, the Senate would be absent at his burial: and if he had been
good, all clad in black, would attend to consecrate his body. And to do the
same, their first attempt was to bury the body of the dead prince without any
ceremony, and then made him an image of wood after the manner of a sick and
colourlesse man, which they placed alofte upon a scaffolde over the Court
gate: and that image, although it were of a sick man, yet did they clad it
with garments of silcke and gold, as though the counterfeite were alive. In
the hight of that scaffolde, or throne, the Senate were set on the left hand,
and on the right hand all the matrones of Rome: of whom none might he apareled
richly, either decked with iuels of gold or stone: ^ut all persons were there
clad in white, for that all white apparel in Rome was counted mourning. The
Senators and matrones were placed and set at the risinge of the sun, and
did not rise until the sun was set: there might they neither speak, or gaze
about, but all that time was consumed in sighing, weeping, and wayling

From hour to hour, Physicians came and went to visit that Image, and so did
raise, behold, and feel his pulses, as if the Emperor him self had been
there alive, and always at their parting would report unto the Senators and
ladies, that the sick person drew on to death. At which news, the matrones
did grite and shriche, and the Senators did weep and wail. This order they
used seven days together, but first upon the sixth day, the Physicians did
forsake the sick person, and finally, on the seventh day manifestly would
publish his death: presently after he was denounced for dead, placeing the
handles of the baire whereon the Image of the dead was laid upon their
shoulders, the chiefest and most honorable Senators on horssebacke did bear
the same: and after this manner went unto the place named Vaieia, and might not
go by any other way but by the sacred way, which was a tracke where no man
durst pass, but Emperors that were dead and priests that were alive. In that
place named Vaieia, there was another buylding made of stone, after the manner
of a Throne, having on both sides degrees and stairs to mount aloft, where
they did place the Image of the dead Emperor: upon the one stairs, stood
children, the sons of the gentlemen of Rome, and on the other part stood
the damsels and virgins of Rome, and there did singe many sorrowful songs and
hymns, published in the praise of the dead. From thence they removed the baire
with the Image of the dead, unto the field of Mars, where also was made
another scaffold, all of dry wood, under the vaut whereof was laid stubble,
stalks, and straw, and other kindling matter to burn: the outside was
bravely painted, and hanged with rich tapestrie, and aloft upon the highest
part thereof, they placed the Image of the dead Emperor. On the day in which
this ceremony was performed in Rome, they did concur to behold the same
from all parts of Italy: and every Lord and lady that was present, did
throw upon the degrees of that Throne, Mire, incense, aloes, amber, roses,
and other things of fragrant savors. When all men had offered their sweet
perfumes, the Senators did skirmish on horsseback, and presently after them
the two Co^suls gave a boylt aloft on their chariots gorgeously adorned: and
after them there followed on foot, all the ancient Romans and neighborhood
of Rome, and all such as had been captains of the wars: all which after
they had gone a turn about the Throne, fell down groueling, exclaming very
loud against the ground. After the three processions were done, which is to
weete, of ye Senators, of the Consuls, and of the capteines, came he that did
inherit the Empire, who with a burning torche, gave fire to that Throne,
which being all of dry stuff, presently was consumed. Before the beginning
of this great ceremony, the Senate sought out against that day a brave Eagle,
which was placed betwixt the handles of ye baire, where the Image of the dead
was laid: with great skill and subtlety, at the time that the Image burnt,
the Eagle was loosed and flewe away: and as her proper nature is to fly
upward, all men said with loud voices, that it was the soul of the dead
Emperor, that was gone to the Gods up to heaven. As often as ye shall find
these words written of any Prince or notable personage, namely: Inter diuos
relatus est, that is, they have placed him with the Gods, all these ceremonies
were done unto him: unto such a one, from thenceforth, they might sacrifice,
adore, make temples, and place Priests, in such manner, they had to honor him
as a God, and not to talk of him, as of a man.

CHAP. IIII. Of the mortal hatred betwixt Bassianus and Geta his brother.
AFter the two brethren had accomplished the funeral office of their father
Seuerus, they went both to lodge in the sacred palace: not jointly, but
parting the lodging betwixt them, every one placing porters by them selves, and
their guard to attend upon them. Although their lodging was one, yet their
wills and dispositions were diverse: and such as had to deal in matters of
importance, conferred not with them, but with their mother: who took the
opinion of the one, and so of the other, which afterward was performed by
advise and consent of the Senate: because otherwise the common wealth should
have run at randon and be lost. These two Princes never jointly came forth,
but when they went to the Senate, or to visit the temple of the great
Emperor Marcus Aurelius: for Seuerus had commanded, that weekly they should
offer sacrifices in that temple, and monthly his heirs should visit that
sepulcher. Bassianus and his brother Geta, had small care to visit temples,
offer sacrifices, go to the Senate, reform the common wealth, either provide
necessary matter for the wars: but all their bent and study was, the one to
beguyle the other, and to win the wills of the people: to the end that one
being dead, the other might reign without contradiction. Both the brethren
being thus divided, and both leading the Empire into hands: notwithstanding
that both had enemies and friends, yet always the greater part of the
common wealth were more affectionate to the younger son, which was Geta. Geta
was white and read, high, sharp, mild, nimble, of groase lightuesse, and of
very good condition: and yet in respect of reigning he was as proud as
Bassianus. Bassianus his brother was a falowe black, cholerike adust, little
of body, broad forehead, much skin on his hands, hollow and hoarse of
voice, preignant, subtle, diligent, and a iyar: for if he needed anything, he
would flatter all men with fair words, and after enuen all things in lies. The
divisions every day proceedinge from evil to worse, it was beyond all men's
powers, to bring them agreed, or make them friends: they both devised,
without advertisement of any person to divide the Empire: the manner was, that
all kingdoms should equally be divided in two parts, and that the name of
Emperor should be indifferent unto them both.

There was allotted unto Bassianus all Europe, and unto Geta his brother the
kingdoms of Asia: and the end wherefore they divided the Empire, was, not to be
friends from thenceforth, but to have liberty, men, and riches, to rise with
Rome: and he that might do most, to dispatche the other of his life. When this
agreement was made, they determined to call their mother Iulia, and all the
ancient servants and friends of the house of Seuerus their father: unto
whom Bassianus gave to understand, how his brother and he had agreed, and were
become friends: and their agreement was, that they had divided the Empire, he
remaining with the estate and seat of Rome, and Geta his brother having
Antioche the head of his Empire, and the estate of all Asia. As Bassianus then
said, so it was agreed, that ye goods of the patrimony were divided in three
parts, two parts for the two brethren, and the third for Iulia their mother:
and further, that all Senators, capteines, and other notable persons of the
Empire, freely (if they so liked) might go with Geta into Asia, or remain with
Bassianus in Rome. There was no man there that liked this agreement, much less
allowed ye same: for they all did see it was but fained, and that ere long the
Empire would be inflamed with wars, as in the days of Julius Caesar and
Pompeyus, of Caesar Augustus, and Marcus Antonius. Although all men were
grieved with yt which was said, yet all men did both dissemble and keep
silence, with sad countenance casting their eyes to the ground: which their
mother Iulia, possessing patience in sufficient, answered and said unto them
as follows.

CHAP. IIII. Of an excellent speech uttered by the mother unto her sons.
I may well call ye sons (O children of my heart) since thou Geta proceededst
from mine intrailes, and thee Bassianus I have nourished with my breasts: and
I swear by the immortal Gods, that much greater is the love that I bare thee,
then the affinity which I have with thy brother. Thou well know Bassianus,
that from the first hour that I came to the court, and was wife unto thy
father Seuerus, I had the name of mother in law, and the works of a perfect
mother: and that many times thou did request me to cherish thy brother Geta,
for that it seemed unto thee he was not favored: in such wise, that if he be
the only person that I have borne, thou only wast he that was cherished. I have
great reason to call you my children, and to bewail you as children, to talk
with you as children: for on the day yt the one proceeded from my bowels, the
other entered into my heart. Marvel ye not to see me power forth so many
tears, and at every word to be dismaide and swoone? for, as ye see my
sorrowful eyes, so may you behold my lamentable heart: ye should well perceive
it gush out more with blood, then mine eyes do flow with tears. If my
husband and your father should hear that which I hear, and should see that
which I see, it would grieve him that ever ye were borne: and no less, that
ever he begat you: because you will give no credit unto your friends, either
obey me your sorrowful mother, or perform his will and commandment.
Wherefore do ye seek the whole for one, since he left the same for both? what
an heavy matter is this my children? the Gods have created ye brethren, and
you have converted your selves enemies: the glory which ye possess, to have
had such a father: ye would quite him with so much grief, to have so froward
children. To leave the Empire entire, your father slew Iulianus, Pessenius
Niger, and Albinius, that held it divided in three parts: and now again ye
will divide and rent it in pieces. Do ye not understand, how Princes that have
their wills united, need not to divide their countries? Have ye not heard
say, that to obtain honor, and to defend that which we possess, for these
two only things, and for no other cause war is raised betwixt kings and
princes? If this be true (as it is) and both you falling out for goods, know
ye not, that your father only of him self, has left ye more then all the
Princes of the world have left unto them? And if it so be, that ye strive for
the attainement of honor, I know not to what end ye would have more honor,
then to be Emperors of Rome. O immortal Gods! I invoke, and most humbly
pray you, that ye deal not according to the childishness of these young men,
but agreeable unto the great service which their father has done you, and the
abundance of tears which their lamentable mother has powered forth: for
otherwise, the memory of my Lord Seuerus shall perish and be lost, and the
majesty of ye Empire put in great danger. If we did think (my children) yt
this division of the Empire, might be an occasion from henceforth to deal and
live like brethren, we would hold it all for good, and think it all right
well: but what does it profit, that ye have divided the Empire only in two
parts: and ye twain remain divided in an hundredth thousand differences? If
ye will be favored of the Gods, and obeyed of men, call to remembrance your
fathers commandment: condescend unto your mothers request, and yealde your
selves unto the judgment of your friends: for that young Princes do never
know to govern well, if they permit not to be governed of the virtuous.
Consider children, that ye are but younglings, and in great affairs have small
experience: and that your youth shall lead you unto many vices, and your small
experience cause you to fall in great and many errors. Also (my children) ye
have to consider, that ye possess your hearts too much passioned, and go
environed with many liars: which two things be most cruel and enorme, in the
persons and houses of princes: because with their passion, they committ much
injustice, and by lies, they cloak many foul and pernicious deeds. The
passioned and furious heart is sufficed with his own fury, to be lead into
all errors: and the liar defends him from all knowledge and acquaintance of
his own fault. If ye remember your selves, that ye be men, and that I am a
woman, with great reason ye might have small regard unto that which I do say:
but if ye consider that ye be my children, and I your mother, great estimation
should ye conceive of my counselles: for that credit which I lose to be a
woman, I recover for that I am your mother. If ye did love your father, as your
father loved you, your sorrowful mother should have no cause so much to
persuade you to be friends: for that to remove all causes to bring his honor
in disputation, ye would refuse and cast behind you all interest whatsoever of
any goods. Since ye will not live in peace, in as much as it touches the
service unto the Gods, and the great mischiefs that must follow your own
persons, and the infamy wherewith ye shall infect your dead father, yet
should ye do the same, for the love and behalf of your living mother:
because the dissentions, trauelles, and infidelities of the children, many they
be that do behold them: but in the end, the mothers do only bewail them.
Against the testament of your father, without the will of your mother,
contrary unto the custom of the Senate, and without advise of any friend, ye
have betwixt you divided the empire, leaving me unto my self to be divided:
wherein, speaking conformably unto justice, it had been more reason ye should
have divided your own proper mother, then the lands and countries of others.
O immortal Gods, why have ye taken away my Lord Seuerus unto your selves, and
left me placed in so many dangers and travels? since ye have given me two
children, why was not given me two hearts? and if I crave two hearts, it is
but to love them: but two thousand hearts will not suffice to endure their
unkindness. O my children, (although no children of my counselles) for that,
though ye be mine by birth, yet are ye become strangers by disobedience. I
know not my children, what to say more unto you: but since ye be twain, and
my heart but one: that ye pull it forth, and open it in the midst, and
divide it as ye have divided the Empire: and yet by the vestall mother, I
swear unto you, that if ye opened my heart, and made search therein, ye
should find in the same the greatness of my love, but much more, that I
suffer and am tormented.

CHAP. V. How Bassianus, to obtain the Empire unto him self, slew his
brother in his mothers arms.
IT was lamentable to hear the Empress Iulia, but much more to behold her,
who seeing her children so extremely divided, and so far from fraternity, at
every word which she said, the Heavens did cleave with sighs, and the
ground was watered with tears. At the instant she finished her talk, she
rose from her chair, and going to her sons* with the right hand she takes
Bassianus, and Geta with the left, imbraceing them with her self, traueiling
to cause them to embrace, and to be reconciled and joining all their three
faces together, with ye aboundaunt tears of the mother, the faces of her
sons were all wett and bedewed. Many Romans that were present began to
mourn, in hearing what Iulia said, and afterward how with her children
she did behave her self: no man replied or spoke more words, in as much as
all men did allow that which the mother said: and improued the division of
the Empire which the sons had made.

The hearts of these two Princes were so much passioned, and jointly
therewith of nature so indurate, that when the mother did talk unto them, it
seemed not, but that they were thinking of some other matter: which had most
perfect apparaunce, because at that time they were neither moved with
compassion of her tears, either afterward did take any profit of her
counsel. The mother only profited not in her traueile to reconcile them, but
that from thenceforth they ceased not to discover greter hatred: that is to
say, in that either of them sought to corrupt each others blood, promising
great wealth in Rome to be given unto him that would confect his lords meat
with poison. When Bassianus perceived, that he might not (by any mean)
dispatche his brother Geta with poison, and jointly therewith, that the Romans
were somewhat inclined unto him by affection, determined on a day, when all
persons were most inclined to sleep at after noone, to go unto the lodging of
his mother Iulia, with whom Geta remained: and finding them at their rest, he
gave Geta so many stabbes with a dagger, that he was bereft of his life. When
Bassianus set upon his brother Geta, the mother to save him, cast her self
upon him: notwithstanding he ceased not to wound him, and kill him, The case
was thus, that with one blow he both wounded his brother, and imbrewed the
garment of the mother: and finally, the brother remained dead, and the mothers
garments defiled.

This done Bassianus goes forth through all the court, exclaming with a loud
voice, and with great fear and trembling: treason, treason, my brother Geta
would have slain me by treason in my bed, and if I had not leapt out at a
window, and the destinies been favorable unto me at that instant, I had not
escaped with life: and not satisfied with that which was said, he commanded
his guard to conduct him out of the court, and to guard and attend him unto
mount Celius, where the Pretorian bands were lodged, infourminge that in ye
palace there was no safety: for that his brother had attempted to murder him.

All men that heard the exclamation that Bassianus made, did believe that all
things had passed as he had said: and the Esquiers of the body did accompany
and attend him, until they had brought him amongst the Pretorians: and
entering the tent where they had their armor and pendons, kneeling upon his
knees, he gave great thanks unto the Gods, that had preserved him unto that
place: and also unto his guard, that had succored him in time of so great
need. To behold Bassianus go at such an hour, with so great an heat,
through the midst of Rome, and that with so great fury, all that beheld him
were escandalized: and did imagine amongst them selves, that he had slain his
brother, or done some vile deed unto his mother in law. As Soon as he saw
him self amongst the Pretorians, he divided amongst them, two thousand and
five hundredth drachmes of gold, according to the weight of Athens* and
further, promised to give them yearly, wheat to furnish their families,
besides their ordinary wages. The fame being divulgate throughout Rome, and
the truth known of the great treason which Bassianus had committed, Geta his
friends joined to seek him, with a determined purpose extremely to have
reue^ged Geta: and as the matter was put to arms, and came to hand gripes,
Geta his friends being the fewer in number, were soon ouercom: which although
they were subdued, yet truly deserve no dispraise: being but few in number,
seeing their Lord dead, and Bassianus in possession of the army, they wanted
no hardiness to fight, and no less courage to dye: but what shall we say,
but that if their quarrel were just, their fortune was very cross. Small
aduantageth it that the mind be generous, and the body warlike, if he that
takes arms be unfortunate: for that one hour of happy fortune, is more
worth then all policies of war. Great was the compassion that all men
conceived of the cruel death of Geta, and no less was the hate which they did
bear unto Bassianus, not only to kill him upon so great assurance, but also
to murder him in a place of so great privilege, that is to say, within the
sacred palace, and embraced within the breasts of his mother. When Bassianus
saw that his brother Geta was dead, all his alies and servant overcome, and
that whatsoever he had attempted with temeritie, succeeded with great
prosperity: he went unto the temples, and took from thence all their
treasure, in such wise, he took away in one day, that which many princes
had given in many years. A great quantity of those treasures Bassianus
divided amongst his Pretorians: who seeing themselves rich in money, and that
their enemies were subdued, went into Rome, began to enter into the houses, and
killed all persons with whom they had unkindness: but that which was more
odious, upon wagers would kill a whole kindred, until they left no person, in
whom any remembrance might remain.

Many noble persons were determined to have slain Bassianus, in the beginning
of his Empire: which they left not undone for his deserving, either for want of
will, but for doubt that after his death, many should rise with the Empire: for
presently they thought it less evil to suffer one, then to resist many.

Now when Bassianus saw himself rich in treasure of the temples, and obeyed
of the Pretorians, he determined to mount aloft upon the high Capitol, and
there to speak unto the Senate: partly to give account of that which was done,
and partly to give them to understand what he would do. Being placed in the
midst of the Senate, and set in the imperial chair, and every man using
silence, he said after this manner.

CHAP. VI. Of a certain speech used of Bassianus unto the Senate, excusing
himself of the death of his brother Geta.
ALthough in age I am but young, and in mine attemptes reputed as rash, yet I
cease not to confess that I am in great hatred with the people: and that my
death should as much content them, as now my life is displeasant unto them. And
as princes are in the view of all persons, so are all their works judged of al
men: and from thence it proceeds, that their just attempts are praised of
many, but their errors condemned of all. They that presume to judge the
works of princes, are not always so just, that they judge continually
conformable unto justice: for as many times they praise the prince with lies:
so it may happen, yt they accuse them with malice. One of the extremest travels
that princes have, is: that such as throng in themselves to talk of our lives,
and to examine our deeds and acts, they talk not as we live, but as we use
and deal with them: for if we honor and magnify them, they report we be no
princes, but gods: but if we chastise and bring them down, they say we be no
men but furies. Many times princes do chastise many, not because we delight to
punish, but yt it so agrees with the imperial authority so to be done: for
as with rewards and pardons we magnify our pierie and clemency, so it is
convenient, that with rigorous chastisements, we make our justice to be
esteemed. Many presume to judge the vices of princes, which if they were
princes, would not only commit things worthy of judgment, but also justly
to be deprived of the Empire: for the knowledge of good government, is not a
thing that men obtain of themselves: but a gift which the Gods do give unto
whom they please.

There is no prince so absolute or dissolute, that at the least, in his
government desires not to be just: but what shall we do, that have no more
power but to wish to do well? and the gods only to give grace to govern well.
But coming to the case now chanced, for which the whole multitude with me be
esca^dalized: I swear by the immortal gods, yt if the truth as it was were
manifested, I should be found without blame: but I am of the one part so
unfortunate, and of th other part the multitude is so variable, that it many
times happens, that of my manifest acts they say nothing: and of that which
never passed my thought, they accuse me. O ye just gods, unto you all I appeal
as witnesses: who first would have killed ye other, either whether my brother
Geta would have slain me, or I would have slain him: for ye well understand,
that being reposed on my bed, he entered upon me with a naked sword: with which
he would have drawn forth my soul, if by chance I had not found one at my
beds head. If he was the beginner of that quarrel, and that fortune would
favor me at that instant, wherefore being utterly without any fault, should I
be blamed of all persons in Rome? What greater testimony would ye of my
innocence, but respecting that he being the person that offended, and I the
man that defended my self, the gods have brought upon him, that which he
meant to perform on me: neither in any good judgment may it be contained,
that if by malice or envy I would have slain my brother, that I should
execute the same by stealth, and within the sacred palace, for that in so
enorme a case, I deserved not so much chastisement for the deed, as to
commit the same in the place where that was done.

I will not deny, that unto my brother I was not bound to honor him, love
him, succor him, and to deal well with him: but I will not confess that I
was bound, for all treasons and injuries to suffer him: for as it is honorable
for great princes, to dissemble and pardon injuries, that are done to them by
their inferiors: so necessary is it for them to revenge the discourtesies and
displeasures, done unto them by their betters or equals. It is notorious unto
al men, that in times past, many princes of the Roman Empire had brethren,
with whom they might not endure, but that many of them were slain* or at the
least driven out of the Empire: for in fine, there is none of so great
temperaunce, that in case of commandment, would have a companion: no not his
brother.

Consider the behavior of Remus and Romulus, Tiberius and Germanicus, Titus
and Domitian, Marcus and Lucius, and others infinite that were brethren:
amongst whom, upon the point of commandment and government, there arose
so great displeasures and unkindness: not as though they had been natural
brethren, but as most cruel enemies. O fathers conscript and friends, give
thanks unto the Gods, that have preserved your prince safe and sound. for that
with out cause they would not have given him his death, and conserved my life:
for the works of our gods are so profound, secreate, and unknown, that
although we see what they do: yet we see not the end why they do it.
Amongst all the gods, only Jupiter is he that has dominion, and so amongst
al men the god Jupiter would not, but that only one should possess the
Empire: for it were no less monstrous to govern the Empire by two persons,
then one body to have two heads. If for all the Heavens, one God be sufficient,
and for all Bees but one king, and all members be governed with one heart, and
all birds have but one guide: I demand of you my friends, to govern the
common wealth of Rome, if one man be not sufficient? As we have read in books
of our forefathers, and as we have seen in our days, there is nothing more
convenient unto the Roman Empire, as to be governed by one only person: for
that we have seen more wars raised, upon which prince should command, then
for any disobedience of subjects. How fierce wars were raised betwixt Silla
and Marius, Caesar and Pompeie, Augustus and Marcus Antoninus, Galba and Othos,
Othos and Bytellus, Bytellus and Vaspasianus: and now of late betwixt Seuerus
my father, and Iulianus and Albinius. All these great calamities, which the
miserable common wealth of Rome has suffered, was not for that many would not
be commanded: but for that many would command. Admitting that my father
commanded in his testament, that Geta my brother and I should divide the
Empire: yet many do know, and they are not few which presume, that he would
never have done it, but his wife and my mother in law constrained him so to
assign: and in a case so great, hard and grave, respect ought not to be given
to that which he did, but unto that which he would have done: because the
magnificence of the Empire, and the wisdom of the Senate, ought not to be
bound, to the procurement of a vain woman: but unto that which is most
convenient for the common wealth.

CHAP. VII. Of the great cruelty of Bassianus, and of such as he commanded to
be slain.
ALl the time that Bassianus used this speech unto ye Senate, no man cut off
his talk, or when he had finished, no person durst answer one word: but that
he in ending his tale, beheld all his friends: and such as he suspected, he
would not once look upon: whereof they remained not only despited, but also
terrified: because the thing that the heart loves, is seen and known by the
vents and windows of the eyes. Neither for that Bassianus had said in open
place, either for any aduisement of friends in secret, did he cease to
continue his cruelties: but that presently he commanded to be slain, not
only such as his brother Geta held for friends, but also the friends of his
friends. He slew all the servant and officers of his brother, not only such
as served him in the common wealth, but all such also, as served him in all
manner of vile things of his house: that is to say, cooks, butlers, caters,
sweepers, moile kepers, turn spits, and boys of the kitchen: at the death of
whom, albeit both before and after he slew many: yet of none had they so great
compassion in Rome as of those persons. Also he slew al his wagginers, all his
horsekeepers, all his bakers, all his lau^derers, all his musicians, al his
taylers, finally, he slew all that his brother loved: and all such as did
serve him. He slew all the Senators and officers of Rome, that followed the
parcialitie of his brother Geta, and kilde all Questors, Pretors, and valiant
capitaines, throughout the Empire. He slew Lucilla, an excellent matrone of
Rome, sister unto the Emperor Commodus, and daughter unto the great Marcus
Aurelius, whom all Emperors past did honor as an Empress, and served as a
mother: and this was in such wise, that as any temple of Rome her house was
priuileged. The cause wherefore they say, he slew the Lady Lucilla, was: for
that, when she heard of the death of Geta, she went unto the Court to comfort
the mother, and bewailed her sorrow: whereof Bassianus being advertised, said.
Since Lucilla mourns for the death of my brother Geta, with my mother in law:
it signifies that she would joy of his life, and of my death: but I will live,
and she shall die. Also he slew many of the vestall virgins, some that he
accused for breaking their virginity: and others, for that they presumed to be
virgins: saying it was a jest, to believe that any might live and die a virgin
in this life.

He slew an ancient knight named Letus, which was at the death of Commodus:
and also was acquainted with the death of Geta his brother. He slew Rufus a
knight of Africa, and his near kinsman, that is to say, his uncles son, who
at the evening did inuit him to supper, and in the morning commanded to be
slain. He slew Pompeyanus the son of Lucilla, and nephue unto Marcus
Aurelius, a man of great courage in wars, and venturous in arms, whom he
commanded to be slain traveling upon the way, and cast forth report that
thieves had slain him. He slew Papianus the learned Lawyer, who in those
days was most famous in knowledge and counsel, that was in all the Roman
Empire: and thus it passed, that Bassianus when he came out of the Senate, did
take Papianus on his right hand, and all alongest the streate laid his right
arm upon his shoulder, until they came unto the entry of the house at the
foot of the staire, where, with an axe, (such as they cleave wood,) he
commanded his head to be cut off.

He slew Petronius which had been Consul, Senator, Questour, Praetor, Edil,
and Flamen forty years: in all which time, he never offended any man,
either any person had complained of him: wherefore he was named the good
Petronius. He slew Samonicus Serenus, which also was a Lawyer: and of this
man it is said, that in eloquence he was very sweet, and in writing no less
Satyricall.

Also he slew a son of the Emperor Pertinax, named Elius Pertinax, who for
a wonder was said in Rome, that in either word or deed, it was never
perceived in him, that ever in his whole life he did so much as vent for the
Roman Empire: which was not a little to be praised, and also meruailed:
because sons naturally are not only inclined to inherit their fathers
goods: but also to succeed them in their honors. Furthermore, he commanded
a notable Roman to be slain, named Chilus, because he had continually
traueiled to make him friend with his brother Geta: who presupposing that
they came to kill him, stripte himself clean out of his apparel, and
escaped out at a certain window of his house.

He killed his first wife, ye daughter of Plautianus, which was exiled into
Sicyl, and caused search to be made in Rome throughout the Empire, for all that
were sons, cousines, uncles, nephues, or near parents unto the blood
royal, all which he commanded to be slain, both men and women: because
neither root, branche, or memory, should remain of ancient or generous
blood. As well in Rome, as else where throughout the Empire, Bassianus
commanded many others to be slain: but that which was more cruel, the
erecutioners had authority to take away their miserable lives, but not to
bury their bodies, leaving them to the fowls of the air: as for the noblest,
they were carried in carres on heaps, and consumed with fire even to ashes. He
was not only evil and cruel, but also did boast himself to be a friend of
such as were noted to be evil and cruel: for they never heard him say well of
any prince past, but of Silla the cruel, Brute the traitor, Catiline the
tyrant, the Gracchies seditious, Domitian the defamed, and Commodus the
dissolute. Exactly to accomplish his cruelties, it chanced on a certain day,
represe^ting the Circen plays in Rome (unto which feast an huge number of
people were come to behold) that as the guide of the imperial chariot, might
not pass, because the streats were stopped with multitudes of people, he began
by force to make his way, and tear and tread the people: who made resistance
for their safety, adding thereunto words over furious, as people passioned.
And as the Emperor then being placed in the same chariot, although they said
no word to his offense, he received the cochemans injury as his own:
presently commanding al his Pretorians which there did guard his person, to
make slaughter at their liberty. And as al persons there present were more
decked and trimmed for the feast, then armed, either in readiness for battle: so
great compassion was it to behold the multitudes of people that died there,
without any offense, and sheading of blood of so many innocents: for if ten
or twelve had offended, they were more then 15. thousand that were there
executed. The Romans did neither eat, drink, sleep, or do any thing, but
with great trembling, not doubting when they should be accused, but when
Bassianus should command them to be slain: for never tyrant did execute
that, which he ordinarily performed in Rome: which is to weete, without any
accusement of fiscall, or complaint of enemy, or want of service, to
command any man to be slain.

CHAP. VIII. Of the provinces which Bassianus did travel, and the things
which he did therein.
AFter that Bassianus had slain his brother Geta, and his enemies, as also
many of his friends, and infinite others yt were neither friends nor foes: he
departed from Rome, iourneying toward Germany, which now is named high
Almaine: with determination to visit those Provinces, and to refourme his
armies, which by continuance of peace, were grown to great negligence in
matters of war. A whole summer he lodged near unto the river of Danubie,
where he exercised hunting, fishing, playing, running, torneying, and sometimes
sat in iudgmente: and a matter wherein he made all men to wonder, was, that
in hearing any cause at the instant, he gave sentence wherein he never erred,
and also iudgmente according to justice. He had great delectatio^ of that
country, and the people of the same, making choice of the valiauntest and
gallantest personages of the youth of Germany, for the guarde of his person.
The provinces adjoining unto Danubie being set in order, he passed into
Thracia, and from thence into the land of Macedonia: with determination to
visit the native country of Alexander the great. All things wherein the
acts of Alexander were graven or painted, he repaired, renewed, and made
better: and many other things he did both add and inuente, in such wise,
that in all the kingdom of Macedonie there was neither city or temple, where
he did not erecte some edifice, or place some picture or counterfeite.

Bassianus performed many notable things in Macedonia right worthy praise,
and some other things no less to be derided: because in many places he
caused a body with two heads to be painted and also graven, whereof one he
entitled unto him self, and the other unto Alexander. The Macedonians did not
a little scorn this act, that Bassianus would compare with the great
Alexander: for they esteemed their king in such possession and estate, that
they say and affirm, neither any in this life to be equal unto him: either
in the other world surmou^ted of none of the Gods. Bassianus grew so proud,
when he saw him self so generally praised for his worthy acts done in
Macedonia, that he commanded al his househoulde, not to call him Bassianus,
but Alexander: and commanded all the captains of his army, to intitule the^
selves with the names of Alexanders ancient captains: whereof the Romans
received no small grief, and all the aunciente servant of his father were not
a little disgraced: for it seemed unto them, yt since he did not trust them
with the guard of his person, he would not love them, either deal with them
according unto his accustomed manner. He would often put off all his Roman
apparel, and cladde him self after ye Flemmish fashion: and further, the
more aptly to resemble them, he would wear counterfeite red hair: and how
much the more he used these things, so much the greater was the grief unto
the Romans. Also he observed a custom, both in eating and drinking, in his
apparel and service, as in all other travels which all ways follow the
wars, but as a common soldier. It happened many times, that if a trench
were to be made, he first would dig, carry forth earth, march on foot,
grind bread corn for his own diet, and bake it under the ashes.

He delighted in base lodging, to resemble the common soldiour, and would not
drink in gold or silver, but in wooden tankards: finally, he did not only
abhor all things that seemed superfluous: but also many times, that which
was right necessary.

He commanded also, that none should attend him, except he were commanded,
or call him Emperor, but companion: all which he did to obtain their love,
and to seem admirable in his travels. He commanded his army to be divided
into three parts, and the one to be called Macedonike, the other Laconike, and
the third Spartanike, in memory of three famous provinces of Grecia, which
followed the great Alexander in all his wars, and the people which he esteemed
most valiant and warlike.

From Macedonie he took his way unto Pergamus, a famous city in Asia, to
view ye temple of Esculapius: the father and founder of physic, in which
temple he slept many nights: and as he afterward said, received there many
aunswers of ye God Esculapius, and many counsels, as well for conservation of
his health, as the gouernemente of his commonwealth. From Pergamus, Bassianus
departed to the city Ilion, that in times paste had been head of the kingdom
of Troy, where great wars were long continued betwixt the Greeks and the
Troyans, which he found not only destroyed, but also plowed and sown.
Bassianus did there greatly desire to bury some person, after the fashion as
in times past they had buried Patroclus: and for accomplishment of his desire,
he commanded poison to be given unto Festus his private and favored servant:
whom, after he was dead, he buried there according to the fashion which the
Troyans used with Patroclus: which fact of his some excuse, affirming that
Festus died without Bassianus his commandment. Before yt Bassianus entered
high Almaine, he would visit Gallia Transalpina, and after a few days of his
entrance therein, commanded ye Proconsul of Narbona to be slain: of which
deed, as also of others which he executed he fell into ye hatred of yt common
people, and deserved ye name of a tyrant. In his nauigatio^ from Germany into
Asia, he found him self in so great danger, yt ye ship it self wherein he
sailed did rent and sink, and he escaped in a little bark. He was strike^ with
so great fear on sea, that after he had escaped that danger, he would
oftentimes say: I know not what man having bread to eat, and garments to
wear and cover him self on land, would (to become an Emperor) go to Sea.

CHAP. IX. Of an horrible cruelty that Bassianus committed in Alexandria.
AFter that Bassianus had seen the great Ilion, and the most part of Asia
and Bithynia, he came unto the city of Antioche, where he was received with great
ceremony: and all the time that he remained there, no less feasted. From
Antioche he took his way into Alexandrie, with great desire to see that
famous city, which the great Alexander had builte: whereof the citizens
being advertised, they made most solemn and costly preparation, wherewith to
receive him, which never had been done to any prince, either Greek or
Roman: chiefly moved there unto, because it was said, that he was a friend
unto Alexander. Many leagues before Bassianus came unto the city, they
repaired the bridges, amended the high ways, furnished all places with
victuales, made many summer houses with boughs, and scattered all the ways
with flowers: and further, all his train did take all things at their own
pleasure, without paymente of any money. But when he arrived in the city,
generally the Alexandrines came forth to receive him, in most gorgeous
apparel, accompanied with instruments and many kinds of music. Presently at
his entry into Alexandrie, he went on foot unto the temples: where he offered
very great sacrifices, and burned therein great quantities of incense,
myrrh, aloes, and such other fumes.

This being done, he went to visit the sepulcher of the great Alexander,
where he used an imperial magnificence, that is to weete, he put off a most
rich robe wherewith he was clad, he took from his cappe a brooch of great
price, a curious collar from his neck, from his breast a stone of value
inestimable, and from his fingers all his rings: and kneeling upon ye ground
did offer the same upon the sepulcher of the great Alexander. Incredible was
the joy that the Alexandrines conceived, to behold a living prince of Rome, to
have a Greek prince which was dead in so great veneration: in respect
whereof, they loved him with all their hearts, and served him with all their
power.

All which things Bassianus performed, not of intent to honor Alexander, or
to pleasure the Alexandrines: but with more certintie to assure him self of
them all, and afterward jointly to kill them all. Many days had past,
since Bassianus had borne great hatred unto the Alexandrines and the occasion
of his unkindness was, because it was said, that they scorned him with words,
and also derided him in enterludes: saying, it was a scoffing matter for him to
make comparison with Alexander, to name himself Achilles, and to imitate
Hercules. Also Bassianus understood how they had much despised him, for ye
death of his brother Geta, and laid their toungs upon his own mother, notinge
her unchastity: which injuries he wanted not skill to dissemble many days,
and after to revenge the same at an instant.

The case was thus: the feasts being finished, he commanded proclamation to be
made, that all the lusty young men, either strangers, or natives of the
country, should muster in a field, to the end he would see, view, and also
arm them after ye old manner: saying, that from thence forth his will was,
that al his men of war should fight, not after the order of the Romans, but
according to the fashion of the Greeks.

Great glory, and also vain glory possessed the Alexandrines, when they
heard these proclamations: and he that might soonest, came first into the
field: conceiving, that such as were the words of the crier, such should be
the works of the Emperor. All the youth of Alexandria remaining in the
field, Bassianus with all his army in armor issued forth to behold them,
and he commanded to bring them selves into a square, to ye end, that one by
one, should pass before him, of whom he would take his choice and presently
after give them armor. Now when the miserable Alexandrines stood all as
sheep together unarmed, Bassianus gave a sign unto his soldiers, to give the
charge as upon enemies: who in their slaughter made so great haste, that within
an hour, those fields were all covered, not with flowers, but with dead
bodies.

Great was the hurt that Bassianus committed that day upon the Alexandrines:
for that he left the widows without sons, graundfathers without nephues,
uncles without cousines, brethren without brethren, and neighbors without
friends: in such wise, that none remained that was not slain, or else
tormented with the death of others. The place where Bassianus committed this
great treason, and so inhumaine cruelty, was in a broad plain field near
unto the great river Nilus: and the number was so great of them which were
slain, that the blood by streams ran through those fields, and stained
and died that river Nilus: in such extreme manner, that that so stately a river
seemed not to run with water, but with blood. The Alexandrines may not be
excused of their fault, in speaking evil of Bassianus, defameing his mother,
and representing his vile factes in enterludes. Admitting that of evil we can
speak but evil, yet princes enter not into this reckoning, whose works we
have license to judge only in our hearts, but not with the tongue to blaspheme
and despise them.

And albeit the offense of the Alexandrines was very great, yea, though it had
been much greater, yet without comparison, much more vehement was the
cruelty that Bassianus did execute on them: which if he had been, as he ought
to have been, the contrary he would have performed: for In the houses of
heroycall and excellent princes, chastisement is given by ounces, and clemency
without measure.

CHAP. X. Of a letter which Bassianus did write unto the king of Parthians to
have his daughter in marriage.
IT seemed unto Bassianus, that to rob temples, to sack towns, to subvert
walls, and to kill the whole neighborhood of Alexandrie, was but a small
matter, in respect of his vile and cruel conditions wherewith he was inclined:
and to this end he determined to attempt so rare and odious a treason, yt all
men which should hear or read thereof, might count his cruelty past but a
trifle. Even as amongst such as be virtuous, one virtue awaketh another virtue:
so amongst the wicked, one evil or mischief draws with it another
mischief: in such wise, that there are some persons so vowed unto evil and
mischief, that without delaie fall into the profunditie of all manner of vice
and mischief. The case was thus, that Bassianus seeing himself in the East
parts, had a desire to make a conquest of the Parthians: and for that he
durst not make them war openly, he remembered to devise a treason for them in
secreate. So much more vile was the fact, as small was ye occasion which moved
him to commit the same: for at that present the Parthians with the Romans, and
the Romans with the Parthians, were in great friendship, and confederacy.

Without advice of parents, friends, or counselers, Bassianus sent a great
Embassage unto Arthabanus king of Parthia, sending also many and rich iuels,
and writing with his own hand a letter after this manner.

Bassianus Antoninus, only Emperor of the Romans, to Arthabanus the great
king of Parthians, health, and good fortune.
The famous ancient Romans, and many of the principal of my predecessors,
came from the West into Asia, only to make war upon this thy kingdom: but
I come not to make thee war, but to seek peace, and to this peace, both thou
and I have to search a mean, that it may be perpetual: for otherwise, a just
war were more safe for princes, then a feigned peace. As we read in books,
and hear of our forefathers, there is not a more brief and sound way, for
great enemies to grow to be faithful friends, then by recovering new
aliance by the way of marriage: for in true and faithful marriages, as the
married be joined in bodies: so be they lincked and confederate in hearts and
minds. Although some Princes have married with the daughters of Consuls and
Senators, and admitting they have so done, I will not so do: for that I was
borne a prince, and am a prince, and will dye a prince: wherefore, I will not
marry but with the daughter of a Prince. When congruently or aptly it may be
done, it agrees not with the majesty of the Empire, that the Prince this day
should hold him for his father in law, whom he held yesterday for his
vassal. Although the wives of Princes use not to command and govern, yet we
must grant, that when Princesses be the daughters of high Princes, and
desscended of royal blood, the people and subjects are more honored,
satisfied, and pleased: and such bring forth children more noble and generous.
The Empire of the Romans, and the Empire of the Parthians, are two the most
renoumed Princes throughout the whole world: for, notwithstanding the one at
times has subdued the other: yet never entirely had the one lordship of the
other. I am prince of the Romans, and thou art Prince of the Parthians: if
thou will marry thy daughter with me, with great good will I would match
with her: and after this manner, of two divided Empires we shall make one in
concord. These two Empires being joined, may there be any kingdom that will
disobey them? or any king that shall dare to say against them? I demand not
thy daughter for her beauty, for there are others much fairer in mine Empire:
neither do I request her for thy richesse, for I have sufficient, neither do
I crave her, to recover more vassals: for I have kingdoms enough subject unto
me. But I do it, because of ancient enemies, we might frame our selves
immortal friends: in such wise, that as hitherto we have had you in contempt,
as barbarians, from henceforth we shall behave our selves as brethren.

Think not that I write thus unto thee, by thy favor to be revenged of mine
enemies: or, for that my kingdoms have rebelled against me (as thou shalt
understand by these mine Ambassadors) which my father left unto me so
plain, and their Princes so dedicated to obedience, that they do not only
accomplish what I command them, but also request me to inioyne them more.

If in this which I write to thee, thou think there be deceipte, thou
ought also to conceive, that I shall be most deceived: partly, for that
being (as I am) a Roman Prince, and partly, because I am the person which
sueth: for that in this marriage thou aduenturest not more then thy daughter:
but I commit unto Fortune, mine honor, goods, and person. Herein I will say
no more, but I pray thee to receive these iewelles which I send thee in good
part: and to that which mine Ambassadors shall say, give credit.

The king of the Parthians, after he had read this letter, and heard the
Ambassadors what they had to say in the behalf of Bassianus, did answer him
after this manner.

CHAP. XI. Of another solemn letter, wherein the king of the Parthians
answered Bassianus.
Arthabanus, king of the ancient kingdom of the Parthians, to Antoninus
Bassianus, the only Roman Emperor, health, and prosperity.
Before all things, I give thanks unto the immortal Gods, because they have
put into thy heart, that which thou have written: and that which thou with thy
Ambassadors have sent to say unto us. By that which I have read in thy
letters, and heard of thy Ambassadors, I know that thou beleeuest in the
Gods, and have not taken counsel of men: for men always give counsel unto
Princes to make war: but the Gods always persuade them to keep peace. Thou
say that the Roman Princes, thy predecessors, always passed into Asia,
with a mind determined to make war with the Parthians* but jointly herewith,
I would thou should consider, that as the war which ye took in hand
against us was unjust, so fortune was unto them, alwayos unfortunate: for it is
not the will of the Gods, that by an unjust war, an entire victory should be
obtained. Ye Romans took the enterprise to be Lords of the whole world: and
to prosecute the same, ye rigged forth many nauies and fleetes, ye joined
great armies, conquered strange provinces, destroyed many kingdoms, killed
much people, robbed infinite treasures, and adventured your selves into great
and immeasurable dangers: and in the end, that which they had obtained, they
lost, yea, the conquerours also lost them selves: because, whatsoever is gotten
to the prejudice of another man, is lost to the great hurt and offense of him
that obtained the same. That which thou promisest in thy letter, and in thy
name thy Ambassadors offer me, I am not only bound to accept, but also
deserved great displeasure, if I durst deny the same: because it is a thing
most just, that the Gods make war upon yt prince, which refuses the
request of men in peace. Thou say that the chiefest mean to confirm peace
is, for princes to practice marriage betwixt themselves. I deny not, but that
in some persons it is most true, but it is no general rule for all men: for
we daily see betwixt most near kindred and alies, most great quarelles and
scandals to arise. My great graundfather was father in law unto king
Arsacidas, and afterward the one slew the other in ye field: and ye very
same we hear reported to have chanced amongst you: Pompey married with the
daughter of Julius, and afterward Julius overcame and destroyed Pompey his
son in law: in such wise, that the marriages which they made to conserve
peace, did awake and inflame them to more cruel war. The Prince that has
fear of the Gods, and is naturally given to peace, may not find a better
mean to obtain the same, the^ to be quiet in his own realm: for, speakinge
the very truth, the prince that is satisfied with his own proper estate,
needs not to seek affinity in strange kingdoms. Unto my father were
offered great, noble, and mighty marriages from strange kingdoms: whereunto
he would never consent, either hardely endure to hear thereof: and would
often say unto me, that many kings and kingdoms he had seen lost by marriage
in strange countries, and therefore would not marry me, but within his own
kingdom: and said, at the hour of his death, that if I would live many
years in peace, I should not abandon my children to strange marriages.

I had three sons, which now be all dead, and there remains unto me but
only one daughter, in whom remains all my hope: and if the Gods would, and
my destinies permit, I would give her an husband within mine own natural
country, whom I might esteem as my son, and he me as his father: for my
intent, is, not to give her an husband that has much goods, but in his person
great worthiness.

To that which thou say of the kingdoms of Parthians, and the Empire of
Romans, would do very well to be joined in one: thou have great reason in that
which you say, if it might be done with as great facility, as it is spoken:
but how is it possible they may be made one, being (as they are) so strange in
nation? so distant in situation? so distinct in language? so diverse in laws?
and above all the rest, so contrary in conditions? Since betwixt you and us,
there are so many lands, countries, nations, hills, and seas: how is it
possible, the bodies being so distante, that the hearts may be united? We are
much better known unto the Godds, then we know our selves: and since they
have created us, and separated us, the one from the other: how is it possible
for us to live, and enjoy together? for by great diligence that men may use,
either power that princes may practice, it is impossible for them to scatter
that, which the Godds do gather together: or to join that which they do
separate.

If thou will have men for thy wars, I will send them! If thou will have
money to enrich thy treasure, I will furnishe thee! If you wilt enter peace with
me, I will grant it! If thou will that we be brothers in arms, by oath I
will confirm it! Finally, I except nothing betwixt thee and me, but that
thou do not crave my daughter to wife: I am determined, and will not, for giving
my daughter a good marriage, leave my country tributarie unto strange people.
The precious iuells and great riches which thou sentest me, I have received
with great good will, and I send thee others, although not such, either so
rich: nevertheless thou may always conceive by them, that the kings of
the Parthians, have great treasures in their keeping, and no less nobleness
of mind to spend them. No more, but the Gods be thy defense, and that thou
of me, and I of thee may see good fortune.

CHAP. XII. How Bassianus committed a great treason against the Parthians.
THis letter being received by Bassianus, he made semblance of great sorrow,
that the king of Parthians would not give him his daughter to wife: howbeit,
he ceased not therefore eftsoon to write, and send more presents, to bring
to pass by importunities, that which of will he might not frame. Arthabanus
considering the importunities of Bassianus in writing, and his largess in
sending more rich iuells, not doubting yt any guile might be concealed in
that marriage, did yealde him self unto the iudgmente of his friends: who
counseled him, that he should not in any wise, but accept the Emperor of
Romans for his son in law: for it might be, that he should recover him
for an enemy, that would not accept him for a son. The fame being spread
throughout all Asia, that the kings daughter should marry with the Emperor
of Rome, Bassianus advised to repair and prepare with all speed: so that in
all cities of the Parthians where he passed, they did not only not resist him,
but with great joy did receive and feast him: for they held it for great
vain glory, to see their princess demanded for wife by the great Emperor
of Rome. In all places where Bassianus passed, he offered rich sacrifices in
their temples, and gave great rewards unto such as did attend and receive
him: all which he dissembled, to escape suspicion of the exceeding malice,
which he determined to execute. Bassianus being arrived at the great city
Parthinia, where most times the great king of Parthians was residente:
Arthabanus issued forth to receive his son Bassianus, who most truly ran
forth, as comfortable unto peace, as Bassianus ready and determined for the
wars. There issued forth with king Arthabanus, not only the noble and
valiant personages of his house and court, but also all the men of power and
wealth of his kingdom, which against that day were called and did attend: in
such wise, yt by his train ye king discovered his valor, as also the
nobleness of his people. Now when the Parthians began to join with the
Romans, and of both parts great courtesies offered, Bassianus gave a sign
unto his armed knights, to give a charge upon the Parthians, upon whom they
executed as great a slaughter, as Hanibal at Canasse, and Scipio at Carthage.
The king Arthabanus as he came in the troop of all his royalty, took his
servant horse, and gave him self to flight: and then as it was night, and
his horse very swift, he had leisure to escape with his life: although not
able to defend his country.

This being done, he sacked the royal palace, and all the city, and after
commanded fire to be given to all parts thereof, which he performed in all
cities where he passed, all the time that he remained in Parthia: and freely
gave license unto his army, to take what they might, and to kill whom they
would. This was ye manner yt Bassianus used, to subdue the Parthians: which
conquest with more reason may be termed ye invention of a traitor, then the
conquest of an Emperor: for the innocente Parthians were rather sold, then
overcome. At the present when these things passed, Bassianus did write unto
the Senate: aduertisinge them that he had subdued all provinces and kingdoms
of the East unto the Roman Empire: some by force, and others by good will:
and that allthough the Roman princes, his predecessors, did exceed him in
years and riches: yet not to be comparable unto him in victories. The Senate
being ignorante of the great treason of Bassianus practiced against the
Parthians (because they received his letters, before any other messenger had
made report thereof) were very joyful, and made great feasts in Rome,
placeing his counterfeit upon all the gates of the city: but after they
understood the truth of the treason committed, they were so much grieved
with that so vile a deed, that if the Parthians did suffer, the Romans did
bewail.

CHAP. XIIII. How Bassianus was slain by the commandment of his private
captain Macrinus.
THe Emperor Bassianus being departed from the territories of Parthia, came
unto the province of Mesopotamia, which was in the month of October: and
beeinge full of woods wherein were bred many wild beasts, he would remain
in the thickest thereof: for that he was more given to chase in mountains,
then to hawke in fields.

The captains of Bassianus army were two Romans, named Audentius, and
Macrinus. Audentius was a rustical person, as concerning matters of ye common
wealth: but very expert and valiant in warrelike affairs. Macrinus
contrariwise, in governing the common wealth, was wise and skillful: but in
martial affairs, somewhat negligent, and not over fortunate. Bassianus did
like very well of Audentius, and no less evil of Macrinus, and did not only
wish, but also said of him much evil: murmuring that he was negligent, a
coward, vicious, an epicure, a glutton that did eat much, and drink not a
little: and that at his coming to Rome, he would remove him from all charge in
matters of war. Macrinus was a man very well learned, and in his speech no
less reformed: and in all things that they said unto him, touching that which
Bassianus should speak of him, he answered: that whatsoever his good lord had
said of him, was spoken of great affection, not to the end to defame him as an
enemy, but to correct him as a son. Although Macrinus used this speech
openly, yet he had other matter in his heart secretly, as afterward in the
success of affairs it manifestly appeared: for, at such time as Bassianus
would have removed Macrinus from his honor and estate, Macrinus dispatched him
of his life.

The case was thus, that Bassianus being inclined of his own proper nature, to
know secrets, not only of men, but also of Gods, and devils, always fearing
himself, that by practice of some treason, they would take away his life, he
was never void of the conversation of Sorcerers, sothsayers, and inchanters, to
advertise him how long he should live, and what death he should die. Not
satisfied with such Magicians, sothsayers, sorcerers, and inchaunters, as did
attend on his person in the wars, he would send unto the Prefect of Rome
named Maternianus, to whom Bassianus committed the credit of his secrets:
writing a letter unto him with his own proper hand, commanding him, with
great diligence and secrecy, to assemble Magicians, Sorcerers, Sothsayers,
Inchaunters, and Astrologians, to know of them, not only how long he should
live, and how he should die: but also to demand of them, if there were any
person within the Empire, that desired or procured to be Emperor. Maternianus
performed all that, which his Lord Bassianus had written unto him: whether it
were any magician or sothsayer that said it, either any enemy of Macrinus
finding opportunity for his purpose: Maternianus did write and advertise
Bassianus, that he had assembled all the sorcerers, inchanters, diuiners,
magicians, sothesayers, astrologians and augurs: and that the resolution of
their counsel was, that if he would enjoy ye Empire, it were convenient that
Macrinus were slain. At the instant when the post returned with his letters from
Rome, Bassianus was placed in his coche, to go forth on hunting: and not
remembering what he had written, either presuming what might be written, said
unto Macrinus, that he should open and read them all: and if that he found
therein matter of great importance, to consult therein: and al other small
matters, that he himself should provide answer, and dispatch. Macrinus
reading these letters, as well such as were written unto Bassianus, as unto
himself, came also to read the letter of Maternianus, wherein he advertised
Bassianus of the answer which the magicians had given him, which is to say,
that presently it were convenient that Macrinus should be put to death: whereof
he was not a little abashed, holding it for great good hap, that this secret
had chanced into his only hands, before any other person: for, at the
instant that Bassianus might have read this letter, he would have commanded
Macrinus his head to flee from his shoulders. Macrinus doubting, that
Maternianus might return to write of the former matter unto Bassianus, and
that, were it but for co^cealing that letter, he would shorten him by the
shoulders, advised to practice the death of Bassianus, before he should
experiment the same on him. Amongst them that guarded the person of Bassianus,
there was one Martianus, who accordingly had a brother also of his guard (him
for a small displeasure Bassianus commanded to be slain) and with Martianus
used words of great despite: in such manner, that Martianus with those words
remained disgraced, and of his brothers death grieved and afflicted. After
Macrinus understood this passion to reign in Martianus against Bassianus, he
first entered with him in familiarity, and gave him silver and gold, received
him into his friendship, and every day lead him into remembrance of the unjust
death of his brother: to the end he should not grow cold, but hot in hatred
against Bassianus. Now when Macrinus felt, that by his benefits he had
recovered Martianus for his faithful friend, and brought him into great
disdain and mortal hatred of Bassianus, he grew to composition to deprive him
of his life, for which deed, his reward should be great: whereof Martianus did
take great delighte, and bound himself to perform the same: partly to revenge
the death of his brother, as also to condescend unto the request of his friend
Macrinus. Bassianus being resident in Careuca a city of Mesopotamia, came
forth to visit a temple of the Goddess Luna, two miles distant from the
city: and being constrained upon the way, to unburden his belly, he entered
the thickest of the covert, accompanied but with one servant: and Martianus
that attended but opportunity to accomplish his promise, entered upon
Bassianus being withdrawn into the thickest of the shrubs, prosecuting his
necessity al alone, Martianus struck him with a lance down flat upon the
ground: which wound was so mortal, that without more words, or strength to
move, where the lance went in, the life came out. After that Martianus had
slain Bassianus, he took his horse and fled: but as the imperial guard was at
hand, within a leage he was overtaken, and slain with lances: in such wise,
that after he had taken reuengme^t of his enemy, he enjoyed his life but one
hour. This was the end of the unhappy Emperor Bassianus, whose life did
merit a slanderous death: for that it was not unreasonable, that he which had
killed so many friends, by treason should be slain with enemies.

CHAP. XIIII. How Macrinus excusing himself of the death of Bassianus, did
advance himself with the Empire.
ON the self same day that Antoninus Bassianus was borne, which was the eight
of April, he was slain, xliiij. years of his age being accomplished, and vj,
years of his Empire and reign expired. The first man that came unto him after
he was slain, was Macrinus, who bewailed his death with so great
dissimutation, as if he had not been the man that procured so vile a deed.
Macrinus was right fortunate that Martianus was slain when he was taken: for
all men thought and also said, that Martianus had slain his Lord Bassianus,
not by inducemente of any person, but to revenge his brothers death. Many
others were of this conspiracy besides Macrinus, that ordained it, and
Martianus that sought ye same: yt is to say Nemesianus and his brother
Apolinarius, Renonuus and Agrippa, al which had sworn his death: some for
injuries which they had received, and others for service unrecompensed.
Presently upon Bassianus his death, Macrinus commanded his body to be burnt,
and his ashes to be placed in a coffin of gold: and so with great guard, and no
less accompanied, he sent the same unto Iulia his mother in law, being then
at Antioch: who at the instante when she understood Bassianus to be dead,
drank a little poison, wherewith she finished her life. The case standing in
this estate, news arrived at the Roman camp, that Arthabanus king of
Parthians pursued Antoninus Bassianus, to execute vengeance for the injury
which he had received: and to the same end, the king and his knights, before
they came to the field, made a vow unto their Gods, never more to return with
life, before they had slain the Emperor Bassianus. The Romans beheld
themselves in great confusion, on the one part, findeing themselves in so
strange a Country without hope of succor, and also for the death of their
prince and their enemy so near at hand: to repair and remedy which
mischief, with great diligence they elected a prince named Audentius, a man of
honest life, and of great experience in the wars: which he refused, alleging
for himself, age and sickness: and that of his election he might not gather
but travel and offense unto the common wealth. Two days was the army without
an Emperor, and in the end upon Audentius his refusal, they elected Macrinus
for Emperor, which election did rather proceed of necessity, then of will:
because their Parthian enemies were very near, and the worthy persons of the
Empire very far. Above we made mention of Iulia, the mother in law unto
Bassianus: this Lady being a widow, and resident in the Court, in the summer
time Bassianus beheld her at a feast, as she was, half naked, and inflamed
with her love said unto her these words. If it were possible to renounce this
name mother, which I owe thee: from henceforth I would call thee wife. Iulia
answered: If thou will, thou may, because princes have authority to make
laws, but are not bound to observe them. And as in Bassianus love did abound;
so finding in Iulia a ready mind, presently he married with her: in such
wise, that unto patricide he added incest: that is to say, that having slain
his brother Geta, also he married his fathers wife.

Bassianus naturally was evil inclined: and if his father were cruel, he was
most cruel: in eating disordinate, in drincking intemperate: for many times in
his excess of drink, he would talk at large. From his infancy he was hated
of all persons, no less of his own, then of strangers, the Pretorian knights
only excepted: which was not for the benefits, that of him they had received:
but for the liberty which he gave them to robb and steal. Some notable
buildinges he erected in Rome, especially certain stately bathes, which he
named after his own name, in cost and curiousnes exceeding all works and
buildinges in Rome. He made also a gate in Rome, and called it Seueriana, in
the reverence of the name of his father Seuerus: wherein he caused to be graven
all the victories and triumphs that his father had obtained, either after or
before he was Emperor. He was the first that brought unto Rome the image of
the Goddess Isis: unto whom he edified a sumptuous temple, and therein did
constitute priests. He left no child either legitimate or not legitimate, but
Heliogabalus, whom he had by a niece of his mother Iulia, of whom we will
speak in the history following.

The life of the Emperor Heliogabalus, compiled by sir Anthony of Gueuara,
Bishop of Mondonnedo, preacher, chronicler, and counselor unto the Emperor
Charles the fifte.
CHAP. I. Of the lineage and nouriture of the Emperor Heliogabalus.
THE second wife of Seuerus was named Iulia, which was mother unto Geta, and
mother in law unto Bassianus: this Iulia, when she was married unto Seuerus,
brought unto Court with her an elder sister, named Mesia, a woman of proportion
sufficient fair and comely, but of condition very wily. This Mesia had with
her two daughters, whereof the elder was named Semiamira, and the younger Manea:
both borne in the Emperor Seuerus his Court, and bred and nourished a long
time after in the house of the Emperor Bassianus. The writers of those times
do not name, who was the husband of Mesia, and the father of Semiamira, and of
Manea: and therefore doubted to be conceived in adultery, or that the father
was of lineage obscure.

Mesia remaining in the Court of Seuerus with her two daughters, being young
and very fair, Bassianus the son of Seuerus had access unto Semiamira, and
begat of her a son named Antoninus Caracalla: and for the love of Iulia his
aunt, and also to the end the damsel should not be despised in the sight of
Seuerus, the graundmother used so great skill in this business, that no person
of the Court might perceive the daughter to be with child, or brought a bed:
or whether ye child was put forth to be noursed. The ancient lineage of this
woman Mesia, was of Phoenicia, and borne she was in a city called Mesania,
near unto which place (in times past) a battle had been fought, between ye
Rhodians and the Phoenicians. Antoninus Caracalla on the fathers side, was
son unto the Emperor Bassianus, and on the mothers side son of Semiamira:
and conceived in adultery. When ye child was five years of age, he was
brought unto the Court, and there bred and nourished with the mother and
graundmother: but all the days that Bassianus lived; they never durst say that
it was his son: because Iulia his aunt and mother in law to Bassianus, had
married with the self same Bassianus: and if she had known the child to be
such, she would have slain it, banished her Niece, and sent away her sister.
This woman Mesia was so wise, and provident, that in the reign of Seuerus, at
Court all men did serve her, and after in the days of Bassianus she
commanded and governed all things at her own pleasure: and this was in such
extreme wise, yt with her he did take counsel for the affairs of the common
wealth, and she did always accompany him, whither soever he went out of
Rome, although it were unto the wars. This Mesia was frank of speech, and of
no great reformation of life, howbeit very skilful in all things which she
adventured to take in hand: for, notwtstanding al men had of her great
suspicio^, yet they were few yt atteyned unto her secret drifts. Although on
the one part, she was accused to be lewd and loase of life, yet on the other
she was praised, because she was very wise in all things wherein she gave
counsel: which most clearly appeared, for that in the 16. years in which she
remained in the Court and manours of those princes (who by her judgment and
opinion were governed) she was never seen to twite or reprove any person with
her tongue: or give counsel in any thing that offended the common wealth. Being
(as she was) sister unto Iulia the Empress, and so accepted with those
princes, this Mesia was marvelous rich: and the cause thereof was, that all
good things which were vacant in the Empire she craved, and whatsoever was
given her she received. The second daughter of this Mesia, named Manea, married
with a Co^sul named Verius, and brought him forth a son, then named Alexius,
but afterward Alexander the Emperor: in such wise, that this Mesia had one
sister, an Empress: and saw her two nephues Emperors. Mesia doubting that
some day it might come to the notice of Iulia her sister, that Antoninus
Caracalla was the son of her husband Bassianus, advised to send both her
nephues unto her own proper country of Phoenicia, there to hold them more
safe, and better taught. In the province of Phoenicia was a most sumptuous
temple, dedicated unto the God Heliogabalus, the woorkemanship whereof was
wrought all of sawen stone, as if it had been timber, in the joining whereof
their appeared no seame, but all me^ judged (that knew not that secret) that
the whole temple had been made of one stone. There was not in that temple, as
was in other temples, which is to wit, any image or simulachre of any God: but
that which it contained, was a black shining stone, great and large beneath,
and upwards more narrow, wherein was graven the Sun and the Moon, right
curiously and subtily, which in view and beholding did dazill the eyes of men.
The people of Phoenicia did report, that the temple was made by man's hand, but
the stone was sent by the Gods from heaven: for which cause they offered upon
the same, silver, gold, jewels, and other great riches: and it was visited, not
only by the natives of Phoenicia, but also from many parts of Asia.

In that temple, there were not only priests, but also Philosophers: to the
end that some should sacrifice, and others teach and refourme manners: because
that temple was endued with so great riches, that there was sufficient both for
the one and the other. Heliogabalus being of ye age of xiiii. years, and his
cousin Alexius of the age of twelve years, their graundmother Mesia placed
them in that temple, to enure them to offer sacrifices, and to learn
Philosophy. These two brethren went apparailed after the manner of two
Priests, which is to weete, in shirtes of Linsey woolsey, their garments of
gold and cotton, their sleeves buttoned with Corrall, their robes trailing,
their heads covered with silk calls, about their necks collars of gold,
their feet bare upon the instep, leaden ringes upon their little fingers,
and ringes of gold upon their thumbes: but above all the rest, they might not
eat but in their houses: either sleep but in their temples. And because
Antoninus was Priest, and brought up in the temple of the God Heliogabalus,
that is to say, a Priest of the Sun, he was afterward named Antoninus
Heliogabalus: and also many days after that he was exalted unto the height of
the Empire, he kept the garments, and received the stipend of his ancient
priesthood. Heliogabalus was of mean stature, read haired, white faced, small
mouthed, short legged, and largely, bearded: and as at that time he was young
and fair, and his sacerdotall vestmentes did so adourne him: although the
secret of his parentage was unknown, yet all men presupposed that he was of
noble blood.

CHAP. II. How captain Macrinus did exalt him self with the Empire, after
the death of Bassianus.
AFter that Martianus had slain Bassianus his Lord, through the counsel of
Macrinus, presently he exalted him self, or (to say better) did tyrannize the
Empire: nevertheless, the armies elected him, and the Romans allowed him: not
because they were pleased with Macrinus, but for joy to see them selves free
and delivered of Bassianus.

So general was the joy amongst the Roman people, to see Bassianus dead,
that they cared not to consider of Macrinus that should succeed, whether he
were good or bad: because, hearts that be tormented, and men that be
despighted, when they hap to oppress their enemies, consider not so much of
their profit, as they respect their reuengement. Ten days after Macrinus
saw him self Emperor, Arthabanus king of the Parthians gave him battle, to
revenge the injury which Bassianus had done unto him: this battle betwixt
both parts was so contended and so bloody, that the victory on that day
remained on neither side: yet least was the loss unto the Romans. Arthabanus
being advertised of the death of his enemy Bassianus, and his choler also
somewhat alaide, made peace with the Romans, and with his armies retired into
his country. After Macrinus beheld him self elected, and confirmed Emperor,
and king Arthabanus returned unto his kingdom, and that in all Asia, not so
much as a lance in the rest against him, he departed to the city of Antioche:
not of any intent to refourme his army, but of purpose totally to vow him
self unto vice and filthiness.

The case was thus, that being settled in Antioche, he gave heed unto no other
matter, but to the use of the Bathe, trimming his head, annoynting his bearde,
going on hunting, prosecuting gluttony and excess, giving him self unto
women: and that which was woorst, he fled from affairs, and followed vices.

When at any time Macrinus did issue forth, to view his men of war, he
walked not with a lance, but with a Caane in his hand, which they held for no
small injury: for that amongst them it was a law, that none might pass
through their bands except he were armed, with some armor.

It was a law much used and observed amongst the Romans, that their Princes
did never enter armed into the Senate, either unarmed did view their Camps
and armies: since in the one they did manage matters of peace, and in the other
nothing but wars. Macrinus heard by report, that the good Marcus Aurelius
spoke sildome, and with low voice: and so he used for resemblance to answer
suitors, with few words, and very base: in such wise, that in his speech he
did imitate Marcus Aurelius, and in his life did resemble Nero. With none of
the Antiochians, either with any person of all Asia, did he consent to have
conference, or to be served at his table, either enter into his chamber, or
sleep in his house: but after the manner of a tyrant, with his own he stood
upon his guarde, and with strangers not a little suspicious.

Ancient persons, his old horsemen, and the Capteines of his armies, he
would not command to stand up, although they had long continued upon their
knees: either to put on their cappes, when they stood bareheaded: wherein, the
Roman Princes always used great measure and consideration: for that courtesy
costeth little, and profits much.

The money which Macrinus received of his rents, or were presented him from the
cities, he consumed them all in vices: and on the other part, he would
neither pay what he owed, or succor his men of war: in such wise, that the
people stood in despair, and the armies (for want of pay) no less
despighted.

The Romans were afflicted with no small grief, to behold the tyrant
Macrinus in all his deeds and attempts, and to see how the Asians despised
him: for they frankely said, that he did not inherit, but they did elect him
Emperor: and their fact to be imputed with greater indignity, that had chosen
a person of so great unworthiness. In his apparel, in his diet, and in all
his manners and fashions, Macrinus would needs imitate, not the Romans, but
the Asians: which the Romans received with great grief, and the Asians with
no less ignominy: for that so evil a person would needs resemble the^. For
so much as there were no wars in Asia, or in all the East, either by Sea or
land, the Roman armies would have returned to Rome, but Macrinus would not
consent: doubting (as they were discontented) that they should join with the
Senate, and determine to depose him from the Empire. Macrinus was much blamed,
for that he stayed to go to Rome: and much more, for want of pay unto his men
of war: for that many times, more hurt redoundeth to Princes by holding their
armies discontented, then to encounter their armed enemies. In very short space
Macrinus had recovered mortal hatred of his armies: of the one part, to be so
absolute a tyrant, and on the other part, to be in vice so dissolute, and
also so much puffed up with pride: for that he seemed to extol himself by
commanding, and loathed and despighted with suites of his subjects. Macrinus
was a man of a low stature, quarellous, ambitious, and also covetous: but
jointly herewith, he was valiant in the field, and yet would seek great
means to live in peace: and notwithstanding all these conditions, both good
and evil, they would never have taken away his life and Empire, if he had not
been nummed with the vices of Asia.

CHAP. III. How the great matrone Mesia bought the Empire for her nephue
Heliogabalus.
IN the time that Macrinus was resident in Antioche, the Roman hosts, were in
defense of the province of Phoenicia: because in that year, that country did
abound in grain for bread, and the people also were not fatigate or spent with
wars. We have said, how in that country, there was a temple dedicated unto
the God Heliogabalus: which in buildings was very magnificent, and of priests
much populated. Many Roman captains, went many times to visit that temple:
some to see, some to pray, and some to offer sacrifices: for that, naturally,
the Romans presumed to be great worshipers of their gods, and to hold their
temples in singular reverence. There was in those days, in those temples, two
young priests first cousins: one of which was named Heliogabalus, and the
other Alexius: these young men, in their vestments which they did wear, and in
their life which they did lead, were judged to be priests: one the other
part, they well seemed by their gravity, to be the sons of princes. The
matrone Mesia was so discreet, secret, and advised, that the children being of
the age of fifteen years, neither them selves, or any other for them, did
either know, or suspect, who were their fathers, either who their grandmother:
but that she said unto all men, that those children were orphans, and sons
unto her ancient servant. When Macrinus did tyrannize ye empire, amongst
other errors which he committed, he banished the famous matrone Mesia from
the court: not for that he did so much as suspect her of any evil, but
being thereunto urged by his vile inclination: for that all princes, his
predecessors, esteemed her as a mother, and honored her as a lady of great
souereigntie. In the court of eight emperors, by the space of 53. years, the
great matrone Mesia had been resident, with all which she uttered of her
self so great valor, and yealded such estimation of her person, and also of
them recovered so great gain, that when Macrinus did reject her from the
court, she had more riches in her exile, the^ Macrinus might find in the whole
empire.

The matrone Mesia departed unto Phoenicia, where her two nephues remained,
namely Heliogabalus, and Alexius: and as there remained many Roman gentlemen
evil paid and worse pleased, so they joined with Mesia, and Mesia with them,
to talk and murmur how Macrinus had slain, by treason, his lord the
Emperor Bassianus, and made hauock of the Empire and common wealth: which
matter was moved amongst persons that had desired to remove this mischief, and
on the tyrante also to take vengeance. The matrone Mesia received exceeding
joy, to hear with her own ears, and see with her eyes, how all the army
was bente against the tyrant Macrinus: and their greatest care was, to find a
man sufficient, and of merit meet for the Empire: because the Romans stood
with him in great and cruel hatred, for want of pay, and the matrone Mesia no
less grieved with her exile. The matrone Mesia beholding her self in so good
and apt assembly, to make her nephue Heliogabalus Roman Emperor, called in
great secrecy, six Roman captains of the chiefest of the army: all which
were of great authority, and no less gravity. Unto these six captains
Mesia said in secret, how her nephue Heliogabalus was son unto the Emperor
Bassianus, and Semiamira her daughter: and that she had held him hidden in
Asia, for doubt of ye Empress Iulia: who (had she known it) would have slain
the child, and banished the mother. Mesia was not only satisfied to say and
certify these vi. captains, that the Emperor Bassianus most truly was
father unto that young man, and nephue unto her self: but jointly therewith,
she brought them into her chamber, and discovered unto them an huge mass of
gold and silver, which she promised, and swear upon the altars of the temple,
to distribute totally upon the army, if they would give the Roman Empire
unto her nephue.

Unto these six captains (to whom the matrone Mesia had committed this
secreate, and discovered this treasure) she both promised and swear, to bring
to pass with her nephue Heliogabalus, that he should give them the most
honorable offices in all the Empire, if in case they should use the mean to
make him Emperor: in so much that, if other men were paid and recompensed,
they should remain both remunerated and honored. Great wisdom was used by
the matrone Mesia, in this matter of so great importance, especially in the
choice of so honorable captains: whose credit was sufficient to frame the
whole army to perform the same. Of this example, princes and great
potentates may collecte, that in any affairs, there is not greater danger,
either more safety, then soundly to consider, in to whose hands they commend
their causes.

The Pretorian bands being evil entreated, and worse paid, great was their
joy, when they heard that Heliogabalus was ye son of Bassianus, for whom the
grandmother craved the Empire: whom they all accepted, and bound them selves
to receive for their Emperor: not only to be revenged of ye tyrant Macrinus,
but also to possess the money. For so much as the temple where he was Priest,
was without the city, agreement was made between the matrone Mesia, and the
army, that presently the same night (notwithstanding it were very late) both
her nephue and also her own person, by strength and devise should be conveyed
over the wall into the city, that at the break of day, they should seize the
city, and advance Heliogabalus unto the Empire. Neither was the matrone Mesia
slack to acomplish their request, either was there any want in the promise
made by the Pretorians: but that Mesia and her nephue approaching to the foot
of the wall, with purposed engines mounted them over into the city: the young man
being placed amids the Roman captains, beleeuinge him to be the son of
Bassianus, by resemblance of his face, and by a mark in his hand, as
Bassianus had.

The Roman armies received great joy, to behold Mesia and her nephue
Heliogabalus: chiefly, to see the young man so comely, fair, and toward: and
in beholding they would all say, that since he had so good a face, necessarily
it followed, that his deeds should be virtuous: but his inclination being
discovered, there was no vice wherein he was not noted: either any virtue
wherefore to be praised. The great matrone Mesia (as a woman that dealt in
affairs both dangerous and escandalous) would first assure the Empire unto
her nephue, before she departed from her treasure: and the case was thus. She
framed all the principals of the army, presently to swear unto Heliogabalus,
as their only Emperor, and to kiss his hand as their natural Lord. A
matter most truly very marvelous, and no less worthy to be commended unto
memory, namely, the dispatche and diligence used by Mesia in one night: most
manifestly apparent, that within six hours, she brought forth her nephue
from the temple, passed him over the wall, did yeald him credit to be the
son of Bassianus, obtained their oaths as unto their Emperor, kissed his
hand as loyal subjects, divided her treasure amongst the armies, fortified
them selves in the fortes of the city, and brought the whole host into
armor. At the break of day, in every tower they did sound their trumpets,
placed their Standards and Pendons, both on bulworkes and corteines, and with
loud voices exclaimed through all streates: Viua, viua el Emperador
Heliogabalo, hiio del buen Bassiano: that is to say: happy and long life unto
the emperor Heliogabalus, son to the good Bassianus. This being done and
proclaimed, Heliogabalus came forth into the city, neither on foot or on
horse back, but upon the shoulders of the most ancient and honorable of
the army, wearing the imperial crown upon his head, and holding the royal
scepter in his hand, and haueing upon his shoulders, the ensign of Augusta,
and before him the pendon of the Eagle: because these were the ensigns whereby
the emperors of Rome were known. And now, after ye standards were placed, and
the strength of the city possessed, the army publicly proclaimed, and
received the Emperor Heliogabalus for their lord and Emperor: presently, the
renowned matrone Mesia did yield unto them all her treasure, both silver and
gold, without breach of any promise, or reserving of any one Jewel. The
Romans were so contented with the matrone Mesia, that there they did both
swear and vow, to esteem her as a mother, to hold Heliogabalus for their
Lord, and to persecute the tyrant Macrinus, even to death.

CHAP. IIII. How Macrinus did write a letter unto the renowned Mesia, after he
understood his deprivation of the Empire.
THE tyrant Macrinus was settled with great security, in the city of
Antioche, when they removed him from the Empire in Phoenicia: for so it has
been, is, and shall be, that when Princes most greedily do prosecute vices,
then their enemies are weauing some webb of most deadly danger. Heliogabalus
was not the full age of seventeen years when he was advanced to the Empire:
when Macrinus in Antioche heard the news of yt which was don in Phoenicia, he
fell into a great laughter, and made a jest of it: chiefly, being certified to
be so very a child, and framed by his grandmother Mesia, whom he held both
for a woman ambitious, and also contentious. Those persons that remained with
Macrinus (after they heard of a new Emperor, and that ye Roman hosts had
don him homage and fealty) advised and also prayed him, that he would not
esteem the matter over light, but with better and riper counsel, should
think and consider for the remedy thereof: for it might come to pass, by
conceiving it to be but a jest, that the other might remain Emperor in
earnest.

As Macrinus naturally was both ambitious, orgulous, and disdaineful: so he
demanding ynke and paper, presently did write a cholerike letter with his own
hands, unto the famous matrone Mesia after this manner.

Macrinus Ancius, only Emperor and universal Lord, to the matrone Mesia her
person, small health, and less grace with the Gods.
Here I am advertised, that in the offense of the Gods, and unto my great want
of reverence, thou have attempted with mine armies, to establish a new
Emperor: which deed exactly declares thee to be (as in deed thou art) a
woman both seditious, and also ambitious: since thou know that by means of
thy tongue and mutiny in the common wealth, I did banishe thee my house. Also
they say, that the emperor which thou have made, is a boy, a priest, a
bastard, and thy nephue: whereunto there is no more to be answered, but that I
shall chastise thee as a woman, and him as a child: that is to say, command
him to be whipped, and thy self to spinne. I swear unto thee Mesia (by the
immortal Gods) that if thou drive me to take my lance in hand, I will force
thee to put thy distaffe under thy girdle: for unto women (such as thou) it
were more honesty to be spinning, then to practice mutinies amongst
soldiers. Also it is said unto me, that thou have given infinite treasures
unto mine armies, to move them to revolt from me, and to elect thy nephue
Emperor: these with the rest, be the fruits of thy guyle: for that only of
thee, and never of any other, it is said, or shall be said, that thou have
robbed the Empire, to buy the Empire.

If all princes past had known thee as I do know thee, neither would they
have given credit unto thy words, or faith unto thy fained works: but as by
thy guileful diligence in their service, and presuming attempts in their
affairs, thou did command their housholdes, and gathered the fruits of
their goods. I have heard thee many times boast thy self, that thou wast
borne in the house of Marcus Aurelius, nourished with Antoninus Pius, and did
dwell in house with Commodus, Pertinax, Iulianus, and Seuerus, Princes very
glorious: which if thou had remembered, thou would never have committed a
deed so vile: for there may not be in the whole world a deed more unseeming,
then for him that was bred in the palace of kings, to committ treason against a
person of such majesty. If it shall hap the Gods to permit, and my sorrowful
destinies so to direct, that in this enterprise I lose both honor and life, I
can say unto thee Mesia, that which historiographers, who shall write of thee
and me, with truth may say, that the Empire came unto me by election, but
to thine through treason. If thou had been a woman of honesty or honor,
thou would not so openly have defamed thy daughter Semiamira, whom thou
chargest to have accompanied Bassianus, and of her body this boy Heliogabalus
to have sproung, for whom now thou procurest the Empire: because in the
houses of blushing faces, generous and noble hearts, they more esteem an
ounce of honor, then all the wealth and estate of this life. Oh Mesia, how
great an error have thou made in this thine enterprise, only to revenge thy
ravenous heart, and to make thy nephue an Emperor? namely, thou have raised a
slander upon Bassianus, defamed the royal palace of incest, dishonored thine
unchaste daughter Semiamira, blemished the Empress Iulia of dishonest consent,
and not stained but imbrued thine own fame, with the filthy couerture of
incestuous adultery. And since Bassianus, Iulia, Semiamira, and Seuerus have
ended their days: wherefore will thou (oh traytresse Mesia) dishonor so many
that be dead, to honor but one that is alive? Now I know (oh Mesia) how
tedious and perilous it is, for quiet men to deal with mutinous women, and
passioned as thou art: who having no iron to hurt our flesh, yet committest
deeds to defame us, and speak words to torment us. Of this treason which
thou have committed against me, I doubt not to be revenged, and my heart
thoroughly satisfied: for so great an offense is treason, that if it be in men
to offend therein, the Gods have only charge to revenge ye same. It is given
me also to understand, that this thy nephue was a priest in the temple of the
God Heliogabalus: in which matter I do not entermedle and say little, since in
this injury ye have not committed offense unto men, but unto the gods: but
jointly therewith I dare say unto thee, that since thou have drawn him forth
of the temple, where he was consecrated unto the Gods, thou shall never enjoy
good days of him: for that of thy part, to have done service unto the Gods,
of Princes thou should have made priests, and not of priests Princes.

The Gods demand nothing which we have, but if by chance we offer any thing
unto them, they like it not, that we should return to take it away: for
which cause I say unto thee, and from henceforth, do prophecy (O Mesia) that
for so much as thou have drawn forth thy nephue from the holy temple, he
shall lose the Empire, and thou thy money. The confidence which thou
committedst unto the men of war, by dividing amongst them so great
quantity of gold and silver, I hope in the immortal Gods, shall all conclude
in smoke: for it is an ancient custom among the Roman hosts, not to give
the Empire to the person of most merit, but unto him that pays best. The
matter that most grieueth me (O Mesia) in this traitorous enterprise, is, to
think, that I being a man, and a Roman prince, must deal, fight, and
contend with a woman: because there may not be in this whole world an equal
despite, then for a man to arm him self against a woman, whose weapons are
but words. But the conclusion shall be, since thou wast borne in the palace of
the good Marcus Aurelius, and Heliogabalus being thy nephue, if thou will be
removed from this follye, and reduce thy self into my subjection and
obedience, I will relieve thee of this exile, and to thy nephue Heliogabalus
will I give a Consulship: and if not, we are come unto the time, that men must
do what they may, and the Gods as they please.

CHAP. V. Of a letter written by the great matrone Mesia unto the tyrant
Macrinus.
When Mesia received the letter from the tyrant Macrinus, her nephue
Heliogabalus, and all the principal captains of the armies being present (who
of set purpose did behold her countenance all the time that she read the
same, which matter was both merueilous and to be noted, in consideration of
such a letter, so furnished with malice, and fraught with despite) she neither
changed countenance, or said one word after the reading of the same. Above
all men or women of her days, in two points this famous matrone Mesia
excelled, which is to weete, for great solicitude in affairs, and sovereign
patience in trauells: and so it came to pass, she often used to say, that she
never lost matter by negligence, or ever aunsweared any man as one passioned.
Heliogabalus and all that were present, did not a little request the renouned
matrone Mesia to read that letter unto them, or tell what it contained, which
she utterly refused, saying unto them, that it were a fact very evil,
presently to read it, and a deed much woorsse, if after in time and place
she did not show it. This being done and Mesia withdrawn, she answered to
Macrinus his letter after this manner.

Mesia Phoenicia, unto Ancius Macrinus his person, health and consolation in
the Gods.
In this the front of my letter, I do not curse or banne thee as thou did
me, in ye beginning of thine: for we that be persons bred and trained in
princes courts, do not a little presume to be praised for our good nourture:
and to escape to be noted malicious. Vrbanitie, benevolence, and good manners,
ought not to be lost for any unkindness, or forgotten for any occasion: for
that amongst persons noble and shamfaste, although they do them injuries, yet
they endure not to speak vile words. Thou should have remembered (Macrinus)
that I was a woman, to who^e thou did write, and thou a man that did take
the same in hand: and that, if thou had found thy self offended or
dishonored by me, thou should have revenged thy self with thy lance, as a
noble person, and not with thy pen as a cowarde. The armor and defense of
women is the tongue, but men defend them selves with their swords or weapons:
wherefore my Lord Seuerus did use to say, that it were a great want in a man,
to revenge his cause with words: and too much lightness in a woman to
defend her grief with weapons. But the case shall be thus, that since thou
take my office, which is to speak, I will take thine which is to fight: for
that the glory whereof thou presumest to have slain so many men, thou shalt
be deprived in receiving thy death at the hands of a woman.

Thou say in thy letter, that thou did banishe me thy house, and cast me
out of Rome, as a woman of an evil tongue, and seditious in the commonwealth:
Macrinus, thou haste to understand, that I am not so much grieved with that
which thou writest to me, as for the occasion which thou give me to
answer thee: because I may not directly answer unto thy vileness, without
disgraceing of my gravity.

If I had been a woman of an evil tongue, and reuolting from the common wealth,
(as thou Macrinus unjustly reportest) would they have suffered me in their
courts? and would the good Marcus Aurelius, Antoninus Pius, and my lord
Seuerus have retained me in their houses? In Princes palaces, and in all
citizens houses, all vices are covered, or at the least, shadowed, except the
person that is seditious, or foul and liberal tounged: which is, not only
intolerable, but much less to be hidden. I appeal unto the immortal Gods
for witnesses, if in fifty and three years, in which I have been trained and
resident in Princes courts, I did ever hurt any person, either in word or
deed, which thou know to be most true, because all men did love me, for
that I traueiled and did good for all persons. Thou Macrinus did banishe me
thy court, to have more scope to follow thy vice: for thou well know, and
also all persons in Rome, that thy lewdness and my gravity might not dwell
under one covert. Thou say in thy letter, that my nephue Heliogabalus shall be
whipped as a boy, and I, as a woman shall be sent to spinne: unto words so far
distempered, and of so great despite as these are, I do not permit to be
answered, but to be revenged. If, when thou did write unto me and my
nephue, words so foul, and of so great enormitie, thou had remembered what
I was, and what thou art: which is to weete, that my father was a knight of
Phoenicia, and thy father a smith of Capua: thou should have considered,
that in sending me to spinne on a distaffe, I would send thee to blow at the
bellows.

To that which thou say, that it were more for my honesty amongst frames
to be weauing, then bribing and seducing the armies, which as thou say so
have I performed: for I give thee to understand, that I have warpt such a webb,
as thou neither know to vnframe, or may cut off when it is finished.
Macrinus, thou had need of more understanding, and also of more power,
either to whip my nephue Heliogabalus, or set me to spinne: for,
notwithstanding our thoughts be low, yet our fortune is high: but thou have a
base fortune, and a hautie heart. Also thou say in thy letter, that to make
my nephue an Emperor, I have divided all my treasure amongst the men of
war: and that of me only it may be said, that I robbed the Empire, to buy
ye empire. To this I answer, that thou have said right well: if, as thou art a
tyrant thou were an Emperor: but I buy not the Empire for my nephue, but
redeem it from thee which art a tyrant, and no less assured, that the fathers
of the sacred Senate will allow my election, and violate thy tyranny. In that
thou say that I robbed the Empire to buy the Empire, proceeds of vile
slander, and no less falsehood: since thou, Macrinus, do know most
certainly, that to obtain riches, I needed not rob the common wealth: because
my patrimony is very great, my husband left me rich, my sister Iulia gave me
al her treasure, my Lord Seuerus ceased not to give me money, the Consul Furius
mine uncle, gave me a yearly stipend, and for all men for whom I sued,
somewhat was presented me: in such wise, that I had always to give, and at no
time found my self in necessity to crave. If this be true (as it is most
true) being a Lady of so great wealth: why should thou Macrinus defame me
with theft? Believe me (thou Macrinus) if I justice, or had it by
inheritance: but did rob it by tyranny. Also thou say in thy letter,
that if I and my nephue would yield obedience, thou will pardon my exile, and
give him a Consulship. To this I answer, that now al things are so far
concluded, that there remains no time to talk of shares: and if we should
understand therein, thou should take what were offered thee, without thy
election of what should please thee: for that parts and shares in such like
cases, are not accustomed to be given by traitors, but by Lords absolute in
estate. Thou and I Macrinus are incountred in so narrow a condition, that the
Gods, fortune, and also arms, have to declare thy malice, and my innocence:
thy tyranny, and my justice: thy treason, and my fidelity: thy falshod, and
my truth: thy cruelty, and my zeal: thy pride and my patience: thy treason,
and my simple intent: which being done, they shall give the Empire, not unto him
that desires, but unto him that shall deserve the same.

CHAP. VI. How the tyrant Macrinus was slain in battle.
AFter that Mesia had written her letter, and dispatched Macrinus messengers,
she conferred with the principal Captains of the army: unto whom she
discovered what Macrinus had written, and how she had answered ye same: who
were not a little grieved with the discourtesies that it contained, and greatly
commended the answer which Mesia had made. And as Macrinus had said in his
letter, that the Roman hosts did use to give the Empire, not unto the person
of most deserving, but unto him that best did pay them: so yt Roman captains
were not therewith a little despited, presently swearing, not once but many
times, that Macrinus might not satisfy that injury with less cost, then with
the loss of his head. Macrinus committed no small error, in banishing Mesia,
but much more in writing that letter, but most of all in charging the armies
with such an outrage: for that it was the total occasion, for Mesia to recover
more favor, and Macrinus to lose his credit. Of this so notable example,
princes and other great potentates have to take example, that when their people
or vassals shall be altered, or mutined, very much to consider, not only what
they do, but also what they say and write: for that in rebellious times, more
hurt is done with a word or a letter, then at another time with a notable
injury. The Matrone Mesia, with her exile not a little grieved, and with the
letter no less displeased: neither would sleep by night, or rest by day:
providing things necessary for the wars, and dispatching posts for Italy:
for her intent was, to sustain her estate in Asia with arms, and in Rome with
letters and promises. This city which Mesia possessed, was of 2000.
housholdes, where she made preparation of engines wherewith to whirle, and
bulworkes to defend: and further, gave commandment, that the most valiante
persons, and most cheyst capitaines should remain within the same: not only
to resist, but also to offend. When Macrinus read the letter that Mesia had
written, and was advertised by his messengers, how patiently, and without
alteration she read his letter, he was not a little grieved therewith: for he
had opinion of ye matrone Mesia, that she had skill to dissemble injuries, and
after in process to revenge the same.

The Prefect of Macrinus army, was a valiant Captain, named Iulianus, whom
he sent with his greatest power unto the city which Mesia and her nephue
Heliogabalus did possess: giving commandment, that he should travel to take
them alive, to perform his promise which he had sworn: which is to wit to
set Mesia to spinne, and her nephue to be whipped. Iulianus was a Captain bold
and valiant, who beseeging the city, which he thought to be in distress,
more then it was, and giving a furious assault, having skarcely mounted on the
topp of the wall, the soldiers of the city by plain strength pulled him
over, cut off his head, and hanged it out on a tower. The morrow after that
these things had passed, Mesia commanded certain of Macrinus Capitaines, to
be called into her presence, who upon assurance approaching unto the foot of
the wall, said unto them these words: that which I have to say unto you (my
friends) is, that ye behold and consider upon this turret, the head of your
sorrowful Captain Iulianus: and say unto your master Macrinus, that the
distaffe wherewith I spinne is that lance, and that head is the call which I
do weaue and knit. When Macrinus heard the news of the misfortune that had
happened unto his Captain Iulianus, and what words the matrone Mesia had
said unto the soldiers of his army: he said (as it was reported) with a
roaring voice: my destinies be finished, my hour is come, and my fortune is
ended. Macrinus with fear had his courage so daunted, that secretly he began
to practice with the matrone Mesia, to divide the Empire with her nephue
Heliogabalus: but being (as she was) in so great readiness, and no less
passioned, she would in no wise accept, either as much as give ear thereunto:
and that, if ye Empire were to be divided, it should be with an Emperor, and
not with a Tyrant.

Macrinus perceiving his offers to be rejected, his words despised, and his
presents nothing regarded, determined to make a proof of fortune, which with
the whirle of her variable wheel, many times does wound without threatening:
and sometimes threateneth without wounding. Macrinus gathering and also paying
his army which he had in the confines of Antioche, departed unto Phoenicia,
where he camped very near unto the city, which Mesia and her nephue
Heliogabalus defended: who presently sent to give Macrinus to understand, that
he should not need to take the pain to assault the town, for that within
very few days they would issue to give him battle in the field. Two Roman
armies, and two Roman Emperors, were in Phoenicia one against another:
Macrinus party every day diminishing, and the other not only increasing but
also prevailing: for that daily the soldiers parted from Macrinus unto
Heliogabalus, understanding that he was son unto Bassianus, and did
acknowledge him for their Emperor, and kissed his hands as their natural Lord
and sovereign.

By the number that daily fledd from him, in their double speech which they
used with him, in the fickle service which they did him, by his bands which
daily diminished, and by their weak courage in fighting: Macrinus did clearly
perceive, that he might not obtain victory, but saw himself to be in
danger of a sale unto his enemies. Macrinus counterfected a show unto his
soldiers of courage to fight, and yet was in great readiness to fly: for
that at all times, when he issued to encounter or skirmish, he was mounted upon
an horse of great swiftnes, and likewise disguised.

Mesia being advertised, that Macrinus had greater regard to the safety of his
life, then his honor or goods, provided to issue at the soudeine to give him
battle: the which although on both sides was thoroughly imbrued in blood, and
not a little daungerously contended, yet in the end, Macrinus was put to flight,
and stayed in a village, but with the loss of his head. This was the end and
conclusion of the tyrant Macrinus, which usurped the Roman dominion xiiij.
months, and ten days: who was so cruel (besides all other vices) that
amongst his own soldiers he was termed, not Macrinus, but Macellinus, which
is to say, butcher: for that in respect of the human blood which he
shed, he more seemed a butcher, then a Roman Prince.

CHAP. VII. Of a notable letter written by the matrone Mesia, unto the Senate
of Rome, craving the confirmation of the Empire unto Heliogabalus her nephue.
THe tyrant Macrinus being dead and beheaded, presently the two armies joined
in one: and notwithstanding the one part had followed Heliogabalus, and the
other Macrinus, yet the matrone Mesia thought it not meet to move disputation,
who had been traitors, or who had been loyal: affirming it to be more
convenient time, to win minds, then to revenge injuries. Although the matrone
Mesia in all other matters past, had discovered her great wisdom, yet in this
case above the rest she made a show of her great prudence: for that (to say the
truth) in rebellious times, and amongst mutinous people, princes ought not to
occupy themselves in chastisements, but in reconcilementes. All the capitaines
of Macrinus that escaped the battle, conceyuing how Mesia commanded by
public proclamation, that no man should presume to call them traitors,
either use them with foul words, jointly assembled of their own francke
minds, to confess her to be their sovereign Lady: and to kiss the hands of
Heliogabalus for their Emperor.

The matrone Mesia vowed her self to joy, for obteyning revenge of the tyrant
Macrinus, and to behold the armies joined in one, yielding due obedience to her
nephue Heliogabalus: that from the years of lxvj. she discovered a gesture and
countenance but of xl. years of age. Although the matrone Mesia held the
Empire of her nephue Heliogabalus safe and established, partly to see the
enemy slain, as also for the obedience received of both the armies: yet she
provided that Heliogabalus should not entitle himself Universal Lord, or Only
Emperor, until the Romans had received him, and the Senate confirmed him.
Not six days after these things had passed in Phoenicia, the matrone Mesia
sent a solemn embassage unto Rome: and secretly gave unto the Ambassadors many
Jewels to divide amongst the Senators, and for time to come in her behalf to
make them great offers: to the end with jewels to train them to her purpose,
and with hope to enterteine them. This being done, Mesia wrote unto the Senate
a letter sufficiently well indicted, after this manner.

Mesia Phoenicia, unto the sacred Roman Senate, health and grace.
Unto men so glorious in acts, and so grave in precepts and doctrine, (as ye
are right reverent fathers co^script) it may seem a matter both new and
strange, for a woman to write unto the sacred Roman Senate: which renowned
name the Gods to reverence, and men thereat do tremble and are terrified. The
matters, which by my ambassadors I send to give you to understand, neither for
that I am a woman that may do little, your gravity has not to consider of the
same as a matter of small importance: because all men are not so wise, that none
does miss: either al women so unable but yt some escape error. Those things
which ye shall read in this my letter, or shall hear at ye mouth of my
Ambassadors, I swear unto you by the immortal gods, and by the sepulchers of
mine elders, that they be most true and not feigned: for that in a Lady of mine
estate, it were less infamy to be unchaste, then to be a liar. I have heard my
Lord Mar. Aurelius say, when I was but a child, that in women always were
conjoined, truth and chastity, and a woman of truth, was never but chaste:
and a woman addicted to lying, did never continue in co^tinencie. Some of you
that now are living may remember, when ye Empress Iulia my sister, came to be
wife of the Emperor Seuerus, and how in her company I came to the Court,
wherein I was long and many years both served and also persecuted: for as in
courts of princes, they that seek their singular advancement: ye one cease
not to persecute the other. Although in princes palaces where I lived, I have
been persecuted, defamed, and also envied: yet I beseech the immortal gods, yt
the dealing and entreatance, which then I used, with such as wished me evil,
that the same and no other, they will perform on me, which now wish me well.
In 53. years yt I have stayed in diverse princes courts, I never dashed any
person out of countenance, I never took the tale out of their mouth, I never
spoke any injurious word, I never reproved any person, I never did prejudice
any man's name, and never injuriously took any vengeance: because in houses of
great princes, no man may obtain advancement, if he lack skill to suffer.
This which I here relate (fathers conscript) is, not to recover praise, but to
the end ye should believe me: for if my person possess no credit, my
embassage must needs have issue of no effect. Speaking more in particular, I
say: ye know that many years since my sister and I departed Rome, attending on
the emperor Bassianus, and after that the traitor Macrinus had slain him,
Iulia his unfortunate wife, so sensibly did feel his death, that by extreme
sorrow she finished her life. Fortune would not consent to deprive me of my
vital spirits, when my sister Iulia was bereft of life: and this she did, not
to the end to forget me, but the more to grieve me: because in great perils
and misfortunes, if at yt time fortune did dissemble, it was not so much as to
honor them, as afterward to be revenged of them. Of the death of Bassianus
my lord and your emperor, as it was in my hands to bewail him, if it had
been as well to defend him, either he had never died, or else had been
raised to life: for that most truly, although Bassianus were young, vain,
fickle, absolute, and dissolute, yet on the other part, he was patient, silent,
and pitiful: and it might have been, in the burden of greater age, he would
have forgotten ye vices of his youth. There is no confidence at al times in
most wise men, either despair in fickle young me^: for that we see all day
long, that many times age does bring forth fruit, where reason did not yield as
much as leaves. He that in deed laid hands on Bassianus, was that caytiue
Martianus: but he that commanded him to be slain, was the traitor Macrinus:
a man most truly of base condition, infamous life, obscure lineage, an idiot in
letters, intemperant in speech, vicious in manners, and a tyrant in his works.
Ye perfectly perceive (fathers conscript) that a man so much defamed, were a
slander to be received and accepted for a prince: for that in great estates
and Segniories, it is not sufficient that their princes be valiant, but also
honorable: which is to wit, not to want proportion in their persons, and to
have noblenes in blood, of all which things Macrinus has no possession: for,
besides that he is of obscure lineage, infamous of life, cruel of condition and
false of promise: so had he a swarte visage, and a dwarfs body, he was splay
footed, and also proare blind.

Macrinus was not satisfied to have slain Bassianus, but also usurped the
Empire: and to heap evil upon evil, did swear upon the altar of the
temple, that he had not slain Bassianus, in such wise, that the perjured
Macrinus, was not contented with homicide and manslaughter: but before the Gods
was also perjured. But as the Gods are just in rewarding the virtuous, and not
careless to chastise the wicked, and that the election of men, being not
confirmed of the gods: my nephue Heliogabalus and I, have herein used so great
skill, that at the time when the tyrant Macrinus was most abandoned unto the
vices of Antioche, we cut off his head: in such wise, that Asia was set free
from his tyranny, and the death of Bassianus well reue^ged. The armies that
were scattered, disco^tented, divided, and evil paid, we have gathered
together, paid, and united: and possess all Asia in obedience unto the Roman
Empire. Also (fathers conscript) I wish ye to understand, that in the time of
life, and also after the death of the tyrant Macrinus, the armies did elect my
nephue Heliogabalus Emperor: which election I will not deny but that I
desired, practiced, procured, and also bought: for that it seemed unto me,
that the Empire being in the hands of such a tyrant as Macrinus, it was not
bought, but redeemed. If in this mart of the Empire I have offended, I will
yield my self to al manner of punishment: but therewith I would have ye to
understand, that I bought it with my money, openly of your army, from a
tyrant, far from Rome, in a rebellious time, and for the son of Basssianus:
and I say for the son of Bassianus, which with most just title should have
inherited the Empire: if Macrinus had not usurped the same.

Fathers conscript, it seems not yt I have deserved blame, much less any
chastiseme^t: because by my industry and proper goods, I have paid your
armies, set Asia in peace, slain the tyrant, redeemed the Empire, and above
all the rest, have revenged the death of Bassianus, and given as his
inheritance apperteined unto his son. As your armies do hear report, and
there do write, they were so poor and in such distress, yt more justly it
may be said, not that I suborned but succored them with my money: because the
more part had not to eat, nor garments to wear, adue^turing to rob upon the
ways, and in towns to silch and steal. And since my nephue is son unto
Bassianus, nephue unto Seuerus, and a young man of himself in semblance of
good inclination, it seems not that we have erred in his election, either
shall ye swerve in his confirmation: for that in life he resembles the father,
and in courage and nobleness of mind the graundfather. Neither is this
election to be reproved, for his evil nourturing or doctrine: for as ye know,
he was not trained in vices, but in temples: not with profane men, but with
honest priests: not robbing on high ways, but offering sacrifices: not
sheading blood, but tears: not wandering at large, but withdrawn: not
persecuting men, but serving the gods. From a child of much infancy, I offered
my nephue Heliogabalus to the gods in the temple: where he has been
instructed to be mild, chaste, silent, patient, sober pitiful, and abstinent:
and if by hap, he shall prove otherwise then now he is, it may be for the
liberty that he shall obtain, and not for the doctrine which he has learned,

All princes past have been elected only of men, but my nephue both of Gods
and men: for that I vowed him to do sacrifices, and the Gods have rendered him
to govern kingdoms. Ye Romans do greatly commend your selves, yt ye removed
Quintus Cincinatus from earing at the plough to be Dictatour: but more is my
nephue to be praised, that was praying in the temple: for of more excellency
is that man that prays before the gods, then he yt ploweth after oxen. In
Rome always in times past, the priesthood was divided from the Empire: but ye
see that which was never seen of your forefathers, namely, that the priest is
an Emperor, and the Emperor a priest: in such wise, that with his sacrifices,
he shall reconcile us with the gods, and with the empire defend us against our
enemies. Fathers co^script, great and infinite thanckes have we to render unto
all the gods, for that they have given us an Emperor which knows to pray,
and has skill to fight: for as ye al know, few victories are obtained by fight
of me^, if the gods do not dispose the same. Although the election of my nephue
has been done by the army, and supposed also to be confirmed by the gods:
yet neither will I yt he rule the empire, or be established Emperor, until by
the sacred Senate it be considered, and also confirmed: for I hold him not
Emperor that is obeyed in Asia, but that is loved and elected at Rome. Since
this young man Heliogabalus is the son of a prince, the nephue, the cosen,
the brother of a prince, and a prince elected, we have al to presume yt he shall
prove a good prince: for that he is much bound to be good, that is descended of
many good persons. As long as I enjoy life, I shall not cease to travel that
his life be such, as the doctrine and nourture which I have given him: and if
after my death he shall prove evil, the fault shall then be none of mine, for as
ye (fathers conscript) do well understand, no blame is to be imputed to him that
is already dead neither may any excuse serve the manifest fault of the liueing.

CHAP. VIII. How the Roman Senate did allow the election of Heliogabalus, and
of the present appearance of his wickedness.
THe Ambassadors being arrived, and their Embassage also known at Rome, both
the Senate and people were in exceeding admiration, when they understood of ye
great acts which Mesia had done in Asia, and heard of the letter that she wrote
unto Rome: whereof many copies were made, and sent to diverse towns and cities.
In Rome they found themselves in great confusion, upon determination of an
answer to ye demand which the matrone Mesia had made, because the Senate
doubted her atte^pts in time to come: in respect whereof they so deferd their
answer, yt the Ambassadors complained unto ye Tribune of the people. By
letters of her Ambassadors, the matrone Mesia was advertised of ye dissension
betwixt the Senate and people, as concerning ye election and confirmation of
her nephue Heliogabalus: whereupon presently she determined to depart from Asia,
to Italy, vowing with an oath to constrain the Senate to perform by force, that
which they refused to accomplish of their own accord. The Senate having
intelligence, the matrone. Mesia to be departed from Asia to Rome, not to sue
or make request, but to fight, forgate not to allow the election of
Heliogabalus: commanding by public proclamation, that from the^ceforth they
should hold and esteem him as their sovereign lord, and obey him as emperor.
The matrone Mesia iourneying from Asia to Rome, and understanding that the
Senate had confirmed the election of Heliogabalus, stayed in the borders of
Greece: for that to return unto Phoenicia was very far, and to sail unto
Italy, no less late. The winter being past, Mesia in the prime of the Spring
sailed into Italy, directing her course straight unto Rome, where she was well
received, and no less feasted: although it be most true, at that instant she
was more feared, then beloved: that she was of so great skill, and of so much
patience, that she most wisely could dissemble injuries, and accept and also
gratify service. Mesia was so prudent and advised, that neither in
countenance, gesture, words or works, she did either secretly or openly,
discover any malice against any person: but dealt with all persons as with her
sons, and honored al men as her brethrene. All the Romans were so pleased
with the gravity of her speech, and the honesty of her life, that on a day
the Senate and people being conjoined, requested with great instance, that it
might please her to accept the government of the common wealth, since she had
therein so great experience, and that her nephue was in Asia. To this demand
Mesia answered. Fathers conscript, I do greatly gratify your request, which
unto me appertains not: for that it rather agrees, with the condition of
women, to breed and nourish Emperors, and unto men to govern Empires.

When these matters passed in Rome, Heliogabalus stayed in Phoenicia, attending
an answer from his grandmother Mesia: who being advertised that he was
accepted in Rome for their absolute Lord, and sovereign Emperor, came
immediately unto Antioch, with intent the year following to pass into Italy.
Heliogabalus finding himself escaped, and freely delivered from the church,
confirmed Emperor, dispatched of the hands of tutours, absent from his
grandmother, and in possession of liberty, to live at his liking, his evil
inclination presently appeared: because the virtue (if he had any) of his
former life, was but feyned: for the evil inclination of young men, may for a
time be dissembled: but being at liberty, they cannot cloak it. The first
insolency yt Heliogabalus committed in Asia, was, yt he appareled himself in
a robe wouen with gold, silk, cotton, flax, and woll, large down unto ye foot,
sown all over with pearls and precious stones: and set a crown on his head
after the manner of Thyara; bracelets on his arms, and earings on his ears: in
such manner, that unto the simple he gave occasion to gaze, vain persons to
talk, and wise men to wonder. All that winter he gave him self to learning,
not of science, but to play on drommes, fluites, and such other pipes, to
dance as a shepeheard, and rustically to sing as a man of the country, and to
jest as a Iuggler: in such wise, that for him self he sought out schools
agreeable unto the life which he meant to lead. The spring of the year being
come, Heliogabalus departed toward Rome, where at the port of Hostia, his
graundmother Mesia received him: and when she saw her nephue, in such
liberty of life, and so strange in apparel, she was touched with no small
disgrace, in respect of such Romans as did accompany her: and no less
offended of the private and favored servants that did attend him. The
matrone Mesia was so wise in her counsels, and so advised in her acts, that
she conferred with her nephue in secret, craving mosted instantly, that in no
wise he should adventure to enter Rome with that manner of garment: for that
it might fall out, in beholding him in the habit of so strange attire, they
would both mutine and be escandalized.

Heliogabalus gave good ear unto the counsel of his graundmother, but her
request he left utterly unperformed, which was unto her no small grief and
displeasure: for that she heard it with her own ears, and the Romans also
said it unto her face, how contrary the acts of her nephue were to the
writing that she had sent touching him out of Asia.

Heliogabalus being arrived at Rome, was received of the common people with
great joy and solemnity: but the ancient and noble personages of Rome,
beholding his presumption in commanding, his rash and hasty speech, his
greediness in feedinge, his strangeness in attire, and vnsteddinesse and
wantonness in gesture, could not satisfy them selves with sighing, and much
less with murmuring. When a certain Senator demanded that matrone Mesia,
why she did permit her nepheu to be clad in a vesture, so unaccustomed,
sighing she answered: It grieueth me not so much of his strange attire, as of
his wicked manners: because we may steal his garmente, but his lewd
conditions we cannot alter. To celebrate certain feasts named Quirinales,
Heliogabalus commanded many beasts to be slain: and the most ancient and
honorable Senators to bear the spittes, being fixed unto lances: in such
wise, that he thought to do them no small honor, unto whom he gave a lance
and a spitte. The matrone Mesia beholding her nephue Heliogabalus, every day
increasing from better to worse, the people of him to grow into hatred, and
that he would neither believe her, either as much as reverence her, she
forgate not to leave Rome, and to return into Phoenicia, where she had left
her house, and also her riches.

CHAP. IX. Of many vices that were contained in the Emperor Heliogabalus.
TO report at large all the vices of Heliogabalus, were to empty and draw
dry drop by drop the river Nilus, or to wade the great river of Danubie:
because they are so many, so vile, and so scandalous, that it should be shame
to write them, and lost time to read them. Of many we shall write a few, and
of the most vile the least dishonest: to the end, yt all men which shall see
or read this writing, may conceive the deserved blame of the Romans, to hold
and suffer such a beast for their Emperor: for that he was not only unmeet
to govern a common wealth: but also his life in him was most evil employed.

We will write partly of his evil life, to discover unto men his evil end: for
as ye divine Plato said, though men can cloak and dissemble others faults:
yet do not the Gods pardon their injuries. This unfortunate Prince was
vicious, absolute, dissolute, and (whereof we have most to wonder) never
weried in his wickedness: for, if virtue be tedious, vice is yrkesome.
Heliogabalus entering the Empire, presently his house was furnished with liars,
Iugglers, and iesters: unto whom he neither denied the entry of his chamber,
or the secrets of his house. Heliogabalus greatly delighted to play and
represent the fable and story of Paris the Troyan, and the Goddess Venus, who
with his accomplices were clad in such garments, as in the chiefest of their
play fell from them, and discovered their nakedness: that unto all grave
persons, occasion was given of murmuring, and to all light persons, of laughing.

This deed was not only of great indignity, but also escandalous to be
represented of a Prince: for it suffices not, that Princes be honest in their
own persons: but they must not permit either word or deed that is
dishonest, to be said or done in their presence. They did yearly celebrate a
certain feast named Salabona, which continued three days, in the first day
they were washed and let blood, on the second they sighed and were silent, and
on the third they feasted and rejoiced in their most costly attire, in the
memory of Adonides the greatest lover that had been in the world: the end
of this feast was, to represent the travels, sighs, sorrows, graces and
disgraces, that lovers sustained before their sovereign delight was obtained.
Heliogabalus had in his chamber a young man named Zotipus, of body, face, and
gesture, very fair and gracious: but of manners and conditions no less
corrupted: for that in his words he was a liar, in dealing double, false of
promise, perjured of his oath, and malicious in all his thoughts.

Heliogabalus was often advertised of the words, deeds, and lewd life of
Zotipus: but as affection did more reign in him, then reason, so could he
neither be separated from his conversation, or give credit to any reported
that was said of him, accompting gibes and iestes, gracious recreations:
guile, liveliness of spirit: deceites, diligence: cross dealinge, pastime:
and malice, subtlety. Very worthy was Zotipus of chasticemente, and
Heliogabalus of much greater reprehensio^: because if princes have license to
dissemble the faults of their favored servants, they ought not to allow and
confirm them: for of great reason none ought to be so acceptable unto the
prince, that openly dare adventure to commit evil. At the time of his
repaste, he did many times command Philosophers and orators to appear in
his presence, not to dispute of natural courses, but of unchaste adulteries.
At time of conference with Ambassadors, Senators, or other grave persons, he
would either play with his hands, or twinkle and wink with his eyes, in such
wise, that suitors departed with disgrace, and not answered. As concerning women
he neither spared matrones, married women, virgins, or widows: but that all
such as he favored, he either obtained, or else defamed.

In drinking he was also disordinate, for at some times he would drink water,
sometimes wine, sometimes ale, sometimes sider, sometimes sodde water, sometimes
golden water, some times stild water, and at other times he would not drink,
but brothes and collesses. In the manner of his feeding, he neither used
authority, or observed gravity: for at some times, he would eat sittinge in
a chair, sometimes on a bench, and sometimes walking: for he used to say, that
in such manner, he did both eat and digest. Naturally he was given to sleep
very little, through the weakness of his brain: and slepte in all places
without respect, as well in the temple, as in the Senate, in the garden, in the
bath, in the bed, and also in the market place: in such wise, that he
wanted force to resist the least motions and affections of his inclination.

Heliogabalus did invent at Rome, a certain manner of feasting named, Festum
vindemiarum, that is to say, the feast of grape gathering: which feast was so
dissolute and unshamefast unto the view of ye common people, that afterward
in Rome they never consented to ye celebratio^ thereof. He was also greatly
addicted to play at tennis, and when he was offended with any old Senator,
either any ancient or honorable Roman, he would send for him to play and
accompany him: with whom he would play so much, that in the end the
sorrowful gentleman should depart unto his house, both tired, beswett, and
drudged, and also many times despoyled of his money. He went very seldom unto
the temples, was utterly void and barren of all friendship or affection unto
wise men, was never seen to read in books, greatly abhorred suitors and
affairs, was negligent, either to pay or refourme the armies, made small
account either of friends or enemies: finally he was addicted unto his own
opinion, and a mortal enemy unto reason.

CHAP. X. Of a letter written by the great matrone Mesia unto her nephue the
Emperor Heliogabalus.
THE great matrone Mesia being advertised in Asia, of her nephue Heliogabalus
so far enraged with vice in Rome, did write him a letter after his manner.

My son Heliogabalus, when thou departedst from Asia unto Rome, I hoped to
have heard such news of thee, as might be joyful to thy common wealth, and
have given unto me great renounce and glory: but as I am advertised here,
and also given to understand from thence, there thou do minister matter for
all men to murmur: and here unto me sufficient cause to weep. Sixty six
years are past since I was borne into this world, in which I have buried and
bewailed my father Torquatus, my mother Aristina, my sister Phillis, and her
husband Tharsus. Also I buried and bewailed my husband Aristippus, my son
Lucius Francus, my daughter Dolobella, and her husband Martianus. Also I
bewailed and buried the good Emperor Marcus Aurelius, and the Empress
Faustina my good and gracious Lady: in whose house I was borne, and in whose
palace I was married. I also buried and bewailed the Emperor Commodus, the
Emperor Pertinax, Annius Pastor mine uncle, Mirtha mine aunte, Camillus my
nephue, and Ioanna my niece. Also I buried and bewailed the Emperor Seuerus,
my only good Lord and famous Emperor. Also I bewailed and buried thine
unfortunate father, my dear and most desired son: whose name I dare not,
either any other, express in my presence: because the sound thereof
constrains me to break forth in tears. I thought it expedient (my son)
to lead thee unto remembrance of al these thy predecessors, to the end thou
may see, how small reason it were, that I should bewail the living, since I
have wept all the days of my life, for so many persons that are dead. When
thou wast borne by stealth, and I did both hide and cover thee: when I did
remove thee from Rome, and brought thee unto Grecia: when I caused thee to be
instructed in Greek letters, and bred and nourished thee in company of wise
men: when I did offer thee unto the God Heliogabalus, and made thee a priest in
his sacred temple: I thought (my son) that all these things should serve me
for joy and peace in my reposed age: and not to bewail thy childishe
youthfulness.

In this I acknowledge, how free the judgments of the Gods are from the
thoughts of men: in that the gods determine one thing, and men suppose
another: which has chanced both unto thee and to me (O my son
Heliogabalus:) because the childishness which thou do use, and the vices
thou possessest, I did not only think, thou would not commit: but also,
that in thy mind they should never have had passage. When I did place thee
with the great priest Gorgias, caused thee to be apparayled in the sacred
vesture, prayedst daily unto the gods, and also every week did offer
sacrifice in the temple: I hoped thou should have proved a Paragon in
virtue, and not (as thou art) a monster in all vice.

If thou would consider, many things do persuade, and also bind thee to be
good, but nothing provoke thee to be evil: that is to weete* to be a man
reasonable, to have been a priest, to be borne in Rome, to be now an
Emperor, to have nourished thee in my house, and to be descended of blood so
noble and generous: for it much provoke men to perform that which they
ought to do, and to remember from whence they be descended. Believe me, my
son, that with less cost, and more ease, thou shall be virtuous, then
vicious: because vices content the flesh when they are committed, and torment
the heart after they be performed: but virtues yield not so much grief in
their woorking, as pleasure when we have given repulse unto vice. I may not
comprehend the froward fortune that follows thee, or the sorrowful destinies
which have pursued me: since I nourished thee in truth, and thou prouest, and
art become a liar: I bred thee chaste, and thou art imbrued with impudicitie:
I brought thee up in temperance, and thou have stained thy self with excess
and gluttony: I trained thee in shamefastness, and thou rendrest a life most
dissolute: and that which is woorst above the rest, thou do neither fear to
offend the Gods, or escandalize men. Admitting thou would not be good, for
any offense unto the Gods that have created thee, or any grief or scandal
unto men with whom thou do live: yet ought thou so to be, to remove all
heaviness and displeasure from me thy old and sorrowful grandmother: since
thou know, I bought for thee the Empire, by the weight of money drawn out
of my chestes, and by force of tears issuing and breaking from mine entrails.
My son, thou do well know, that to make thee a Roman Prince, I gave
great gifts unto the temples, offered unto the Gods infinite sacrifices, gave
unto the Pretorians all my treasures, made unto the Priests great offers, and
sent unto the Senators most rich jewels, all which is nothing: for if it had
been possible, I would have given my blood unto the immortal Gods, that thou
might be one of them. And if I have erred in purchaseing the Empire, much
more should I err to make thee one of the Gods, since in thee no virtue is to
be found, either any vice wanting. The Gods have made thee fair of face,
gallant of proportion, stout of strength, learned in letters, expert in arms,
valiant of heart, delicate in judgment, and bold in perils: but what profit
all these graces, since thou art so great an enemy of others counsel: and so
far enamored of thine own proper judgment? Thou followest vanity, as one
most inconstant: thou do prosecute thine age, as one ouerchildishe: thou
pursuest sensuality, as one most wilful in follies: which thing for a while
may be dissembled, but long time may not be suffered: in such wise, that either
the Empire shall be lost betwixt thine hands: or thou must dye within few
days. As the seat of the Empire is consecrated unto the Gods, so they suffer
not evil Princes long to reign* which thou may consider in Tyberius,
Caligula, Claudius, Nero, Galba, Otho, Vitellius, Domitian, Commodus, Iulianus,
Bassianus and Niger, al which had so evil an end, that where the iron of the
enemy entered, by the same place the soul departed. Oh my sorrowful and
unfortunate son Bassianus: of whom until this time I go laden with
sorrows: and also thou have to hold it for most certain, that since thou
art a disciple of his evil manners, so shall thou be also a follower of his
most miserable death. Being very young, and as then but a child, I heard my
Lord Marcus Aurelius very often say, that the immortal Gods did sooner slaye
evil Princes, then other wicked persons: because the evil man, is only evil
unto his own house and person: but the evil prince lives to the hurt of the
whole common wealth. I bought not the Empire, for any other cause, but chiefly
to renew the memory of the good Emperor Antoninus Pius: but alas alas of me?
who greatly fear and also hold it for certain, that as in Nero the
generation of the Caesar's finished: even so in thee the sincere lineage of the
Antonines shall be ended.

In the days that I remained at Rome, I understood, and since I came into
Asia, I have also seen, that by the prosperity of a good man, many be
advanced: and by mishap of a wicked person, many finish and decay.

I am advertised, that in thy house and chamber, men of wicked life, and little
wisdom, have free entrance and familiarity: which in princes houses, is
very perilous, and no less pernicious: for that such persons do procure thee
to follow the counsels which they shall give, and to dissemble the excess
which they shall commit. If thou be evil, and such as attend thee be
wicked: how may thou have hardiness to chastise any evil? To refourme
others, thou must first refourme thy self: and to chastise others, thou have
first to punish thy servant: for that, if the private and favored servants
of Princes be dissolute, the common wealth does fall out to be absolute. In
the reign of my lord Marcus Aurelius, I saw his court furnished with
virtuous persons, and in the days of his son Commodus, I saw his house
filled with wicked people: and am well able to say unto thee, my son, that
as their houses were, so was their common wealths. If thou will live in quiet,
go always in peace, and avoid suspicion: keep in thine house continually men
of honesty, gravity, and wisdom, because honorable and wise men in Princes
houses, yealde authority with their persons, and profit with their counsels.

Now, or never, thou may withdraw thine hand, cease to be evil, and bind
thy self to be good: because of all that is past, we will impute the fault to
thy youth: which if thou refusest to do, then will we refer it wholly unto
thy wilful vanity. It profits not a little for the healpe of good
government of the common wealth, that the Prince be of good life: for subjects
having good Princes, imitate what they see, and perform what they command.


CHAP. XI. Of certain laws which the Emperor Heliogabalus made in Rome.
HEliogabalus made certain laws, whereof some were good, some indifferent, and
others neither good nor evil, but most vain: for as he used to say, so
great authority have Princes in their kingdoms, as the gods in the heavens.
He made a law that no vestall virgin should make a vow of chastity, but to
stand at her liberty to be enclosed, or to be married: for he held opinion,
that women were very weak to perform vows: and at every hour, variable of
opinion and advise. He made a law, that no widow might marry within a year
of her husbands death: on the one part sufficiently to bewail the dead, and
on the other part, exactly to consider of him that should marry her. He made
a law, that no flesh, bread, wine, or any fruit should be sold in Rome by
view, but by weight and measure: because in selling of things by weight and
measure, they are bought according to their value, and not as they are praised.

He made a law that al taylers in receiving garments to make, should take the
same by weight, to avoid purloyning of any part thereof. He made a law that
no young man under the government of father, mother, or tutour, might give,
take, or play any money: because it were to be presupposed, that such a one,
being in no possession of inheritance, had either stolen, or made some evil
mart. He made a law that all maids, having attained the age of xxv. years,
might marry, although their parents would not thereunto consent: for he used
to say, that good parents have more care to marry one daughter, then to
breed x. sons. He made a law, that on holy days, and days of public
feasts and joy, they should not openly bury their dead: saying, it were an
evil sign unto the common wealth, if at the time of joy, others should begin
to weep. He made a law, that no Roman should presume to throw out at door,
any servant, slave, or horse, or any other beast, were it but a dog, either
for any old age or sickness: saying, that for the same purpose, men serve
from their youth, to be succored when they come to age. He made a law, that
punishment should not be given unto thieves as Judges commanded, but at the
will of the persons which were robbed: affirming theaft to be so foul a fault,
that by the hands of all persons they deserved chasticement. He made a law,
that no citizen of Rome should presume to draw, to drown, to strangle, or
hang his slave for any offense: saying, that to the Gods alone, and to Princes,
power is given to slaye and kill, and to others only to punish. He made a
law, that if any married woman should committ adultery with any kinsman or
friend of her husband, he might neither chastise, reprove or blame her, if she
proved that her husband had first brought him to ye house: affirming: that a
woman naturally of her self is weak, and being moved by any occasion, has
no power to make resistance. He made a law, that freely all manner of persons
within the walls of Rome, might depart from their wives, and their wives from
their husbands, after six years marriage: affirming, that since from year to
year was a long time to change a garment, it were not much, that from six to
six years, there should be change of marriage. He made a law, that in all
Rome they should have no shop wherein to sell compou^d medicines, but only
simples and wholesome herbs, to avoid resemblance of tauernes, wherein they
sold new wines, but in shops only old medicines. He made a law, that none
should marry in Rome but with his equal: that is to say, a merchant with a
merchant, a goldsmith with a goldsmith, a servant with a servant, and a
rusticall with a rusticall: for he held opinion, that men, in making unequal
marriages, do enforce them selves to more then they may, and spend much more
then they ought. He made a law, that when any house burned in Rome, all the
neighborhood should run to the healp and succor thereof, upon the pain of
any man's default therein, to contribute to the repairing thereof. Many other
laws were made by Heliogabalus, as Historiographers of him do report, of
great indignity to be written, and no less unshamefast to be read.

CHAP. XII. How Heliogabalus was thrice married, and of his marrying of the
Gods together.
AFter that Heliogabalus was come from Asia, he stayed in Rome an whole year
without marriage: after which time he married with a gentlewoman of Rome,
beautiful of face, and noble of blood: and it well appeared, that he rather
married her for beauty, then nobleness: for that a year being scarcely
passed, he was divorced.

He did not only remove her from all honor, but also cast her out of his
house, spoiled her of all her Jewels and apparel, and constrained her by
spinning and weauing openly to get her living. The first wife being repudiate,
he grew enamoured of one of the vestal virgins, whom he removed out of the
church, and openly espoused: for which fact, the Senate was not a little
grieved, and Rome no less escandalized: because the vestal virgins, were
offered in the temples unto the Gods, and sworn and vowed to perpetual
chastity. After he understood the grief of the Senate, and the murmuring of
ye people, he mounted one day into the Senate, and wished them not to be
sorrowful for his marriage with a vestall virgin, for that if it were an
offense, it were but an human offense: and being (as he was) a Priest, it
apperteined not unto him to marry, but with a woman that were a Priest: and if
that were not sufficient, yet it sufficed that he was a Prince and an Emperor
most supreme, unto whose greatness it appertained to make laws, without all
obligation to observe them. More then a year, and less then twain, he was
married unto this vestall virgin: to whom, as to the first, he gave a libell
of divorce: and the sorrowful woman came to so great and miserable poverty,
that if the other did obtain living by spinning, this did purchase the same by
adultery: in such wise, that of a consecrated virgin, and of a noble Empress,
she became a common adulteress. He married the third time with a widow, and
matrone of Rome, and for better occasion he would often say, that she was
descended from the lineage of Commodus: and that from thence forth he would not
take a wife, but of blood very high, of beauty singular, and of condition
most discreet. Heliogabalus would often say, any Prince might escape error in
his first marriage: that is to say, if she were of base condition, to esteem
her of no reputation: if she were foul, to abhor her: and if she were
foolish, to kill her.

Heliogabalus proceeded unto so great madness, that he did not only deride
human marriages, but also scoffed at divine matrimonies: for that he
determined openly to marry his God Heliogabalus, and to celebrate matrimony
with some other Goddess. The case was thus, that the thing which the Romans
held under greatest guarde, reverence, and veneration, was the Image of the
Goddess Pallas, which was said to fall from heaven upon the walls of Troy:
this Image Heliogabalus commanded to be taken out of the church, where she
remained hidden, and to be transferred unto his house: and from the day that
she was brought from Troy, was never seen with man's eye until that day.
He made a coche of plate over gilded, aloft whereon he placed the Goddess
Pallas, apparelled in rich robes, and charged with most precious jewels: one
of the Oxen wherewith the coche was drawn, was white without any spott of
black: and the other was black without any spott of white. Heliogabalus went
before with a goad in his hand, guyding the Oxen, and turning his face always
toward the Chariot, in such manner, that still to behold the Goddess, he
marched backwardes. The Romans understanding, that Heliogabalus would that day
play the Carter, provided from the imperial palace unto the temple, a broad
and a sandy way, that in his backewarde walk he should not find whereat to
stumble, much less to fall. And when they were all come unto the church, they
took the God Heliogabalus, and the Goddess Pallas, married them, and joined
them as man and wife, and made them a right sumptuous bed in the midst of the
temple, where they jointly slept all that night. The Romans received no small
grief, to behold Heliogabalus committ such follies: for that presuming (as
they presumed) to be so great worshippers of the Gods, it seemed unto them
that in making such marriages, was to deride the Gods: and it might happen,
that what he did but in ieste, they might repaye in earnest.

Now, when these Gods were espoused, Heliogabalus would solemnize that
marriage with joys: for which purpose, he commanded the Circene plays to be
prepared: wherein he commanded infinite beasts to be slain, and the flesh of
them all, both good and bad, to be eaten of all persons: in such wise, that
there they did eat Lions, Bears, Woolues, Tigers, Unicorns, Ounces, Horses,
Asses, Dogs, Beeues, Buffes, and other wild beasts, Bores excepted, which
they used not to eat in Phoenicia, where he was bred and nourished. Now, when
all these feasts were finished, and al plays performed and concluded,
Heliogabalus would make a show of the greatness of his mind, and the wealth
and riches of his person: and being advanced upon the highest steps or degrees
of the church, he threw amongst the circumstants, a great sum of money, and
no less riches in jewels: for the scambling and getting whereof, many were
wounded, choked, strangled, and slain: and the hurt was not so small, but
that much greater was the sorrow in Rome and all Italy, for the great
numbers which there died: then any pleasure of the money which they had
gotten.

CHAP. XIII. How Heliogabalus sold offices, and practiced many vanities.
HEliogabalus did mart and sell all offices of justice, and of the Senate, as
well Censors and Edils, as Pretors and Tribunes, in such wise, that he which
gave most money, although lest virtuous, did bear greatest office. It was a
custom in Rome, to elect no Senator, except he were in lineage an ancient
Patritian: and of age, at the least fifty years: but he made his election
(for the most part) of base persons, as gardeners, potters, and taylers: and
other young men of the age of xx. years. He did not only sell the offices of
the common wealth, but also of the government of his house: as porters,
cooks, caters, chamberlains, and auditors: whereof followed, that at times
when he would dispatch them for their evil service, they would plead, that
they had bought it of him for money.

Heliogabalus being a friend unto ieasters, and greatly delighting in their
conversation, it happened against the celebration of the feast of May, in the
even thereof, xx. carte loades of Roses were brought unto the Court, which
being cast all into one chamber, against the next days feast, he commanded
those iugglers and ieasters to be thrown amongst those Roses, which being
many, and they overwhelmed therein, were all strangled with Roses. He did never
eat but at tables of silver, or sit in chair that was not wrought with
silver, gold, and Unicorn: and all the provision of pots, skilets, ladels,
spits, and all other things of the kitchen, were of silver, and his cooks in
silk. Secretly Heliogabalus commanded an hundredth pitchars of flies to be
taken, and being brought to the Court, he feasted certain Romans: and being
then Summer and time of great heat, and in chiefest of their dinner, he
commanded his hungry flies to be set at large, who with their liberty gave
an onset upon the guestes, as upon a camp of enemies, in such wise, that the
guestes gave themselves to flight, and the flies sat down to eat.

On the day of the great feast of his God, all the sacred Senate, and whole
multitude of people, offering sacrifices in the temple, and all the doors fast
shut, soudeinly he caused to be set loose amongst ye troops of people, an
hundredth cattes, ten thousand rattes, an hundredth greyhounds, and a thousand
hares: where the fight and slaughter was so great, and the confusion, rumble,
and cry of people so extreme, that it seemed, he went rather to scorn the
Gods, then offer sacrifices.

The chamber where he slept, his Gallerie where he walked, the place where he
did eat, and also dispatche affairs, was always swept, not with broomes of
any common matter, but of threeds of gold: which office he gave unto one of the
chiefest persons of his Court. When he would at any time walk a little on
foot, it was not on hard ground, but on sand of gold. Heliogabalus was not
satisfied to wear shoes of any silk, or velvet, either of clothe of gold, or
gold wrought with the hammer: but the soles were of Unicorn, and gold of
Nilus: and the instep and upper part thereof set with pearl and most rich
stones: in such wise, that Heliogabalus shoes were of more value, then the
crown of Julius Caesar, or Augustus. He was much addicted to wear rings on
his fingers, and sometimes would wear them of brass, iron, lead, amber, and
of leather: in such wise, that this prince, the more to discover his madness,
did wear shoes of gold, and ringes of lether. On a time there came from
Alexandria, 10. ships laden with great and most precious riches: and
understanding that they were arrived at the port of Hostia, secreately he
commanded the mariners to sincke them: whereof being reproved in the Senate,
he answered: that thereby they had to understand his small covetousness, for
that he spent the riches of the earth, and drowned that which came by Sea.
Heliogabalus was prodigal and curious, not only openly, but also in secreate:
for that his Vrinall was of Unicorn, and his stool of fine gold. When he
chanced to issue out of Rome, he had with him no less then 600. wagons, which
were al laden, not with chestes, apparel, either any thing necessary or
apperteyning unto persons of the Court: but with women, ieasters, musicians,
hunters, fishers, exquisite wines, and victuals never heard off: for that he
never went forth of Rome to visit countries, or conquer enemies, but to
seek delectable places, the more freely to give him self to vice. A certain
Senator demanding why he used such excess in spending, he made him answer:
My friend, I give thee to understand, that none does inherit but after the
death of some person: and therefore I will in my life time, make my self mine
own heir.

The armies did not a little repent them to have elected him Emperor, and the
Senate no less to have accepted and allowed the same: for that he was so
wilful in all things, that he was not only satisfied to be vicious in all
human vices: but watched and studied to invent new wickedness. Mesia the
grandmother of Heliogabalus, which procured, or (to say better) bought him the
Empire, had sufficiently advised and also persuaded him to be good and
virtuous: but he was so obstinate in his evil, and so vowed and dedicated
unto vice, that he little esteemed the counsel of his friends, either the
threatenings of his enemies.

When his graundmother Mesia perceived, that good persuasions would neither
profit, either great threatenings pearce him with any fear, she remembered to
fix her eyes upon her other nephue named Alexander, that the one being dead,
the other might succeed: for she held it for most certain, that in few
days, respect being had of his many vices, his Empire should finishe. As Mesia
was ancient, provident, and of experience: so she persuaded Heliogabalus with
such words, that he accepted his cousin Alexander as companion of the Empire,
which election the Senate approved and allowed with great affection, and no
less grateful unto the whole people: and from thence forth, although they
obeyed Heliogabalus, yet they did yeald al their love unto his cousin
Alexander. Heliogabalus being advertised by certain Nekromantike Priests of
Egypt, that he should have a death according unto his life (whereby, he
doubted that his life should be short, and his death shameful:) began to
devise with him self, what kind of death might be given him by his enemies:
and considered, that either they would cut his throat, or hang him, or cast
him down from some rock, or drown him, or end his days with some poison: and
thus it was, he filled a ponde full of rose water, wherein to be drowned: at
the foot of a Tower of his house, he placed golden sand, to fall on: he made
twisted silk halters wherewith to be hanged: he commanded daggers and
swords of gold, wherewith to be slain: and conserved poison in Unicorn
boxes, wherewith to be poisoned: all which he provided of purpose, that at the
time of need he might one way or other end his wretched life: for (as he used
to say) he greatly did not esteem to die, if with such, and so stately
instruments he might be put to death. But the success happened quite contrary
to the forcastes of Heliogabalus, as well in dying when he would not, as in the
manner of his death, whereof he did not think: for it is a thing notorious
unto all men, that we may neither enlarge our life as we desire, either shun
that death which we abhor.

CHAP. XIIII. Of the shameful death of the Emperor Heliogabalus.
AFter that Heliogabalus had accepted his cosen Alexander companion of the
Empire, he not a little repented him thereof: for that he clearly perceived
himself to be abhorred, and his cosen greatly beloved: he determinately
purposed to deprive Alexander of his honor, as also to devise a drift to
dispatch him of his life. Manea, the mother of Alexander, understanding the
extreme hatred of Heliogabalus so furiously bent against her son Alexander,
had over him great regard, that he should not walk alone by night, accompany
suspicious persons, feed of any meat that were presented, or pass by
dangerous places: because she was assured, yt to kill him, Heliogabalus sought
not occasion, but opportunity.

After that Heliogabalus found the great guard and watch of the mother and
grandmother over Alexander, he went on a day unto the Senate, persuading with
sweet words, and after commanding upon great pains, to take that name
Caesar from Alexander, which they had given him: this demand being heard of
the whole Senate, every man cast down his head, and answered not so much as
one word. When he saw the Senate refuse his request, he did write a letter
unto the Prefects, and most principal of the armies, to give them to understand
that from the^cefoorth they should give no honor unto Alexander, much less
yield him service as unto Caesar: but the armies finding it rather to proceed
of his overmuch malice, then of any fault in Alexander, did not obey his
commandments, neither answered his letters.

When he might not persuade the Senators, or constrain the armies, he
advised to bribe and corrupt his servant and household officers, promising
them many and great rewards, if they would temper his meat with some poison,
to rid him of his life. He conferred also with the tutours of Alexander, to
find if he might frame them to lead him forth in to some Orchard or gardeine,
or to seek some device to leave him alone: unto whom he did not only promise
great riches and wealth, but also promotions to great offices. Heliogabalus
perceiving that he might neither corrupt the one, or persuade the other, for
that he was loved of al men, commanded his counterfects openly to be
overthrown and defiled with dyrte: which was holden amongst the Romans, as
great an injury, as exactly to take away a man's life.

On that day in which Heliogabalus had commanded the counterfects of Alexander
to be defaced and defiled, he prepared also in secreate, certain his friends
to kill Alexander, if upon the chance of any mutiny that might happen, he
should come forth: for he did bear him so mortal hatred, that it seemed his
life to prosper to none effect, if he might not spoil him of his life. The
day before this matter grew to effect, Heliogabalus issued out of Rome, to
solace at a gardeine: and when they began to overthrow and traile the pictures
of Alexander, the Pretors of the armies assembled with great speed, to stay
the same: by which mean there was raised no small scandal, in so much that
they did not only repel that injury, but also pursued Heliogabalus unto his
garden to have slain him. All Rome being armed, the mother and grandmother of
Heliogabalus, departed with great have unto the garden, where he was persuading
him to take Alexander in a Licter, and jointly to pass through the streats:
that after this manner, seeing them both friends, the armies might be pacified
and disseuered. Heliogabalus being utterly void of care of the scandal that
passed in Rome, attended rather every hour with great joy, ye news of
Alexanders death, and the spoil of his pictures. As much as Heliogabalus
determined to have slain Alexander, so much were the armies purposed to have
killed Heliogabalus: and for the execution thereof, with great fury they
marched to seek him at his garden: unto whom there came forth to talk, not
himself, but his grandmother, of whom she obtained at that time the safety of
his life: which they granted upon condition, that he should correct his
person, reform his house, and visit the common wealths. On the next day,
they cast forth and ridd the house of Heliogabalus, of Gabalus, Herodes,
Gordius, and Murius, which were his favored servants, and companions of his
vices: and those in deed, that from a fool, converted him into an idiot. A
month after these things had passed, and the tumult pacified, in the Calends
of Ianus, which is the beginning of January, Heliogabalus refused to go unto
the Senate, either to send Alexander his substitute: whereof the Senators
found themselves greatly iniuried, and remained thereof very suspicious.

And being as then very late at night, when the Senators came from the Senate,
they there presently at the gates thereof, received commandment from
Heliogabalus, that without all delay upon pain of their lives, they should
depart out of the city of Rome, without visitation either of house or friend:
and as there were of them both sick and old, so it was lamentable to behold
them wander in the darcke, stumbling in those fields, and so bitterly weeping.
The Consuls and Senators being banished, there remained in Rome a certain
ancient Consul named Sabinus, a man excellently learned, unto whom Vlpianus
did dedicate his books, and of whom the Romans received counsel, in all
their grave affairs. This Sabinus, by reason of his great age, came not out of
his house: and Heliogabalus thincking he had no other enemy remaining in all
Rome, called a Centurion, and said in his ear, that he should go unto Sabinus
house and cut off his head: and as it chanced, the Centurion being deaf, and
not understanding the commandment to have him slain, but banished as the
oath Senators, by defense of the Centurion, Sabinus escaped with his life.

The Pretorians, and men of war being advertised, that Heliogabalus had
banished the Consuls and Senators, and also commanded the good old Sabinus to
be slain, strangled Siluius, tutour unto Alexander, and removed Vlpianus from
his Censorship: with furious rage went unto the Court, and breaking the gates
they slew Heliogabalus, and his mother that bare him: and they killed, not
only all his servants, but also his cattes and dogs, his Parratts, horses,
peacockes, and monkies: in such wise, that in all his house they left nothing
alive.

When Heliogabalus understood the breaking up of his gates, and the slaughter
of his household, thincking to save his person, hid himself in a privy up to
the chinne, where they discharged him of his head: in such wise, that
conformable to his filthy life, he received a nastie death. Although
Heliogabalus and his mother were jointly slain, yet most truly she discovered
a more noble mind: for that she died in her chamber as a Lady, and he most
cowardly in a privy. Heliogabalus and his mother being dead, they took their
naked and mangled bodies, and trailed them in the dirte alongest the streates
unto Tiber, in the depth whereof they were cast to be eaten of fish, and not
to be sought or found of men.

Many Princes, his predecessors, and successors were very evil, wicked of
life, and pernicious unto the common wealth: but amongst all, Heliogabalus
alone was he, in whom was found no good work: so he alone wanted a
Sepulcher. By this Prince, all princes ought to take example, to fly
wilfulness, and the hatred of their people: because a detested life remoueth
all merit of honorable burial.

The Romans not satisfied to have slain, drawn, and drowned Heliogabalus,
overthrew and whirled stones at his counterfects that were placed in the
Capitol, and scrapte out his name in all places where it was written: and the
more to discover their hatred, they did not only kill all his servants and
friends, but burned all his apparel and jewels: in such wise, that of him
remained no other memory in Rome, but the report of his name, whereat they did
spet on the ground.

Heliogabalus reigned 6. years, 3 months, and ten days: he lived 32.
years, 4. months, and five days: whereof 26. years he was a young man, very
virtuous, and a priest withdrawn and also solitary: the other 6. years he
was an Emperor more absolute and vicious, then ever reigned in the Roman
Empire: for that the vices which were scattered in other persons, were found
jointly in his possession.

The life of the good Emperor Alexander Seuerus, son of the good matrone
Manea, compiled by Sir Anthony of Gueuara, bishop of Mondonnedo, preacher,
chronicler and counselor, unto the Emperor Charles the fifte.
CHAP. I. Of the nouriture and natural country of the Emperor Alexander
Seuerus.
AURELIUS Alexander was naturally an Assyrian borne, his father was named
Varius, and his mother Manea: he was cosen germane unto the emperor
Heliogabalus, for their mothers were sisters: and although he were borne in
Assyria, yet he was bred and nourished in Rome: for that in those days his
grandmother, the great matrone Mesia, governed Seuerus and his household, and
also the whole common wealth. Alexander was tall of body, of black curled
hair, sallow and lean faced, with great eyes, a thick short neck, his hands
dry, and of big sinews, slender legged, high of instep, and his complexion
somewhat cholerike, but much flegmatike, which afterward he discovered in the
course of his life: because he was mild of conversation, and in government
pitiful. Alexander was borne in the city of Arsena, Septimus Seuerus being
Emperor: he was nourished the first four years in Assyria, and then brought
unto Rome, under the government of his grandmother, where after she had kept
him with her, other three years in Rome, she returned him into Assyria: partly
to avoid the idle nouriture of the Court, and also for that Bassianus should
not murder him. The presages of his Empire were these: it was found most
truly, that on the day that Alexander Magnus died, this Alexander Aurelius was
borne: and at the time of child birth his mother came to visit the Sepulcher
of Alexander, where she fell in travel and brought forth this son, who was
named Alexander, his nourse being called Olympia, and his tutour Philip: which
were the two names of the father and mother of Alexander Magnus. The self same
day that Alexander was borne, there came an old woman to her house, and offered
unto ye mother a red egg, which a stock dove had laid at ye hour: aduouching
that red egg to signify no other matter, but yt the same child should be
Emperor. Manea the mother of this prince, was a woman very wise, prudent,
advised, and no less fair: and the special cause why she deserved so
greatly to be esteemed and honored, was: because no Roman woman did exceed
her in honesty of person, either was equal unto her in keeping her house. As
this matrone Manea naturally was virtuous, and inclined unto good, so she had
great solicitude to nourishe and instruct her son Alexander in good manners,
and to learn good and profitable sciences: and to the end he should not
forget, in the company of other young men, what he had learned of his masters
and tutors, she set great watch, that none were permitted, either to talk,
confer, or to be conversant with him, yt were not wise and learned. After that
Alexander was able to go, his mother taught him to be temperate in diet, neat
in his apparel, reposed in his pace, and reformed in his speech. He held so
great measure in all things apperteyning to good manners, sincerity in
virtues, and cleanness from all vice, (which that age always does yield) yt
all men (unto whom he was known) said, that it was as much to see Alexander in
time of his youth, as Tullius when he was an old man. It was not to be found
all the time he was governed by his mother, that any one day he did pass
without learning or exercise, either in letters or cheualrie: whereof they both
deserved perpetual praise, which is to wit, the mother in her commandments,
and the son for his obedience. Many sonns would prove good, if their fathers
had knowledge to give them instructions: neither would so many prove evil, if
they did yield obedience unto their parents: to which purpose the divine Plato
said in his books of common wealth, that that family was happy and blessed,
where the parents were prudent, and the children obedient. Manea used most
special vigilancie in the guard of her son, not only from all usual vices,
but also vicious persons: for that many times, good inclinations are corrupted
by vicious conversation. In his infancy, his scholemasters were Valerius,
Gordius, and Viturius: this Viturius was he that afterward was most esteemed
in his house, and wrote the discourse of his life, which history was lost when
the Gothe^s entered Rome. His master for Gra^mar, was Nebon the Grecian: in
Philosophy, Estelion the first: and in Rhetorike, Serapio the virtuous: and
afterward when he came to Rome, he had for his masters, Escarius, Julius, and
Macrinus: grave persons to instruct, and learned to teach. Above all other
Roman princes, Alexander was a friend of wise men, for whom he made diligent
search, and enriched them if they were poor, honored, enterteined, and gave
them credit when they counseled him: finally, a wise man of him never received
an ill answer, or found in his house any door shut against him. Being
demanded, why he did so generally delight in the wise and learned, he
answered: I love them for that which they know, and honor them for that which
they may: for in time to come, under their histories which they shall write,
our same shall shine and flourish. Alexander, in the days of his youth, was
deadly hated of his cosen Heliogabalus: and this proceeded, not of the sharp
condition of Alexander, but for the evil nature of Heliogabalus, that is to
say, for that he would not consent to be a companion in his wickedness, as by
birth he was his kinseman. There were never seen, two princes so conjoined in
parentage, so nere in succession, and so different in lives, as Heliogabalus,
and Alexander: for yt in Heliogabalus there was not one virtue to be praised,
either in Alexander one vice to be reprehended.

CHAP. II. How Alexander was advanced unto the Empire, and of his laudable
manners.
TWo years before the Pretorians killed Heliogabalus the Emperor, Alexander
was elected Augustus, to ye great grace, liking, and conformity of all the
Roman people: whereof proceeded, that on the day in which they had slain the
unworthy Heliogabalus, they gave unto Alexander the ensigns of the empire.
When Alexander began to reign, he was very young: wherefore, Mesia the
^randmother, and Manea the mother, did take the charge (...) government of the
empire: who although in condition they were women, yet most truly in
government they discovered themselves to be men. They elected xij. persons to
assist them in the affairs of the Empire, which were chosen amongst the
ancient, the most expert: and amongst ye learned, the most wise: and without
determination and judgment of all these, they did neither hear what was
demanded, either determined any matter that they had to do. The first deed
of Alexander, and his grandmother Mesia, his mother Manea, and his xii.
counselors, was, to take order for reformation of temples: namely, to repair
the decaide, to cleanse the defiled, enrich such as were robbed, and to populate
such as were disinhabited: because in the days of his predecessor
Heliogabalus, not only human matters went to wrack, but the gods also were
profaned. Divine matters being reformed, presently they took order for
co^seruation of the common wealth: and before all things, all vicious persons
were resolved from their offices: and not satisfied to punish their offenses,
with deprivation of their offices, he forced them to make restitution of
whatsoever they had either bribed, or purloyned, and from thencefoorth to live
of their own proper sweat. Matters of justice were not handled, but of men
very well learned: Martial affairs were not commended, but unto men of great
experience: causes of the common wealth were not manured, but of persons
skillful therein: in such wise, that they provided, not offices for men, but
men for offices.

Also Alexander reformed the whole condition and estate of his house, as well
the ministers, as the expenses thereof: which all the days of Heliogabalus
exceeded in disorder, and was no less defiled with vice: for which cause he
set a seazment of the charges thereof, and elected faithful officers to spend
the same: in such wise, that in the house of Alexander, there was neither
immoderate expenses, either men wanting offices. Although order was taken for
the ordinary expenses of his house, yet notwithstanding, his household had all
things in abundance, convenient unto his imperial magnificence: and many
strangers that came from far, praised Alexander, because they might not
accuse him of prodigality, either note him of avarice. The temples, the common
wealth, and his house being ordered, the good prince forgot not to reform his
own person: not only for the manner of consuming of time, but also for ye order
and manner of his apparel: for that he used to say, if the money which princes
spend in robes superfluous, and the time which they consume in apparelling and
decking themselves, were spent to the profit of their common wealths, they
should obtain more favor of the gods, and less hatred of men. Alexander was
so humble in condition, yt publicly he commanded, none should call him, Lord,
either by word or writing: but, the priests should call him, brother: the
Senators, son: men at arms, companion: and common persons, friend: and this
he did, for that he held the gods in so great reverence, that he would they
only should be called Lords. On the superscriptio^s of letters brought him by
Ambassadors, or sent him from any province, they wrote thereon exquisite and
stately titles: wherein he provided, no other superscription to be added, but
this: Unto our son, our Brother, our Companion or Friend, Aurelius Alexander
Roman Emperor. Heliogabalus his predecessor, did commonly wear precious
stones on his feet, and most costly jewels of gold and Unicorn in his
apparel: which things Alexander never used, either delighted to wear: for as
he was wont to say, princes are not to be known of their vassals, by their
rich robes, but by their good works performed in their common wealths. He was
apparelled most commonly, in white: in winter, with a certain kind of bla^ket
of Britain, and in summer, with a certain manner of cotton that was brought
him from Asia. Some times he would make him garments of cotton and linen wouen
together: oftentimes saying, that he much delighted therein, for that it was
very cheap to be bought, light to wear, and might best be washed in summer.
He would many times walk in Rome with a friend or twain, holding his hands
behind: and finding himself weary, would enter into the first neighbors
house, and sit down upon a bank of earth, and some times would there fall a
sleep: in such manner, that he had so great familiarity with all men, as if he
had been one of them. He was mild, pitiful, patie^t, silent, in all things of
great continency, and was never seen extreemely diste^pered, or at any time
to use furious words with any person: for which cause, no manner of person did
wish him evil for his evil deeds, but of a cancred and corrupt nature wherewith
he was defiled.

CHAP. III. How Alexander being invested with the Empire, presently did visit
and reform his common wealth.
IN the second year of ye Empire of Alexander, his grandmother the great and
renowned matrone Mesia died: in whose death he and the Roman people also
discovered great sorrow, bestowing upon her coarse, so honorable a funeral,
and such solemn obsequies, as apperteined to one that had been cosen unto
the Emperor Seuerus, and had for nephues the Emperor Heliogabalus, and
Alexander. Mesia being dead, the burden of government was laid upon Manea,
mother unto Alexander: whom al men conceived to be in full possession of
chastity, temperance, prudence, and patience, but notwithstanding somewhat
inclined to avarice: whereof proceeded, these words early in ye morning to be
written upon the gates: if Manea had not charge of money in the common wealth,
such a Roman had never been borne in Rome. Long time passed in which the
Senate had not been visited: which Alexander forgot not, as well to visit, as
also to reform: not only by inquisition how they lived and governed the common
wealth, but also how they ordered their houses and ruled their families: for he
used often to say, that the man which knew not to govern his wife, to provide
for his house, and direct his family, the prince might not commit a greater
folly, then to place such a one in the government of the common wealth. In
Rome they were named Milites veterani, that long time had served in wars, and
were withdrawn unto their houses: these were mainteyned at the charges of the
common wealth, and priuileged for appearance before a Judge: and as Alexander
was infourmed of their licentious and vicious lives, he commanded them to be
banished Rome, and no more to be mainteyned by the common wealth. When he
signed the sentence of their exile, with his own hands, he added these words:
It is as just that the vicious and wicked, from a free man, be converted to a
slave: as the virtuous from a bond man, to be made free: for where there is
corruption of manners, liberties have no place: Most truly these words were
spoken, as of a prince right worthy veneration. Also he visited the officers
of the common treasury, as if we should say, the Auditors and others that had
charge of the goods of the kingdom: amongst whom he found many bribers, and
needelesse officers: those he commanded to be punished, and these to be
disfranchised. Alexander was greatly affectionate unto the affairs of the
common wealth: with which zeal he used so great diligence, that the goods of
the common wealth were recovered and gotten again from the hands of robbers,
and spent and employed in matters profitable: for it was his opinion, ye Good
princes ought not to consent, that vagabounds should live of the entrails of
the people. He wrote unto all provinces, that in all civil causes, Judges
should proceed according to the order and right thereof, thieves and matters of
felony excepted: who within three days after their apprehension, should
either be punished, executed, made slaves for the service of men, or condemned
to common works for public profit, and for no cause to let them escape: for
as he often said, Never man which had made a proof in the knowledge of theft,
until his death, might at any time depart from so foul a vice. He also
visited the officers, that had the charge of pay for the men of war: against
whom he received accusations for payment of evil money, imbezeling of pays,
reckoning the dead with the living, and valuing their victuals more then they
were woorthe: whom Alexander commanded openly to be whipped, and for evermore
to be banished. He established by public edicte, that whosoever should
adventure from thencefoorth to steal, or imbezill any payment due for matters
of war, should, for the same, loose his life. All things which he had to
command, or provide in the common wealth, he did first communicate with such
persons as he thought to have knowledge and experience thereof: and his manner
was to say, that in following his own proper judgment, he had never but
tedious success: but by repayring unto other men's advise, he always gathered
some fruit.

He held in his house many, and very notable persons, of whom always he was
accompanied: but amongst al whom he best loved, and did most commend his
secreetes, was Vlpianus: this Vlpianus, besides his great learning, was a man
so virtuous, that Alexander would often say, he had rather adventure the
committing of some odious deed before the Gods, then speak a foul word in
presence of Vlpianus.

His predecessor Heliogabalus, had ordained many laws in the favor of the
fiscall, to the great prejudice of the people: for, admitting that goods were
augmented: yet on the other part, the common wealth daily diminished: for
which cause Alexander commanded, that all those laws should be reuiewed,
considered, and reformed: for, as he used to say, it were more commodious for
the Prince which is no tyrant, that his common wealth be rich, and his house
poor: then the common wealth to be poor, and his house rich. When he began
to reign, the people were abandoned to dissolute manners: for which cause he
made some rigorous laws, and other mild and pitiful: but, when he
commanded them to be proclaimed openly, he gave advertisement unto his
ministers, to execute them in secret. Consider not so much what I command
you, as the intent wherewith I command you, which is to weete, that rigorous
laws are not, but to terrify: but laws which are pitiful, to be executed,
because we make not laws, to take away men's lives, but to root and weed
vices out of our common wealths.

When the Senators did sit in grave affairs, he was not contented that they
should say their opinions by word, but by writing: neither was he yet
satisfied that they should set it down in writing, but add also thereunto ye
reasons which moved them to yt their opinion: saying, he did it to this end,
that none should adventure to yield his opinion, either forced with affection,
or corrupted with passion: but as reason and virtue should direct him.
Naturally, he was an enemy unto lies and liars: and if any man presumed to lie
in his presence, he received thereof as great despite, as though he had done
him an injury. He would often say, that good Princes have to esteem such for
greater enemies, that deceive them with flattering and lies, then such as do
intrude upon their countries: for the one takes not but of his goods, but the
other robs him of his fame. At all times, when they had talk of the election
of any Senator or Judge, he was always heard to speak these words in the
Senate: If, as now being present with men, I were in presence of the Gods, I
would crave their opinions in the election of Senators and Judges: for that
the choice of governors in a common wealth, does more seem divine, then
human election.

CHAP. IIII. Of the mild conditions of Alexander, and of his grateful
conversation.
ALexander was friendly unto his servant, whom he would visit indifferently
in their sickness: that is to weete, as well the meaner, as the more favored:
and in repayment of such his visitation, he would request them to give him
advertisement what was said of him in the common wealth: and if they said
unto him any thing more worthy amendment, then praise, he gave them as
great thanks for that advise, as at another time he used to give for any
great and notable service. The Consul Vncoiasson, on a certain time in great
secret, said unto Alexander: I am not a little astonnied at thee, (most
serene Prince) that do permit thy self to be governed of thy graundmother
Mesia, thy mother Manea, and thy wife Meania: who have framed thy conditions so
mild, that thereby thou do impair the estimation, both of thy person, and
also of thine Empire: for that a base and ouerfamiliar condition, leads unto
contempt.

Unto this Alexander answered: I owe reverence unto my graundemother, because
she nourished me: unto my mother, for that she bred me: and unto my wife
good company, for as much as she has married with me: and since it is thus,
with reason I ought of no man to be evil judged, for that I do no more but
duty.

From the day that he was elected Emperor, until he was placed in his
Sepulcher, there passed no day wherein he did not some notable deed worthy to
be marked, and no less to be followed: which is to say, hearing causes in
Justice, visiting temples, being resident in the Senate, repayring walls,
pardoning offenses, doing good unto the poor, and dispatching such other
affairs. He was bountiful to Ambassadors and strangers, and no less
reformed in his ordinary expenses: above the rest, he held narrow and
straight reckoning, and was well advised with the officers of his common
treasury, always to have in possession treasure in store. He said many
times, that the poor and needy Prince might neither be served affectionately
of his subjects, or with arms resist his enemies.

Unto such as were sound, and strong to travel, and yet wanted money to
maintain a trade, he commanded them to be succored with the goods of the
common treasury: upon condition, to repaye the same in process of time, with
the fruits and profits of his trade: by which mean he discharged his Empire,
not only of many poor persons, but also of thieves and vagabondes. All
persons that received either wages or stypende, he had registered in a book:
wherein was written their age, lineage, and service which they had done him,
using when he was alone, to read in that book: in such wise, he did so speak,
name, and had notice of all persons, as if they had been but one man.

The common store house for wheat, and oil, founded and furnished by Seuerus,
Heliogabalus had both wasted and destroyed: in such wise, that there remained
nothing in store: this storehouse Alexander reedified, endued, and also
provided with exceeding great abundance of wheat and oil: so that in his
days, wheat and oil did flow and abound as water.

The Jews that were in Italy, of all men were evil handeled, and the
Christians no less persecuted and banished: now, when both the one and the
other made complaint, Alexander commanded them to live within their laws:
upon such condition, as they performed their ceremonies in secret. He did
much honor the Presidents of provinces, and when he traueiled upon the way,
they only were placed with him in his Coche or licter: which he did, to the
end that all men might behold how much he honored the ministers of Justice,
as also to be infourmed of the state of the common wealth of that country: for
that naturally, he was so great a friend, in that which touched the common
wealth, that he did not only take pleasure to provide and talk thereof, but
also held it for a vice, to be forgetful of the same. He used unto no kind
of people so great liberality, as unto Judges, Tribunes, and Pretors, which
had charge, and were sincere in ministering Justice: and aduouched unto the
Senate, that a Prince with reason ought not to be entitled a Prince, unless
he were careful for the execution of Justice: and if he find any that is just
in the administration thereof, such a one justly may not be recompensed: for
which cause, I give them more then any other persons which serve me, that by
their enrichement, all occasions to make other men poor, from them may be
removed. In the behalf of the common wealth he was advertised, that beef and
bacon was exceeding dear in Rome: in respect whereof he straitely charged and
commanded, that no person should adventure to kill either calfe or suckinge
pig, by the space of two years: whereof it came to pass, within the space
aforesaid, that a pound of flesh, which was sold for eight, was worth but
twain. Of men yt seemed grave, prudent, and sincere, he would always be
infourmed and receive advise, for provision of all grave and doubtful cases,
and yet would never communicate or commend his trust to any special persons:
for he used to say, that when the people do understand, that the prince is
counseled or directed by any one person, such a one, with gifts and requests
may easily be corrupted.

Alexander had a servant named Belon, who promised a gentleman to dispatch a
certain matter of great importance with Alexander, that touched him not a
little, giving to understand, that he was very private with the Prince: and
in remuneration of his promised travel, he received of that gentleman a
great sum of money: whereof Alexander being advertised, and that which he
promised to obtain, to be a matter most unjust, and no small offense unto the
common wealth, he commanded him to be crucified: affirming, that none should
dare to adventure to sell the favor of the Prince, to the prejudice of the
common people. He would many times assemble the chiefest of the people, and
warn them to be virtuous, noble minded, and pitiful unto the common sort:
aduertising them, that assuredly he would deal with the virtuous, as with
sons, and with the wicked, as with enemies.

Three times he gave unto the Roman people, great quantities of wheat, in
time of great dearth. Also, at other times he gave, of his grace, unto the
ancient horsemen, great sums of money: understanding the greatest part of
them to be in debt. There were in Rome many persons that lived not, but by
usury, by which mean much goods were lost, and many houses become tributarie:
wherein Alexander commanded exceeding diligence to be used in the reuiewe of
such contracts, and a memorial of the most notable griefs to be given him:
which when he had considered, he punished the usurers, and gave liberty unto
the poor men that were oppressed.

The manner of his dispatche in affairs, was, to be patient in hearing, mylde
in answering, skillful in conceiving, and pitiful in denying: in such wise,
that if he gave not that which they demanded, at the least he gave them
comfort with his words. After he came from the Senate, and had dispatched the
affairs of suitors, he did always pass the time in reading Greek rather then
Latin: amongst all other things which he used to read, was Plato his common
wealth, Cicero his offices, Horace, and Quintus Curtius, with the life of
Alexander: whom (his vices excepted) he diligently did imitate. If he saw any
of his officers, that for age, or impotencie, might not serve: he did either
call him or visit him, giving him many thanks for the service which he had
done him: and would request him to take it in good part, to receive his whole
stipend, with ease and rest in his own house: and to place some other in that
office, meet for his service. Usually he did eat twice a day, and in his
feeding more cleanly and curious, then costly and sumptuous: and never was
offended with his officers, for the lack of many, or exquisite meats: but for
want of cleanliness, and good seasoning.

Many persons wandering in Rome, and vagarant throughout all Italy, yole as
castawayes, who disdaining to learn some occupation after they were so charged
by commandment: he gave license unto all men, without further authority, to
take them for their slaves: which if they renounced, then freely to kill them.
He did permit none of his servants to wear any silk, clothe of gold, or
silver: for that he often used to say, that open excess of apparel, and secret
vice, were the destruction of Courtiers. Also he often aduouched, the condition
of a good Prince was, more to be recreated with hearing wise men talk, then in
tasting delicate meats. Alexander had in his house a certain person named
Veturius Turinus, whom he loved: against him going and coming to his chamber,
no door was shutt: this fellow was both guylefull and lying, and made all men,
that were suitors unto Alexander, believe that he had more conference with him,
then with any person of the Empire.

The case was thus, that Alexander being advertised of his vanity and
lewdness, and how he deceived, and was bribed of many, caused a Foster to
request Turinus to dispatche a certain suite with Alexander: who coming and
going daily into the Princes chamber, always advertised the suter: thus, and
so I have said in thy matter, and thus and so was I answered of Alexander:
the good Prince had true intelligence what Turinus used to say, and of the
bribes which he had received: whereupon presently he provided that Turinus was
taken, and in his presence by witness convinced of the guyle and deceit which
he had committed, of his huge promises also, and how much he had robbed:
which inquisition exactly made, he commanded him to be fixed aloft upon a
stake openly in Rome, and under him was set green wood and wette straw,
which being set on fire, did yield unto his nose a most cruel smoke, which
was not so little, but that in short space it delivered the miserable caytife
of his life: a crier with a loud voice making proclamation, Fumo punitur qui
fumum vendidit: which is to say: He that sold smoke, is smooldered in smoke.
In all famous cities, he caused storehouses to be made, only serving for safe
keeping of the goods and riches of such neighbors as doubted robbing.

He made in Rome new principal streets, wherein he buylt stately and
delightsome houses, which he gave in reward unto his friends and servants
that were wise and virtuous.

Garments of pure silcke he was never known, either to buy or wear: and if
by chance any were given or presented unto him, he bestowed them upon the
priests of the Temples, to be apparelled when they should offer sacrifices. He
was neither envious, or covetous of other men's goods: and in this case he
used to say, that the covetous Prince does finishe and conclude in tyranny.

Naturally he had compassion of the poor, but most chiefly of the needy
shamefaste man: that is to say, that in former times had been in honor, and
afterward fell into extreme poverty: for he used to say: there is no kind of
mishappe so unfortunate, as for a man to call to remembrance that in times past
he had been fortunate. All that he did take and confiscate of malefactors, he
commanded to be given unto shamefaste poor men: with an inquisition before
hand, how he fell into such poverty: whether by vicious adversity, or by
some other casualtie: for he held opinion, that to make him rich, which by
vice was made poor, were a cruel deed.

CHAP. V. Of his zeal of justice and other commendable acts, as well touching
his person, as his common wealth.
ALl the days of his Empire, he enterteined but one Physician, unto whom, or
any other, he did not at any time yield his pulse, either of any Physician
took counsel: and to him would often say in jest, think not that I give thee
to eat, to cure me: but to the end thou shall not cure me. He neither
delighted in Physic, or that Physicians should remain in Rome: and for
defense of his opinion he used to say, that as great infirmities do not
happen but by great excess: so it argues that the Prince which is compassed
with Physicians, goes charged with many vices. Presidents of provinces, when
he sent them to be resident in their circuites, he did not only instruct what
they ought to do, but also provided them for all necessities: and at their
return, if they had done well, he relieved their necessities with his great
liberality: but if they had done evil, he distressed them both of goods and
fame. Pretors, Censors, and presidentes that had charge of justice, if they had
no wives, he compelled to take concubines into their houses, to the end they
should not follow other men's wives: for he held opinion, that it were not
agreeable unto Justice, or according unto the honor of Rome, that the Judges
for adultery, should be accused of adultery. Unto CHRIST he would have made a
temple in Rome, and placed him in the number of their Gods, which also was said
of the Emperor Adrian: but the priests of the temples disuaded him, saying:
that they had received answer of the oracle that if he should perform that
act, all other temples should perish, and all persons would convert
themselves and become Christians. Alexander in Iestes, was gracious: in fables,
inuentiue: in bankets, a companion: in gathering of gold, skillful: in
conseruing, advised: in searching of mines, diligent: in giving, liberal: and
in speculation of new devices, exceeding careful. In earnest or in jest, in
word or in writing, he would not be called, but Roman: for which purpose, he
made sundry diligent searches of his genealogy, whereby he gave demonstration
of his descent from the Fabioes Metelloes, which were noble and ancient
Romans. He brought unto Rome great learned men, to read all Sciences: to
which effect he erected many colleges and studies, and endued them with great
rents, where the sons only of poor men were received and taught. Governors
of Provinces he punished most grievously, for their offense in Justice:
especially, if they were noted, or rather accused, of bryberie: but if by
malice they were wrongfully accused, the accuser received the chasticement of
the accused. This good Prince was pitiful unto all offenders, except
thieves, and false witnesses: against whom he used extreme justice: and
respecting the offense to redound, not so much unto him self, as unto others,
he affirmed: that ye Prince ought not to give them pardon. He had always in
his chamber a book wherein were written all notable services which had been
done unto him: he also entered into the same, all great rewards that he had
given: and if any man happened to do him some notable service, and craved no
recompense in consideration thereof: he would call him and say these, or such
like words: What is the matter that thou demaundest nothing of me? perchance
thou would have me thy debtour for thy service, since thou seek not the
recompense of thy travel. Seems it well unto thee, that thou should
obtain the fame of a faithful servant, and by thy mean I should purchase
the renoune of an ingrate prince? How shall others receive courage to serve
me, when they see thee unrecompensed for service past? know thou not, that
if it be just, that servants for treason committed, be put to death: is it not
also most just, that Princes for their ingratitude be abhorred? presupposing
that thou would serve me, without respect to profit thy self, of my
magnificence: wherein I give thee to understand, I find my self more
offended then served: for at all times when they shall praise thee for that
which thou have done for me, they shall despise me, not only for
ingratitude, but rather for hatred which I shall seem to bear unto thee. And
if thou ceasest to crave, in thinking me to be in necessity, and not able to
accomplish with all persons, most vain is thy judgment: for that the Prince,
having no other mean to pay, is so much bound to recompense service, that he
has to redeem it, even from his ordinary diet. Conformable unto thine
estate, demand what thou will: for since thou being a servant, had a
mind to serve: it is just, that I being a Prince, should have rewards to
give thee.

These, and such other words Alexander used to say, unto such as were
mindful to serve him: and forgettfull to crave of him. Those that served him,
and others that craved of him, he did never recompense with the reward of any
office of justice: but such as had served him, he recompensed their service,
with houses, Jewels, inheritances, or money.

For any importunity which they should use with him, any service which they
should do him, any Jewels which they should present him, or any favor which
they had of him, he gave not at any time, unto any person, any office for
government of justice: if he had not seen ability in his person, and merit
in his life. Every seventeen days, he paid his men of war: and when they
departed out of Italy, to conquer any country, he did ease them with beasts
whereon to ride, and succored them with money to spend, for maintenance of
their horses of service in courage, and their persons from weariness. When he
traveled upon the way, he paid for the lodging of all his train, and did
bear the charges of all sick persons.

Certain Christians, and certain tauerners came before him to plead for a
parcel of ground, where the Christians would have erected an house of prayer,
there to worship Christ their God: and on the other side, the tauerners
alleged their great necessity of that situation, for tauernes for the people:
in which matter Alexander gave this sentence. Divine things ought always to
have preferment before human matters: wherefore, I say and command, that
the Christians make their house for Christ their God: for, admitting their God
is unto us unknown, yet his honor is to be preferred before the profit of
tauerners.

CHAP. VI. How war was offered in Asia unto Alexander, and what was said
unto his Ambassadors.
JN the eleventh year after the beginning of the Empire of Alexander, soudeinly
he received letters from Asia, wherein he was given to understand by his
Roman officers, that there were resident, how Artaxerxes king of the Persians
had subdued, and also slain Arthabanus king of the Parthians: and not
contented with that victory, began also to occupy and possess Assyria and
Mesopotamia, provinces subject unto Rome. Upon which news, Alexander seemed
to receive some trouble of mind, partly to have wars in Asia, which always
was unto the Romans both dangerous and costely: and partly, for that in
ten years past, he had seen no enemy against him in armor: as also, for
that the success of wars consists not in leading great armies, but in the
favorable provision of the destinies.

Alexander, from his infancy, had been bredde in peace, had governed the
Empire in peace, and naturally also was inclined unto peace: in respect
whereof, it was no marvel though he were annoyed with wars: for that the
trouble and disquietnesse which war brings with it, is more convenient unto
cruel and unquiet persons, then for men of reposed minds.

He commanded his private servants deputed for his counsel, to join with
the Senate, jointly to read the letters that were written to him out of Asia,
and to determine how they should be answered: for, as negligence is hurtful
in all grave affairs, so in the wars it slays. The letters being read,
although they were therein of sundry judgments, yet in the end they resumed,
that before they made Artaxerxes war, they should request with peace: for,
admitting that at that present he destroyed the Roman territories, yet were it
not agreeable unto the greatenesse and sincerity of Rome, to take war in
hand, before that such war were very well justified. With great brevity
Alexander dispatched Ambassadors into Asia, and by them did write unto
Artaxerxes king of the Persians a letter, after this manner.

Alexander Seuerus, Roman Emperor, to Axtaxerxes king of Persians, health and
peace, in the pacified Gods.
We salute thee with health, because we wish it thee: and we salute thee with
peace, for that we be lovers thereof: and thou have not to hold it in small
estimation, that I salute thee in peace, and wish thee health: for unto Princes
that possess not health, life is tedious: and they which have not peace, it
were less evil to be dead. It may chance, that the war which a man has
against his own proper sensuality suffices not, but that he must invent
war against some strange country. A man that may not subdue his heart,
which within his own body is imprisoned, thinks he to conquer the whole
world that is placed in so great liberty? If in time of peace we may not live
in quietness: what shall we do when we awake new enemies against us? The
Prince that may not persuade him self to conform his will and mind to the
judgment of one only person, does he think to constreine all persons to be
appliant to his only judgment? Great travel has the poor man, that wants
all things: but much more has the Prince yt is contented with nothing. Here we
understand, that you have adventured thy person, spent thy treasure, employed
thy friends, and destroyed many people, to be lord of the Parthians: and we
fully believe, that now thou art no more satisfied, then when thou were only
king of Persia: for, contentation consists not in co^quering strange
kingdoms, but in taming and moderating our own proper desires. Neither the
Parthians there in Asia, neither the Romans here in Europa, have committed any
deed, wherefore thou should murder the^, or manace us: but it may come to
pass, that they shall revenge their injury, and we destroy thy potencie:
because for the more part, there never grows any danger toward us by our
enemies which have us in hatred: but from our friends whom we have offended.
The Romans and Parthians at al times have been thy good friends, and thou
have attempted an enterprise to offend them: but I swear unto thee by the
immortal Gods, that if thou do not restore them that which thou have taken,
and to us, that which we possess: in such manner, we Romans will make thee
war, that from commanding as a king of Asia, thou shall come to serve as a
vassal servant in Rome. There we send thee our Ambassadors, which shall
declare unto thee our will, hear them and believe them: and if thou will not
give faith unto the words which they shall speak, thou shall hereafter give
credit unto the armies which we will send. No more, but that our Gods be with
thee, and thine always with me.

The Roman Ambassadors which passed into Asia with this letter, afterward
reported, that when king Artaxerxes had perused the same twice or thrice, he
spoke in this manner.

Certain words uttered by Artaxerxes upon the receipt of Alexander his
Embassage.
I have read this letter of your Prince, more then once or twice: and as
appears by the style thereof, he has spent more time in the Achademies,
studying: then in the fields, fighting: because warrelike Princes have high
thoughts, and reasons very short: but in arms very doughtie.

I accept your Embassage, and explicate your credit, since the meaning of your
Prince is, that I shall leave what I have taken from the Parthians, and not
occupy my self in possessing that which apperteineth unto the Romans: unto
this aunsweringe, I say: that the law which has ordained, this is thine, and
this is mine, proceeded from base minds and humble hearts, that wanted
hardiness to enterprise great things: immagining to defend by books, that
which they durst not win with arms. The laws made by poor Philosophers
ought not to prejudice the greatenesse of Princes: because the Gods have
determined, that all things shall be proper, except kingdoms, which amongst
Princes should be common: the right whereof consists not in such as do
inherit them, but in them which may win them.

The heroycall Princes, and high minds, are not to be satisfied with the
patrimonies of their predecessors: much less apperteineth it unto their
greatenesse, to demand by law, that which their enemies have taken from them:
but for preservation of their inheritance to spend their treasure, and for
conquering and subduing kingdoms, every hour to adventure their lives.

And since it is thus, that there is no king so virtuous, but enuieth another
kingdom: I am determimined to conserve that which I have taken from the
Parthians, and to take what I may from the Romans: and if fortune shall be
froward in this my journey, at the least all men shall praise the greatness of
my mind.

These and such other words Artaxerxes used with the Roman Ambassadors,
which (as they afterward reported in Rome) did not so much marvel at that
which he said, as of the mind wherewith he did manifest the same: for he
seemed not to talk with the tongue, but to fight with his hands. Now, when
the Ambassadors were dispatched and departed from the court, he called them
again and said: Say unto Alexander your prince, that I mean not to answer
unto his philosophical letter: but in place of writing, I assign him the
field for paper, the lance for the pen, blood for ynke, and wounds for
words. The Ambassadors being returned unto Rome, and reporting all that had
happened with Artaxerxes, the Senate were not a little touched therewith, and
all the people conceived no small indignation, jointly swearing to break the
pride of Artaxerxes, and to revenge the words that he had spoken against Rome.
This Prince Artaxerxes was much loved and liked of his people, and no less
feared of strangers: and a thing most to be noted in him, was, that if in
taking from others he had the show of a tyrant, after he possessed the same,
he did govern as a right and just Prince. Many Romans requested Alexander, to
assemble Sorcerers, and Magicians, to declare the success of that war:
which he would not in any wise accomplish, either might well endure the
hearing thereof, affirming: that if as the Magicians and Soothsayers, by their
art, have knowledge to understand things to come, so they had power to remedy
the mischief which they should find, it were not unjust to co^ferre with them,
and also to serve them: but since I am certain that I may not escape what my
destinies will cast upon me, I will rather stick unto that which the Gods
shall determine, then unto that which the Magicians shall report and imagine.

CHAP. VII. Of a discreet speech used by Alexander unto his men of war.
ALexander understanding the proud answer that Artaxerxes had given unto his
Ambassadors, determined against him to denounce war: unto which end he
sent his mandats to all provinces, cities, subjects, and confederats with the
Roman Empire, to succor them with money, and assist them with their most
warlike people. Eleven years were past, in which the Empire enjoyed most
perfect peace and tranquillity: and upon the tidings of these new wars
into Asia, they were not a little amazed and escandalized: partly for exacting
new tributes, and partly for demanding their husbands and sons for the
wars. With grateful minds and ready disposition, the imperialists accepted
the Emperor Alexander in his requests and were no less ready to yield their
money, their sons, and persons to be employed in his service: because they
were fully persuaded, that neither by his fault, that war was raised: either
by his want of merit, to find therein any misfortune. During the time that
money was collecting, and the men of war assembling, he commanded all the
Capitaines, Centurions, and the most principal of all his garrisons and armies,
to come before him: who being placed in the field, and he himself advanced
aloft, he spoke to them after this manner.

Alexander his Oration, to his Capiteines and army, ass;embled in the field.
Brethren, companions, and my friends, I beseech the immortal Gods, to give
unto my tongue sweet eloquence, touching that which I have to say: and to
place in your hearts congruent attention, concerning that which you have to
hear: because, grace to persuade in him that speaks, and permission to be
persuaded in him that hears, are gifts that many crave, but very few
obtain. The inclination wherewith we are ledd, is so proud, and the malice of
man so wily, yt there is none which esteems himself so simple, but thinks
to know that which another understands: and therefore, for one man to have
skill to persuade many, is a gift that the gods only do give. With the
severity of Demosthenes, the prudence of Pythagoras, the wisdom of Plato,
and the eloquence of Cicero, many may hardly persuade one person: and does one
man think to persuade many? That which I have presently to say unto you, is
not to the end that ye shall do what I will, but to understand what it is that
you will: because, in great and grave affairs, one has to propound, but many
to determine. But coming to the purpose: you have known and seen, that these
xi. years we have governed the Roman Empire: in which space we have traveled
to conserve all men in justice, and shunned all occasions that might hinder our
peace: wherein we have cause to give thanks unto the Gods, since we have
deserved to enjoy in our time, yt which our predecessors never obtained.
Although a prince in his condition be a Saturnine, and in his life not well
advised, in conversation unbridled, in keeping covetous, and proud in his own
estimation: yet all is to be suffered and dissimuled, if he hold peace with
strangers, and without acception of persons, do equal justice unto his
subjects. It is known unto you all, that Artaxerxes king of Persians, has
destroyed the Parthians, and dealt foulely with all our confederats and
friends, and yet remains in so great power in Asia, yt there is not against
him one lance in the Rest: but your heroycall deeds and noble minds being
considered, we think not that ye either marvel, or have any doubt thereof:
for that admiration proceeds of small wisdom, and fear of cowardnesse.
Heroycall persons, that amongst others would be notified, receive with equal
minds adversity and prosperity: for unto such men, though the joy of
prosperity, and the smarte of adversity be uncertain, yet is their glory
unvariable. Leaving the Gods, and speaking of the affairs of men, nothing may
justly be termed great, but that which brings with it great inconvenience:
and then one is of more valor then all, when one does that which all leave
undone: for, greatness consists not in possessing proud desires: but in
perfourming deeds of nobleness.

From Rome we have sent our Ambassadors unto Artaxerxes, to persuade him to
leave those provinces which he has taken, and to abstain from them which
he meant to take: which he not only refuses to do, but hardly might endure
the hearing thereof: for which cause, it apperteineth unto the greatness of
Rome, to employ it self to the breaking of his pride: for that it proceeded
not of less virtue to humble the proud, then to advance the humble. Many of
you which be here, have been bred, and also present at the glorious acts of
Antoninus Pius, and Seuerus my progenitors, noble men of immortal renown:
and notwithstanding that by the antiquity of your years, and the travels
which ye have passed in the wars, ye may not fight, yet at the least ye shall
profit us by your advise and counsel: which in the wars is very
necessary, and no less profitable: for that in such assembly, one counsel is
often given, that exceeds the service of a thousand horsemen. Perfectly we
ought to hope, that we Romans shall be conquerours, and the Barbarians
overthrown: not only for that they first raised this war, but also because
we have requested them with peace: wherein ye Gods are so just, that very
sildome they permit them to enjoy the victory, who were the occasion to raise
that war. And doubt ye never the more, for that our armor is old and rustie:
because the felicity of war, consists not in bright armor, but in
doughtie hearts and noble minds. Many which march on land in bright armor, be
overcome: and all men that go by sea, wear rustie armor, and do conquer: in
such wise, that war is not mainteyned with armor of iron, but with hearts
of steel. And be not esca^dalized with consideration that ye have to fight
under the sta^dard of a young prince, which wants experience in the wars:
but as of the rest, so of this ye shall have no cause to doubt: for that I go
determined, intending in the act of fighting, to fight as one of you: and in
matters of counsel, to yield my self unto the counsel of the ancient.

For any want of victuals, neither have ye to suspecte: for that we are
provided already in the chanel of Byzantio, with wheat of Sicyl, wines of
Ca^die, bacon of Campania, oil of Spain, salt of Capua, pouldred beef of
Cerdonia, and oats and beans of Normandy. For other pleasant and delectable
things, I neither command to search, either would I (if they were found)
suffer them to be transported: because in the wars, they may hardly subdue
their enemies, that are overcome with vices. Scipio the African, when he went
to besiege the renowned Numantia, found thirty thousand Romans (which xiiii.
years had been at the siege thereof) environed with two hundredth thousand
vices: who (like a skillful Captain) banished both vice and vicious persons
out of his camp: this being accomplished, presently the enemies were overcome.
In this iourny so tedious, perilous, chargeable and costly, I would not that ye
should do more the^ ye shall see me do: because in travel upon the way,
sailing on the sea, defending passages, executing on ye enemies, and in the
usage of my person, ye shall find me an affable companion, and no niggardly
prince.

These, and such other words Alexander used unto his army: which being
heard, with loud voices they did all wish the Gods to preserve his life, and
said with one assent, that they were ready to go and die in that war in his
service. This speech being ended, he divided amongst his armies much money,
according to the custom of the Roman Emperors: which was not given in part
of payment of their wages, but to animate them, that with the better will they
might endure the travels of war.

CHAP. VIII. How the Romans were overcome of the Persians.
AFter that Alexander had discoursed with his Captains and provided all things
necessary for his journey, he commanded open war to be proclaimed against
Asia, and a day appointed for his departing: before which time, he made great
sacrifices in the temples, and vows unto the Gods: because the good Roman
princes used for custom, first to pacify the ire of the Gods, before they
took arms against their enemies. On the day in which he issued out of Rome,
all the Senate and people did accompany him 3. miles: and further also (a
thing much to be noted) there was none which beheld him departing, but bitterly
fell a weeping: for that being (as he was) a prince so pitiful, of all me^ he
was cordially and heartily beloved. From the time yt he departed from Rome, he
stayed not, until he arrived at the city Alexandria: to which place he had
commanded all ye garrisons of Illyria to repair, yt there being assembled,
the ignorant might exercise feats of arms: and further, to provide things
necessary for ye wars. Alexander being arrived at Alexandria, it seemed unto
him, and to his grave Roman counselors, to send another Embassage to
Artaxerxes, king of the Persians, once more to inuit him to peace: which if he
refused, then against him to sound defiance.

Artaxerxes being advertised of Alexander his passage into Asia, and the
coming of his Ambassadors into his kingdom, did neither manifest any fear of
the Roman power, either was any thing altered with this new Embassage, making
the Legates none other answer, but that shortly he would send a new
embassage. Within 6. days after, Artaxerxes sent an embassage of 400. horsemen
to Alexander, of the most noble, valiant, and gallantest gentlemen of his
armies: and the end wherefore he sent so many and so brave, was, to terrify the
Romans with the magnificence of ye Persians. The Embassage of those 400.
persons, were comprised in few words, and after this manner were they written.

The Embassage of Artaxerxes, the Persian king, to Alexander the renowned
Emperor.
The great king Artaxerxes, Lord of the Persians, commands thee Alexander,
king of the Romans, to depart out of Asia, and cease to enter possession of
Assyria: care not to enter into Ionia, Caria, either to have to do with
Pontus, the sea Aegeum, either to pass any country or province which
co^fineth or bordereth upon Europa: for otherwise, in not acco^plishing these
things, it shall be necessary yt thou be chastised.

Alexander considering this proud Embassage, commanded all the 400.
Ambassadors to be taken, and rewarding others with all the apparel which they
did wear, and the jewels which they had, he sent them banished into Phrygia,
there to till the lands, and plow with oxen. Some gave Alexander counsel, not to
banish but to hang them: to whom he answered: he that says in his Embassage no
more then he is commanded, and fights for defense of his country, unjustly
they take away his life. Alexander possessing an army of great power, forgot
not to divide the same into three parts, yt is to say, sending the one by the
way of Armenia, ye other along the borders of Tygris and Euphrates, and the
third part he ledd with himself to enter into the countries and fields of his
enemies: to the end, that the Persians beholding themselves assailed on every
side, should yield and stoop to the service of the Romans. In those days, ye
Persians had not skill orderly to give a battle, but ye jointly they fought in
heaps, and so either they did subdue, or were subdued: and that which is more
to be meruailed, as well women went to the wars as men: neither did the
prince give wages unto the one or the other, more then every one was able to
get, rob, and spoil in the same. Although the Persians were not ready in
keeping of array, yet on the other part, they were much accustomed unto arms,
and from their youth addicted to run horses, and shoot arrows.

(...) that the Persians had slain their parents, and that their wives and
children were now destroyed by the Germans. Exceeding was the sorrow which
stoung Alexanders heart, considering with what haste he was called unto the
wars of Germany: chiefly, for advertisement of the necessity of his
personal presence in the same wars: for otherwise, the Romans would not
repair: and such as came discomfited from Asia, would all depart. The greatest
grief that did cruciate and torment his heart, was, to think that at ye hour
in which the fame of his unfortunate fight should be diuulgate and noysed
through the Empire, and the Germans newly revolted, his enemies in Rome would
attempt some commotion in the common wealth: for that it is natural unto the
common people, to desire daily change of new Lords. The Emperor Alexander
determined in his own person to be in the wars of Germany: and on the other
part, did write to the Senate amorous letters, sending unto Rome, to be offered
in the temples, great sacrifices: and ships laden with wheat and oil, to
be divided amongst the people: and jointly with this, he secreately provided
to furnishe the frontiars with men and victuals: in such wise, that this good
prince, in his own person would go to the wars against his enemies: and
with his goods would win the hearts of his subjects. With no small
diligence, Alexander traueiled from Asia to Germany: and immediately upon his
arrival at Rhene, he made bridges of boats, whereon his armies might freely
pass, and also fight with his enemies.

Alexander iourneying toward Germany, enterteyned certain people called
Maures, which lived in the fields Ossroanos, bordering upon Thracia: who
fought with long lances, having a head of iron at each end, with such
dexterity and readiness on horseback, that in riding they would take up their
lances fallen unto the ground: and also wound their enemies as well in flight,
as assault. Many of these Maures were marvelous ready archers at the
crosbowe: and as naturally the Germans are high of body, and slow and laden
with flesh, and the Maures on the other part, very skilful in shooting, and of
like life in skirmishing: so they behaved themselves no more nor no less with
the Germans, then an archer with a white at a Butt, that is to say, without
all danger to strike the same all to pieces. Although the Romans were few,
yet in their martial affairs they had prosperous beginning, and no less hope
of good success: but ye Germans, admitting they were many, yet fought they
with great misfortune: because the Romans were men of experience, but the
Germans chiefly practiced manuring the fields. Notwithstanding the Germans
did repent them of their warlike attempts, and Alexander not misliking his
personal journey: yet the good prince forgot not to request them, and also
pray them with peace: for which purpose, he sent unto them wise Ambassadors,
that on his behalf should say unto them very good words, and offer large
rewards, with a general pardon of all injuries: this did he, not for fear,
but yet with some doubt of fortunes variableness, which in warlike atte^pts
discovers her dealing with most uncertainty. The Germans most times
begin their wars with choler, and prosecute the same with fury: but in the
end, they endure to be persuaded by requests, and to be overcome with money.
During the time that the Ambassadors practiced peace, they established a truce
betwixt both armies, whereat the Roman hosts were amazed, and no less
escandalized: for that as then being fleshed upon the Germans, they would
revenge all injuries, and also rob them of their goods.

In Alexanders army there was a Captain named Maximius, borne in Thracia, in
lineage obscure, in condition barbarous, of inclination vicious, in office a
mansleyar, and a robber on high ways: who, for his valiantness in warrelike
affairs, came by all the degrees of cheualrie to have ye charge of men of
war. And to consider a marvelous matter of this Maximius, which is to say:
yt as Nature was his adversary in depriving him of virtues natural, so was
Fortune his favorer in all variable chances: because, then fortune shows
her greatness, when such as be of small valor, are advanced to the possession
of mighty things. The Romans considering how Alexander practiced peace with
the Germans, and that the truce continuing, he gave himself unto pleasure
and vice, all spoil and robbing of enemies being removed, agreed amongst
themselves to create Maximius Emperor, and to murder their lord and Emperor
Alexander. The case was thus, that Maximius being in the fields, teaching
certain young men to play at weapons, the confederate traitors came unto him,
and taking Maximius amongst them, apparelled him with the robe and ensign of
the Empire: who being ignorant of their intent, and supposing it to be done in
jest, used some resistance. But, when Maximius perceived his promotion to be
no matter of jest, he determined to kill the true Emperor in earnest: whereof
Alexander (all careless in his tente) being advertised, began to change
countenance as one sore abashed, and his mother also to fall a weeping. The
generous and valiant gentlemen that Alexander had with him, he did request and
persuade to resist the traitor Maximius, and as good vassals and friends, in
this case to live and die with him: which they all promised, but afterward
observed not.

The next day early in the morning, it was said unto Alexander, that Maximius
came accompanied with all the army: whereupon Alexander demanding armor to
issue forth to fight, there was not one man found that would follow: for yt all
his men of war were returned to Maximius, and the most of his servants that
night were fled. When Maximius came within the view of the imperial tent,
where Alexander remained, he stood still, and commanded certain Capitaines
to go to Alexander, not to take, but to kill him: and that by no means they
should give him space or place to do any deed, or stay to hear any of his
words: for that many times delays in like cases bring to pass, that he that
should have died, does kill him that should have lived.

When Maximius his Captains came unto Alexanders tente, he was blaming his
mother, saying, that by her avarice and covetousness he lost both life and
honor: but his complaints, and her lamentations extended to small purpose: for
that jointly they slew the son, and mangled the mother all to pieces.
Herodianus (in his Roman histories) says, that this chance and death
happened unto Alexander: but other Historiographers, no less grave and true,
although they say that he died in Germany, yet say not that he was subdued in
Asia: moreover, the occasion of his death they report after another manner:
because Herodianus knew not otherwise to excuse the treason committed by
Maximius, but to say, for that Alexander had been overcome, he was odious unto
all the army.

CHAP. X. Of a solemn Oration made by Alexander unto his men of war.
WHen Alexander departed from Rome to go into the wars of Asia, he had
great regard unto his men of war, as well for their safety, as also for
robbing such countries as they were to pass: for, as natural is it for men of
war to rob their neighbors, as to kill enemies. When he did eat, he had
always his tente open: to the end all men of his host should both see and
know, that the meat which he did eat, had more taste of the sharpness of
the wars, then of the delicateness of Rome. Nightly he did visit the
circuit of his camp: and at all times would give them false alarmes, to yield
them aptness unto armor, and readiness to repair unto their ensigns. If
any person did wander from his standard, either to rob, or but so much as to
walk, the quality of the person considered, he received punishment more or
less.

If any were a brabler with his host, froward with his companions, disobedient
unto his officers, took any thing by violence, or was foul mouthed, he would
say these words unto him: would thou, that as thou do, they should do,
or as thou say, they should say unto thee? Know thou not the proverb of
the Christians, Quod tibi no^ vis, alteri ne feceris, that is, what thou will
not to thy self, do not to another. Alexander said that he heard this Proverb
spoken, and he wist not whether of the Jews or Christians: which in his heart
took such deep impression, that he did not only speak and repeat, but also
many times wrote the same unto his governors: and further, caused them to be
drawn upon his ensigns, and graven upon all his works. Alexander being
resident in the territories of Antioche, was informed that a certain Captain
had abused an ancient woman, both in word and deed: and both being called
into his presence, and the matter heard, he commanded the Captain to be
deprived of his room and office, and of the liberties which he had received
in Rome: and further, that he should be slave unto the old woman: furthermore,
he commanded that in Carpentars craft he should perform his service, and
maintain his old dame. He used so great severity and hardness with his men
of war, that many times he dispatched them by whole bands: for that he
might not endure their civil dissentions: or robberies, and scandals amongst
neighbors.

All Roman princes had fear of their armies, except Alexander, and the cause
why (as he said) he feared them not, was: for that he paid them very well,
and removed all occasion of reprehension from his own person and life: for in
the end, none has true liberty to chastise, but the man that is of a sincere
life. The army remaining in Antioche, he was advertised that they gave
themselves unto women, haunted hoate houses, and spente and lost much time in
vain plays and idleness: whereupon he commanded all the Capitaines,
Tribunes, and Centurions, to be taken, and with yrons to be cast into prison,
upon which cause there grew amongst them, no small scandal: in so much that
openly they durst say unto Alexander, if on that present day he did not let
them lose, the next day following they would depart unto the enemies.
Alexander being advertised what his men of war had said, and what they meant
to do, commanded them all to appear before his presence, both such as were in
bonds, as those that were at liberty: saying unto them these words.

Alexander his Oration, made to his men of war, at his commandment before
him summoned and assembled.
Brothers, friends, and my companions, that which now I have to say unto you,
is more for ye love which I bear you, then fear which I have of you:
because, princes that have fear to execute justice, either it is for that they
are unjust: or because their subjects should dissemble their own proper
vices. How would ye that I should suffer you, being (as ye are) noble
Romans? whom cruel tyrants would not endure as their subjects? There is
none so evil, although he endeavor not to be virtuous, that of the good
holds not good opinion: whereof follows, that it is much more evil for the
common wealth, the prince being virtuous, to suffer persons vicious: then him
that is vicious, to permit no vice in his common wealth.

The prince that consents unto vices, and dissembleth with vicious persons,
is not to be named a pitiful father, but a peruersse and a cruel tyraunte:
for that, notwithstanding at the present he does not chastise them, yet in
process the one shall destroy the other. One vicious, with another that is
vicious, may never long continue in friendship: for presently upon the decay of
vice, at the instant their friendship fails. Being (as I am) your prince
according to justice, and your brother in love, how would ye that I should
suffer you to ravish women, play your wages away at dice, spoil orchardes,
with other such like vile and heinous deeds? Admitting that now I would pass
and dissemble the same, yet doubtless, your selves before others would blame
and condemn ye same: because this tribute the good have over the evil, that
if they be grieved with the chastisement given unto the evil, in the end they
shall some day praise him yt did justice. Understand ye not that ye are
gentlemen of Rome? and that on the day in which any man takes the name of a
Roman, he binds himself to be virtuous? Because this name of Romans, was
not so much magnified of our predecessors, by killing enemies in Asia, as by
weeding vices out of our common wealths.

We call the Persians, Barbarians, because they have taken that which was
ours: and doubt ye that of Romans, they shall not entitle us tyrants, that
have spoiled others? I am named Alexander, and would imitate Alexander the
great: of whom, and of his father king Philip it is said, that when they
brought forth their armies to fight, they seemed more a Senate in the common
wealth, then men of war. If they had done what ye now have done, never might
those princes have obtained so great victories of their enemies, either writers
so largely to have registered their noble and glorious deeds, either might I
have praised them with so good words: whereof follows, that the chiefest
effect to overthrow enemies, is, to hold armies very well disciplined.
Princes use to lose many victories, not for want of justified war, but because
their men of war are wicked: and admittinge that some times evil men do
conquer, yet in the end they shall be vanquished, or else of the gods cruelly
chasticed. Let them be certain, that are either present or absent, if any one
will be evil, either let him return unto his house, or else we shall chasten
him if he remain under our standard: because it is not just that we,
coming to recover that which is usurped from the common wealth, by bearinge
with your works, should defame our mother Rome. If we suffer so many
travels, adventure our selves in so many perils, and consume our treasures,
it is not for want of oil, wheat, wine, plate, or gold, but to magnify the
renown of the Roman Empire: and since it is so, how is it possible for the
Gods to permit, that by the hands of infamous persons, we should obtain
honor or renoune. Numa Pompilius, Quintus Cincinnatus, Marcus Marcellus,
Paulus Emilius, Quintus Fabius, Cneus Fabricius, and Scipio Africanus brought
to pass, with the Gods that the Roman empire was accepted, and that through
the world the name of Rome was reuere^ced: we read not in histories that these
glorious and noble men, in their persons were tyrants, and much less would
consent their armies to be vicious. Believe me, friends and companions,
Princes that will maintain the fame of good Princes, and not recover the
reproach of tyrants, ought to have as great care to preserve their armies
from vice, as to avoid the treason of enemies: for that men do incur greater
danger by secret vices, then by open enemies. That which ye have done, is
either good or evil: and if robbinge of fields, raysinge of mutinies, and
forceing of women, be good: then by this account, to honor temples, defend
orphans, sacrifice unto the Gods, and to use justice with all people, is
wicked: since the laws which condemn the one, allow the other: which of
all you is neither to be believed, either so much as once to be thought: for,
not withstandinge of evil we can say but evil: yet is it much worse to
defend, then do it. If these insolences which I have rehearsed, and you have
committed, ye hold for evil: why conceive ye not the chasticemente given for
the same, to be good? If virtue and reward be cousines, who will deny that the
trespass and ye punishment are brethren? He that ordained the conqueror to
triumph, has he not appointed the thief to be hanged? Will ye be paid before
hand, for service unperformed? and will ye neither pay or restore that which
ye have purloyned?

Notwithstanding Princes have great liberty in the common wealth, yet are
they not exempted or free from justice: and will men of war only be
priuileged? The words which ye have uttered, and the threatninges which ye
have thundered, neither do I take them as injuries, or yeald my self to any
grievous agony: for in killinge me, ye shall kill but one: yet in the end,
there shall not want in the Empire, one to succeed me, and also to chastise
you.

That which I presently request and command you, is, to amend that which
is past, presentely to embrace quietness, and to be advised in time to come:
which if ye refuse, I shall be forced to use rigor, because I am not to
supporte mine Empire, by relieuing vicious soldiers, but in maintenance of
all men by justice.

These and such words being said, they became al mild and pacified: and
further, all armor being laid a part, in token of obedience: and their
heads cast down, in sign of sorrow: every man departed unto his charge.
Hereby, the great authority of Alexander in his commandments is to be
gathered: and the force which he had in his persuadinge speech, to be
pondered. The band and capteineship which he dismissed, after xxx. days he
did both pardon and admit them: because he saw in them great repentance,
for that which was past, and ready minds to serve him in time to come: and so
it came to pass, that afterward in battle they proved men most notable, and
such in deed, as to whom greatest glory was given.

CHAP. XI. Of the victory that Alexander obtained against the Persians, and of
his triumph, as some writers do report.
WHen Alexander departed from Rome, because of the wars in Asia, a great part
of Summer was past: for which cause, it was necessary for him to Winter in
Antioche: admitting ye delay increases cost, yet was it profitable for
perfourmance of his warlike attempts: for that in mean time, he reformed his
armies, provided victuals, repaired high ways, recovered many dangerous
passages, and also removed from his enemy many confederates. When summer
began, Alexander marched with his army: after whose entrance into the land of
Persia, he performed al exploites accustomed in such a journey: which is to
weete, brake bridges, ouerthrewe fortes, burned houses, sacked towns, spoiled
fields, killed men, and did captiuate women: whereof we have not to meruell,
for that notwithstanding war be justified, and all things just therein
demanded, yet always the deeds thereof be most unjust. Certain days
being past, wherein were trauersed diverse dangerous skirmishes, and no less
perilous incounters, by the consent of Alexander and Artaxerxes, they
committed both their fortunes unto the merit of a battle: the Persians being
overthrown, and the Romans remaining conquerours: wherein, if Artaxerxes had
staide his hardiness, and commended the matter unto policy, placeing his
power in his fortes and most strong places: if he had suffered the Romans
by tracte of time to consume themselves, according to the custom of great
armies, in strange countries: he might have preserved, both his country and
honor. Great riches were recovered in that battle, and infinite the captives
which then were taken: and as the Persians hold it for a most great injury
to serve any strange nation, so Artaxerxes, notwithstanding he was poor and
overcome, gathered together great sums of money, and redeemed all captives:
in such wise, that in Persia there remained no money, either any captives
came unto Rome.

Alexander recovered in those wars, the renoume of valiant, magnanime, and
not covetous: and he was justly entitled valiant, for his doughtinesse in
fighting: magnanime, for his magnificent liberality: and not covetous, for the
small share that he reserved unto him self.

The affairs of Persia being dispatched. Alexander returned unto Rome,
entering the same with great triumph, and glory: for that conformable unto
the people and nation which they had subdued, was the riches that was brought
unto the treasury. And after being mounted upon the Capitol, he said unto the
Senate, after this manner.

A short Oration made to the Senate.
Fathers Conscript, for that I come tired with so long a journey, and you no
less wearied in receiving me, it were no reason to make long speech, much
less to invent new eloquence: because there is nothing so eloquently spoken,
but if it be said out of time or place, seems tedious unto the audience. He
that shall speak, or persuade others, has not only to consider what he says,
but also to observe time, and respect the assembly: for the Sea at one time,
does permit her self to be spurned: and at another time not to be touched.
By that which ye have heard, as that which this day ye have seen, ye may
understand how dangerous this war has been, and how copious a victory
we have obtained: for as ye understand (Fathers conscript) there is no great
harvest, without great tillage.

The case is thus, that the Persians had in their favor four score thousand
footmen, six thousand horssemen, seven hundredth Elephants, two thousand iron
carts, and two thousand slaves that were young men: the one half to bear
victuals, and the other half to mend high ways.

On that day in which both the one and the other came forth into the field to
fight, no man would have thought, but yt the whole world had been come
together, and also the dead risen out of their graves. Of foot men we slew
twenty thousand, and did captiuate twenty thousand, of horse men two
thousand were killed, and three thousand did yealde, of Elephantes we bring
three hundred, and three hundred we have slain: the carts, the slaves, and
prisoners, they have redeemed by the weight of money, in such wise, that we
have taken their countries, overcome their persons, and brought away their
goods. I return safe and sound, ye army enriched, king Artaxerxes defeated,
the name of Rome magnified, and the confederates satisfied: and with all these
travels though we come wearied, yet are we not fatigated: because victory is
so sweet a thing, that it leads al trauells past into oblivion.

Alexander having said these words, the Senate exclaimed with loud voices.

The immortal Gods save thee Alexander, the Gods make thy fame immortal, since
this day thou haste honored Rome with everlasting fame. Thou have overcome
the Persians, visited the Parthians, subdued kings, enriched the armies, and
placed us in great honor: for which cause, not unworthily, we entitle thee
Pater Patriae father of our country, Tribune of the people, most high
Bishop, first Consul, and only Emperor of the world.

These and such other exclamations manifested by the Senate, at the issue of
the Capitol gate, Alexander said unto all persons that there did attend him.

Fathers, sons, brothers, and companions unto the fathers of the Senate, we
have given account of all that we have done, and will give you a reason, as
apperteineth, of all that we have said. For this day, the triumph paste
suffices: to morrow, we will visit the temples: the next day, we will offer
great sacrifices: the fourth day, we will give liberty unto prisoners: the
fifte day, we will divide rewards amongst the poor widows, and orphans: the
sixte day, we will begin ye Persike and Circen plays: for considering the
greatness of our victory, we will first accomplish with the Gods, by whom we
have obtained the same: and then with men which gave us their assistance.

When Alexander came from the Capitol, he mounted on horse back to ride unto
his palace: whom, at that instante, certain ancient gentlemen of Rome did
take and bear upon their shoulders, the people gathered together exclaminge
with loud voices, in this manner.

Blessed is Mamea thy mother, blessed art thou Alexander her son, blessed is
Rome yt bred thee, blessed is ye army that elected thee, and blessed is ye
Senate yt did consecrate thee: for in thee is contained ye felicity of
Octauius, and the bounty of Traiane. Thou have lead with thee into the wars,
our husbands, our sons, and our friends, whom thou bring back with thee
all sound, all rich, and likewise all contented: wherefore, we say unto thee,
that if this day we place thee upon our shoulders, for ever more we will lay up
thy memory in our entrayles.

In these exclamations the people continued, before and behind, for the space
of four hours, extremly pestering all passage, until the chariote
triumphant, with four Elephants, made the ways open. All yt which he said
unto ye people, he commanded presently to be accomplished.

At the end of these feasts, he did institute a temple of Virgins, who were
named Maneaes, in reverence of his mother Manea. At the same time he received
news, that at Tanger a city of Africa, Furius Celsus had obtained victory,
and Iunius Palinatus likewise in Armenia triumphed over the enemies, as also
Varius Macrinus in Illyria had made a conquest of certain countries: and the
currers which brought ye news, presented him also with three tables of
Laurel. The feasts and triumphs being finished, he would be informed of the
officers of the common wealth, that is to say: how in his absence they had used
the people, and how they had administered justice: and such as had not done
well, he removed: and those that had done well, he rewarded: giuinge unto some
more honorable offices, and to others heritages and money. Many times
Alexander would say, that they deserved as great glory that in time of war
did well govern the common wealth, as they which in the wars obtained
victory.

CHAP. XII. Of things which he did in Rome, and how the tyrant Maximius did
kill him in Britain.
AFter that Alexander had subdued and triumphed over the Persians, certain
days he was detained in the government and refourmation of the common wealth:
because the long absence of princes breeds want of justice amongst the
multitude. Of all the riches that he brought from the wars of Asia, he did
take for him self, but one horse, one chariot, four Elephantes, one sword,
one cup of Ius, and a paper of poinctes, which belonged unto king
Artaxerxes: for as he said, The pray of princes, ought to be employed on
princes. The defense of the most dangerous frontiers, he commended not but
unto men yt had great wealth in the same: which if he had not, he gave it them
in such wise, that to conserve his fidelity which he did owe, and to save his
goods which he possessed, he should be forced to defend his country, or dye
in the enterprise.

There was in Rome in those days a Mathematicia^, named Thrasibulus, of who^
Alexander demanded what death he should dye: who answered: thou shall dye in
a strange country, not in thine old age, but by ye swoorde of a Barbarian:
whereat Alexander was nothing altered, but rather with exceeding joy embracing
Thrasibulus said: A certain speech of Alexander against the terror of death.
If the Gods did grant unto other princes to live perpetually, and command
me only to dye, I confess I should dolefully feel the deed of death: but
our life being (as it is) so short, and death so necessary: I had rather dye
in the field by the hands of mine enemies, then in my chamber compassed with
Physicians. Unto the greatness of Princes it appertains, not only to lead a
good life, but also elect an honorable death: and to this end I say unto thee
Thrasibulus, that all ye felicity of a Prince consists in well governing the
common wealth, and also to imploye his life for the same. What fame, or glory,
what ease or quietness, does follow the life of that Prince which dies in
his old years, and sickely? in which age, for the most part, old men be evil
served of their subjects, and contemned of strangers. He that conceiueth it
to be good for the priest to dye in the temple, conceiueth no less of the
Prince that dies in the field: for that the office of the one is to pray, and
of the other to fight.

I have seen many dye here in Rome, after the manner which the common people
do think the best kind of death: that is to say, laden with years, laid in
their beds, accompanied with sons, honored of parents, compassed with
sons in law, visited of Physicians, and served of nephues: at whose death, I
bear no envy: since I knew of them, that before their bodies were tasted of
woormes, their hearts were vnbowelled with grief and thought.

Thrasibulus, thou do well know, that Alexander, Darius, Hector, Pompeyus,
Gayus, Tullius, Seneca, and Demosthenes, were men in their persons very
glorious, in doctrines very wise, and in their deeds no less heroycall: and
yet all these with many others dyed, not accompanied with their friends, but by
the hands of their enemies: neither were they blemished with so untimely a
death, since of them nothing was less esteemed: but rather by their cruel
deaths, they advanced their fames. No other thing is diverse in death, but
only the manner of the same, sithence death in the end is always but one
thing: for we should not be afflicted with the manner of our death: but what
things we should repair, to the ame^dement of our life. Admitting that these
considerations, apperteine more unto Philosophers, then unto the simple: yet I
say both to thee and other, that as it was not in our hands to be borne, so
shall not the manner of our death consist in our selves: but yt hour being
arrived, there and then shall every man find for him self, what fortune has
provided.



All these things Alexander said unto Thrasibulus in secret, and afterward
openly in the hearing of all men. Not many days after these things passed,
Alexander departed unto the wars of Germany, which were not prosecuted in
Germany, but in Gallia transalpina: for because the French men were subject
unto the Romans, the Germans did invade them. Alexander being in the
greatest heat of these wars, certain mutinous soldiers and old servants
of Heliogabalus, did create a captain, named Maximius, Emperor: because the
Emperor Alexander would not consent, but utterly detested their horrible and
vicious acts. Alexander remaining in the lesser Britain in a place named
Cilicia, Maximius and his traiterous adherentes determined to kill him their
Lord and Emperor, before it might be manifested through the armies: for yt,
notwithstanding diverse of them did doubt his severity, yet on the other part
all persons did love his justice.

Alexander reposinge at after noone, ye traitors agreed with a iester to
murder him in his tente: who being entered, fell into such dismay, that he not
only gave over his determined attempt unperformed, but also fled with no
small doubt and fear affrighted. But being afterward retired unto Maximius
and his companions, persuaded them presently to kill Alexander, being at that
time on his bed solitary and unaccompanied, for that other wise he would
discover their whole intent: which he said, because it was A law Martial,
that any which should adventure to enter the tente of the prince without
license, should pay no less then the loss of his life. Maximius and his
accomplices consideringe what the iester had said, presently determined to
murder their Lord and Emperor Alexander: and so jointly and furiously
entringe his tente, slew both him, his mother, and all persons that made
resistance, or ouerthwarted them with any displeasaunt speech. Alexander died
one the twelfth of June, after thirteen years and nine days of his Empire
were expired: he lived twenty and nine years, three months, and seven days:
and was a Prince in Rome most loved in his life, and most bewailed at his
death. The enemies of Alexander did note him, that he despised in him self to
be native in Assyria, that he loved gold, invented new tributes, was severe
with soldiers, did what he could to resemble Alexander Magnus, and that he
was somewhate suspicious. But the thing wherefore Alexander was most blamed,
and justly deserved to be noted, was, that being a man, and of great
experience in the government of the Empire, he continued subject unto his
mother, as when he was a child: and in this case it was sufficient, that he
had reverenced and honored her as a mother: and on the other part to have
considered, that her counsel in the end, was but of a woman. Alexander was so
universally beloved of all nations of the Empire, that it chanced at his
death, which never was read to have chanced at the death of any Prince of the
world, that is to say: that they were all slain which brought the news of
his death: neither the commandments of commissions of his successor, would
they obey: aduouchinge it to be blasphemy in the place of so virtuous a
Prince, to yield obedience unto a traitor so detestable.

FINIS.
Errors escaped.
Page. 136 Page. 143 Page. 335 Page. 366 Page. 431
Faults. Chap. ii. Faults. Chap. xi. Faults. Chap. iiii. Faults. Chap. xii.
Faults. Oath. Faults. Manea.
Correction Chap. vii. Correction Chap. x. Correction Chap. iii. Correction
Chap. x. Correction Other. Correction Mamea, and
so it must be read, wheresoever it is found.

A general Table, containing the titles or arguments of every Chapter
throughout the body of this whole book. ()
The life of the Emperor Traiane. Page 13.
Chap. 1 OF four renoumed cities that perished and were subverted in Spain. 2
Of the country and birth of the Emperor Traiane. 3 How Traiane passed out of
Spain, being a young man to go into Italy. 4 Of the friendship and parentage
that Traiane had with the Emperor Nerua. 5 How Nerua was made Emperor, and
adopted Traiane his son. 6 Of the laws that Traiane made, to the profit of
the common wealth. 7 Of the noble and notable virtues that were in Traiane. 8
Of the proud and stately buyldinges which Traiane made. 9 Of some vices
whereof Traiane was noted. 10 Of the first wars that Traiane had against the
Datians. 11 How Traiane triumphed over the Datians, and reformed his common
wealth. 12 Of the second wars that Traiane had against the Datians. 13 Of the
great buyldings that Traiane made in the kingdom of Datia. 14 Of the second
entering of Rome by the Emperor Traiane, and the notable things, which he did
in the same. 15 What Traiane did in Sicyl, in Africa, and in Spain. 16 How
Traiane did pass out of Spain into Asia, and the manner that he used in the
wars. 17 Of the honorable titles that the Romans sent unto Traiane, and of
the earthquake in Antioche. 18 How Traiane subdued Assyria, and what he did in
Babylon. 19 How Traiane, after great travel to pass into the Indiaes, was
constreined to retire. 20 How Traiane coming from Asia to triumph in Rome,
was staide by death in Sicyl.
The life of the Emperor Adrian. Page 71.
Chap. 1 Of the lineage from whence Adrian descended, and of the place and
country where he was bred and nourished. 2 Of some evil inclinations that
possessed and had power in Adrian. 3 Of the friends and enemies which Adrian
had. 4 Of the love that the Emperor Traiane had unto Adrian. 5 Of the care and
solicitude of Adrian, to obtain the Empire. 6 How at Traianes death Adrian
was declared Emperor. 7 Of his entrance into Rome. 8 Of the good conditions
and inclinations of Adrian. 9 Of the manner which Adrian used with the men of
war. 10 Of the acts that Adrian did in England, France, and Spain. 11
How Adrian did pass into Asia, and of the things that chanced there. 12 Of
the great liberality that Adrian used, and some cruelties that he committed.
13 Of the laws that Adrian made. 14 Of some of his gracious and pythie
sentences. 15 Of the things that he did worthy praise, and some other things
worthy dispraise. 16 Whom Adrian did adopt to succeed him in his Empire. 17
How, and where the Emperor Adrian died.
The life of the Emperor Antoninus Pius. Page 118.
Chap. 1 Of the lineage and country of the Emperor Antoninus Pius. 2 Of the
inclination, proportion, and natural fashion of his body. 3 Of the works of
piety which he did, and the cause why he was entitled Antoninus Pius. 4 Of
the words that Adrian said unto the Senate, when he did adopt Antoninus
Pius. 5 Of the offices that Antoninus held before he was Emperor. 6 How he
held all Provinces in peace, not by arms, but with letters. 7 How he did
visit the officers of his common wealth, and the reformation of his house. 8
Of certain notable buyldings erected by Antoninus. 9 Of certain laws which
the Emperor Antoninus Pius made. 10 Of the prodigious and monsterous things
that happened, during the Empire of Antoninus Pius. 11 Of the wars that
happened in the reign of Antoninus Pius, and other his acts. 12 Of the
succession of the Empire, and the occasion of his death.
The life of the Emperor Commodus. Page 149.
Chap. 1 Of the birth of the Emperor Commodus. 2 Of the honorable titles
given to the Emperor Commodus, in time of his youth. 3 How Commodus did
inherit the Empire of his father Marcus Aurelius, and of a certain speech
which he used unto the Senate. 4 Of a certain famous and notable speech, used
by one of his Tutours: for that he would leave the war of Panonia unfinished.
5 How Commodus left the wars of Panonia to go to Rome. 6 How Commodus was
cruel, and of the cruelties which he used. 7 Of a certain conspiracy
attempted against Commodus, and of Perennius his most favored Counselor. 8
Of a conspiracy that Perennius wrought against the Emperor Commodus. 9 Of the
tyrant Maternus, and of his treason against Commodus. 10 Of the inexpected
death of Cleander, a favored and most private servant unto Commodus. 11 The
report of a fire which descended from Heaven, and burned in Rome the Temple of
Peace. 12 Of many cruelties, and not a few fantastical practices of
Commodus. 13 A discourse of the provinces that rebelled in his reign, and the
prodigies of his death. 14 How Commodus was slain, by the devise and counsel
of his Courtesane Martia.
The life of the Emperor Pertinax. Page 240.
Chap. 1 Of the lineage and country of the Emperor Pertinax. 2 Of the
variable fortune that Pertinax did pass, before he obtained the Empire. 3
What was said, and what he answered unto those persons, that offered him the
Empire. 4 A certain notable speech uttered by Letus, unto the army, in the
favor of Pertinax. 5 Of an Oration made by Pertinax in the Senate, immediately
after he was elected Emperor. 6 Of many things which he did after he was
Emperor. 7 Of many things which he did ordeine and refourme in the common
wealth. 8 Of certain vices wherewith he was infected, and of the prodigies of
his death. 9 Of the occasion that the Pretorians took to murder him. 10 Of a
notable speech that the Emperor Pertinax used, when his soldiers came to
kill him.
The life of the Emperor Iulianus. Page 246.
Chap. 1 Of the life, lineage, and country of the Emperor Iulianus. 2 How
the Empire of Rome was set to sale, and also soulde by proclamation. 3 Of the
great and mortal hatred which the Romans did bear unto Iulianus, for
buying the Empire. 4 Of twoe Roman Capteines named Seuerus and Pessenius,
that rebelled against the Emperor Iulianus. 5 How by the commandment of
the Senate, the Emperor Iulianus was slain.
The life of the Emperor Seuerus. Page 266.
Chap. 1 Of the lineage and country of the Emperor Seuerus. 2 Of the offices
which Seuerus held in the Empire, before he was Emperor. 3 How the
Pretorians did elect him Emperor. 4 How he revenged the death of the good
Emperor Pertinax. 5 Of things that he did in Rome, presently after he was
Emperor. 6 How the Emperor Seuerus passed into Asia against Captain
Pessenius that rebelled against him. 7 Of the wars that passed betwixt
Pessenius and Seuerus, in Asia. 8 Of a cruel and furious battle, betwixt
Pessenius and Seuerus, wherein Pessenius was slain. 9 Of the Consul Albinius,
and how he rebelled against Seuerus in England. 10 Of a famous speech that
Seuerus uttered unto his armies, to bring them in hatred with his enemy
Albinius. 11 How Seuerus departed from Asia to France, and fought with
Albinius and slew him. 12 How after the death of Albinius, Seuerus returned
to Rome, and there slew many. 13 How Seuerus returned into Asia, and
conquered many provinces. 14 Of Seuerus his sons, and of their evil
inclination. 15 Of a favored servant of Seuerus named Plautianus. 16 Of a
certain treason that Plautianus had ordained against Seuerus, and how it was
discovered, 17 Of the particular vices and virtues of Seuerus. 18 How Seuerus
passed into great Britain, where he dyed.
The life of the Emperor Bassianus. Page..230.
Chap. 1 How Bassianus and his brother Geta did inherit the Empire of their
father Seuerus. 2 How in Rome they bury their Emperors, and of great
ceremonies which there they used. 3 Of the mortal hatred betwixt Bassianus
and Geta his brother. 4 Of an excellent speech uttered by the mother unto her
sons 5 How Bassianus, to obtain the Empire unto himself, slew his brother
in his mothers arms. 6 Of a certain speech used of Bassianus unto the
Senate, excusinge himself of the death of his brother Geta. 7 Of the great
cruelty of Bassianus, and of such as he commanded to be slain. 8 Of the
provinces which Bassianus did travel, and the things which he did therein. 9
Of an horrible cruelty that Bassianus committed in Alexandria. 10 Of a letter
which Bassianus did write unto the king of Parthians, to have his daughter in
marriage. 11 Of another solemn letter, wherein the king of the Parthians
answered Bassianus. 12 How Bassianus committed a great treason against the
Parthians. 13 How Bassianus was slain by the commandment of his private
captain Macrinus. 14 How Macrinus excusing him self of the death of
Bassianus, did advance himself with the Empire.
The life of the Emperor Heliogabalus. Page 374.
Chap. 1 Of the lineage and nouriture of the Emperor Heliogabalus. 2 How
Captain Macrinus did exalte him self with the Empire, after the death of
Bassianus. 3 How the great matrone Mesia bought the Empire for her nephue
Heliogabalus. 4 How Macrinus did write a letter unto the renowned Mesia, after
he understood his deprivation of the Empire. 5 Of a letter written by the
great matrone Mesia unto the Tyrant Macrinus. 6 How the Tyrante Macrinus was
slain in Battle. 7 Of a notable letter, written by the matrone Mesia, unto
the Senate of Rome, craving the confirmation of the Empire unto Heliogabalus
her nephue. 8 How the Roman Senate did allow the election of Heliogabalus,
and of the present appearance of his wickedness. 9 Of many vices that were
contained in the Emperor Heliogabalus. 10 Of a letter written by the great
matrone Mesia, unto her nephue the Emperor Heliogabalus. 11 Of certain laws
which the Emperor Heliogabalus made in Rome. 12 How Heliogabalus was thrice
married, and of his marrying of the Gods together. 13 How Heliogabalus sold
offices, and practiced many vices. 14 Of the shameful death of the Emperor
Heliogabalus.
The life of the Emperor Alexander Seuerus. Page 433.
Chap. 1 Of the nouriture and natural country of the Emperor Alexander
Seuerus. 2 How Alexander was advanced unto the Empire, and of his laudable
manners. 3 How Alexander being invested with the Empire, presently did visit
and refourme his common wealth. 4 Of the mild conditions of Alexander, and of
his grateful conversation. 5 Of his zeal of justice and other commendable
acts, as well touching his person, as his common wealth. 6 How war was
offered in Asia unto Alexander, and what was said unto his Ambassadors. 7 Of
a discrete speech used by Alexander unto his men of war. 8 How the Romans
were overcome of the Persians. 9 Of other wars which he had in Germany, and
(as some do say) was there slain. 10 Of a solemn Oration made by Alexander
unto his men of war. 11 Of the victory that Alexander obtained against the
Persians, and of his triumph, as some writers do report. 12 Of things which
he did in Rome, and how the tyrant Maximius did kill him in Britain.
FINIS.
Jmprinted at London for Ralphe Newberrie, dwelling in Fleetestreate a little
above the Conduite. ()


