THE BVRTHEN OF TIRE. A Sermon Preached at Paul's Cross, By JOHN GRENT, then
Fellow of New-Colledge in Oxford.

ISAI. 28. 1. Woe to the Crown of Pride, --

LONDON, Printed for RICHARD ROYSTON.

1627.

TO HIS MVCH HONORED PATRON, SIR THOMAS HOLT, Knight and Baronet, the comforts
of Grace here, and a Crown of glory hereafter.
SIR,
THis discourse presumes, now it aduentureth the Press, on the Patronage it
had, when it passed the Pen. The Author of it well knows, and ever will
acknowledge, his deep engagements for your many favors: one principal, (a
comfort to your soul, that conferred it, as to his, that received it,) the
fair, and free entrance, to the exercise of his Ministry. Which one, and the
rest, he can no way answer, but by his Prayers to God, and hearty desires,
for the increase of all happiness, and honor, to you, and yours; and this he
will not cease to do, while he remembers himself to be

Your much bounden, JOHN GRENT.

THE BVRTHEN of TIRE.
ISAI 23. 7. 8. 9. 7. Is this your joyous City, whose Antiquity is of ancient
days? Her own feet shall carry her a far off to soiourne.

8. Who has taken this counsel against Tire, the crowning City, whose
Merchants are Princes, whose Traffiquers are the Honorable of the earth?

9. The Lord of Hoasts has purposed it, to stain the pride of all glory, and
to bring into contempt all the Honorable of the Earth.


THe sound of War in a time of peace is like a shower of rain, when the
Sun shines; mention of Fear in the height of favor as the cursings of
Mount Ebal among the blessings of mount Gerizim. Best suitable unto these
Halcyonian days would be the Olive leaf of peace in the Doves mouth, and to
men lulled asleep in Securities lapp welcome soft Pillowes sewen under their
elbowes. But while Mercy is thus our desire, Misery may be our desert; and when
we look for a Barnabas, a son of consolation, we may meet with a Boanerges, a
son of Thunder. As we receive good things at Gods hands, so we must evil;
the acts of his Justice should no more discontent us, then of his Mercy, for he
is aequally glorified in them both: and therefore, if this be the Burden of
Tire, for ought I know, there is no remedy, but Tire must hear it, Tire must
bear it. Is this your joyous City, whose Antiquity is of ancient days? her
own feet shall carry her a far off to ioiourne, etc.

Lo here 1 Tyres glory, and 2 Her Judgment.
Her glory lies

First, in her Antiquity, which was of ancient days.

Secondly, in her present flourishing estate, a joyous City, a crowning City,
graced not only with her own, but also with Forraiue dignity, Chapmen as well
as Merchants, her Merchants at home Princes, her Chapmen from abroad, The
honorable of the earth.

Her judgment is set forth

First, by the form and manner of it.

Secondly, by its causes.

The form and manner of it in these words, Her own feet shall carry her a
far off to soiourne, Wherein three degrees:

1 Banishment, she should be carried to soiourne. 2 Poverty, her own feet
should carry her. 3 Remoteness of place, a far off.
The causes of this judgment are three.

1 The efficient cause. 2 The impulsive cause. 3 The final cause.
First, the efficient, or Author of it, The Lord of Hoasts: He took this
counsel against Tire; He it was that purposed it.

Secondly, the impulsive, or that that moved him to it, Pride and Glory.

Thirdly, the final, or end wherefore he did it, to stain the pride of that
glory, and then (a degree farther) to bring into contempt all the Honorable of
the earth.

These branches, and in this order, (with Gods gracious assistance) implore my
pains and your patience, and in the first place, the former part of Tyres
glory, her Antiquity, which was (says my Prophet) of ancient days.

So past the Records of memory was this Cities Tyres glory. 1 Her Antiquity.
Original, that eitherlike, Fame,-Caput inter nubila condit, it seems muffled
and wrapped in the clouds, and you may as well find the head of Nilus fountain,
as of Tyres foundation; or else, you must needs make her one of the eldest
daughters of the new World, even the structure and work of Tyras, laphets
son. For whereas Josephus seems to give her birth but 240. years before
Solomon's Temple, to wit, in Gedeons time, and Justin only before the sack of
Troy, about Iepthas time, (both making Sidon the fair mother of Tire a far
fairer daughter) they are rather to be understood of her reaedifying and
repayring, then of her first founding; for sure, her Antiquity was of more
ancient days. But though it were, yet it ill became her proudly to vaunt of
it, and thereupon to contemn her bordering neighbors; as it would ill beseem
this Famous City vainly to brag of her Antiquity, or of her Founder Brute,
father of Britany, who (it is thought) in old Eli's time, was King in England,
before there was any King in Israel. Indeed Antiquity, in some men's eyes,
carries a very fair show, and like a Perspectiue, makes the object seem
bigger then truly it is, having that to brag off, they care for no more. If
they can but say, Tire the ancient City Tire. Rome the ancient City Rome; they
think, that must presently sweep all away before it, as did Kishon, that
ancient River Kishon, Judge. 5. 21. But in true judgment, it little skils, how
old, how ancient a City is, rather how holy, how honest, how upright, how
just, how pleasing to God, and how profitable to men. Therefore, as Apollo
being demanded by the Athenians, which Religion was the best? Answered, the
ancientest; and a second time, which was the ancientest? replied that that was
best? So say I of Cities, which is the best? the Ancientest: Which is the
ancientest? the best: For antiquity, is to be measured by goodness, not
goodness by antiquity, else might youthinke well of the Devil, he can
pleadage, an old Serpent, a Lier from the beginning. It Is true, very ancient
was Tire, and long was it, ere she came to the height of her glory; but here
was her misery, her sin grew up as fast as her self; she was no elder in
age, then in evil: and therefore, the longer she had settled, with Moab, on
the lecs of wickedness, the more need to be powered out from vessel to
vessel; the longer the blade of her iniquity had been growing, the riper,
and the readier to be cut down with the sickle of vengeance. The harvest of
whose Woe, when our Prophet foresawe, he laughs and scoffs at her, by way of
derision, Is this your joyous City? (not so much wondering at her ruin, or
pitying her misery, as indeed insulting over her calamity, and vpbrayding her
pride, the cause of her fall) Is this your tryumphing, glorying, flaunting,
flourishine City? that so drew the worlds eyes to look on her? that was so
much admired by them that used Traffic with her? that so vaunted of her
Antiquity, as if the Rock, on which she had long stood, could never be moved?
See, see, whither her glorying is now come, Her own feet shall carry her a
far off to soiourne. It Is not her ancientnes that can Patronize her from
heavens vengeance, no nor yet her present flourishing estate, though a joyous
City, a crowning City; whose Merchants are Princes, and her Chapmen the
Honorable of the Earth: the second part of Tyres glory, and in the second
place saluteth your attention.

2 Very excellent things are spoken of this renowned 2 Her present flour shing
estate.
City, and yet no more then her pomp and glory might sometime justly
challenge; they that dwelt in her, and that dealt in Traffic with her, were
so enriched (says my Prophet) by her Merchandise, that they came not behind
the greatest Personages of the earth, Kings, Princes, Nobles. Famous may be the
Merchants of Venice, Florence, Antwerpe, but these of Tire surpast them all;
the admiration of whose wealth and glory brought forth the word Tyrant (King,
then noting Majesty, not cruelty) so that Cyneas Pyrrhus his Ambassador, might
far better have called Tire then Rome, Ciuitatem regum, A City of Kings. What
place in the world could show such a Shop of Wares, as she does, Ezekiel. 27?
Which the City that so had the harnest of the River for her reuenewe, and was
her self a Mart of Nations, verse. 3. of this Chap? Where, (since the Deluge)
but in her, and Sodom could you see an Eden, and garden of God, as she is
called, Ezekiel. 28. 13? Whose Prince, but hers, was styled The anointed Cherub,
that covers, that was upon the holy Mountain of God, and walked up and down
in the midst of the stones of fire? Ezekiel. 28, 14. What City, but this Tire
could have so dazzled the eyes of the Eastern World, as to put her own name on
a whole Region Tyria, or Syria? Once, what place, besides her, could have stood
in aemulation with that Queen of Nations, and Lady of Kingdoms, the
perfection of beauty, and joy of the whole earth, Jerusalem? and make her
self, as much frequented for wealth, as Jerusalem for religion? and yet all
this, and more too; is true of that crowning City, whose Merchants were
Princes, and her Chapmen the honorable of the earth. Which gay trimming of
Tire, with so specious privileges makes a man think her a peerless
Princess, Paragon of beauty, fair Ester; but lo, a Harlot dressed in strange
apparel, by a flattering glass, painted Iezabel: outward ornament enough,
wealth, and glory, and pomp, and majesty, like the raiment of Needle work
the Kings Daughter wore; and like the Vesture of gold wrought about with diverse
colors, but none of that which should make her all glorious within, and cause
his Majesty take pleasure in her beauty, pure Religion, holiness of life,
practice of virtuous actions. Which Pearl of price (the one thing necessary)
when our Prophet sees neglected, and yet other seeming Jewels (of little or no
value) much set by, he can tell Tire, that her temporal blessings, without
blessings spiritual, are but a fair preface to foul ruin; and therefore if
he can find nothing else to commend her by, but that her Antiquity is of
ancient days, and that she is a joyous City, a crowning City, whose Merchants
are Princes, and her Chapmen the Honorable of the earth, he will give her
anon a most heavy doom, her own feet shall carry her a far off to
soiourne.

O consider this, and lay it to heart, all ye that inhabit the like joyous
City, (for who, in this point of flourishing Estate, sees not Londons face in
Tyres looking glass?) Flatter not your selves with your wealth and pomp, like
her Merchants, as if you (forsooth) were Gods only Fauourits, and your Fleece
alone, like Gedeons, wet with the dew of heaven, and all the ground dry round
about. Dream not of secure possessing the Fortunate Islands, nor of being
begirt with the Sea, and hemmd in with watery walls from all danger; Think not
by heaping together thick clay, and therewith building your nest on high; you
shall escape wrath and judgment to come. Know rather that the Christian
Armor, Faith and Rightcousnes, and the Churches Weapons, Prayers and Tears,
must be your best bulwark against destruction. If you would be covered with
the defense of the most high, and be safe under the shadow of the Almighty, be
sure, such shelter is not procured by your glorious pomp, and ruffling pride,
but by your fearing God and keeping his Commandments. Strangers eyes can
witness a daily increase of your outward glory, o that we could see in you the
like growth of inward grace; we walk about your Sio^, and go round about her,
we tell the towers thereof, and note her Temples, we mark well her bulwarks, and
set up her houses, that we may acquaint them that shall come hereafter, and
the children that are yet unborn; but we had far rather take notice of your
piety, charity, sobriety toward God, your Neighbors, and your selves; without
which, all your pomp in the end, will prove but vanity and vexation of
spirit. You have lately extended your Cities wings, as if you meant to make her
fly over a good part of this Island, and by sumptuous buildings have perfected
her beauty; you have enlarged your room, increased your border, joined house
to house at home, procured goodly Colonies abroad; you first get the riches of
the Kingdom, then her honors; long may you enjoy both, if you be firm friends
to God and goodness. Your course of Trading is pleasing to the Lord, and your
Merchandise blessed if you make not shipwreck of a good Conscience. Not only
the Kingdom of heaven is like a Merchant man, seeking goodly pearls, Mat. 13.
But even the Church is a Ship of Merchants, fetching her food from far, Pro.
31. Buying and selling are the nerves and sinews of a Kingdom, exercises not
misbeseeming the Saints of God: Joseph was a Merchant of Corn; Lydia a seller
of Purple, David bought a floor, and Jeremy a field. But yet amids your great
dealing, and traffic in the world, let me put you in mind of two sorts of
Mercha^ts, most odious among you. Merchants of Time, and merchants of the
Temple: of Time, Usurers; of the Temple, Church-robbers; Time and Temple are
both Gods wares, therefore take heed o man, of setting to sale, what is none of
thine own. Will thou, that can not, with all thy wealth purchase an hours
addition unto thy life, yet offer to sell a year to thy neighbor for ten in the
hundred? will thou, whose own soul must be saved by the constant exercise of a
painful Ministry, sell thousa^ds of souls to the devil, by putting a hireling
over the flock of Ch? Princes and Nobles either should not be such broking
merchants, or (I am sure) such broking mercha^ts are not Princes and Nobles,
but base degenerate persons, that have not the least spark of true nobility in
the^. He that is wise will beware of such trading for fear of the gold of
Tolouse, that will Aurum Tololosanum.
one day, bring ruin to him, and to his family.

From these sacrilegious Merchants, it is but stepping a little aside into the
Shops of deceit, and a man meets with many others almost as pernicious: who
suck suh sweetness of gain, by using scant measure which is abominable, and
wicked balances, with the bag of false weights, Micah. 6. as also by uttering
wares with oily words, and sometime intermixing oaths and lies, and
aequiuocation about the prizes, that they will not be drawn from it, though
(in most bargains they make) they venture the woeful end of Ananias and
Zaphira, Acts 5. (the first example of judgment in the New Testament.) I can
scarce repeat it without trembling, Tell me, sold you the Land for so much? Yea
for so much. Does your ware stand you in so much? Yea in so much. How is it
that you have conceived this thing in your heart? you have not lied unto men,
but unto God; and you know what followed, both husband and wife fell straight
way down to the ground, and gave up the ghost. It Is to be hoped, there are not
many Merchants, that deal in such deceitful manner, let those that do, take
heed they, with their money, perish not together. Howeuer, let the best, in
the fear of God, examine their Trading, and in all bargains they make, be
sure to take Conscience along with them. Let both Buyers and Sellers consider,
the end of their commerce should be the upholding one another, not the
undoing; therefore let these beware how and by what means, of Merchants, they
make themselves Princes, and those how, and by what means of Chapmen they
become the Honorable of the Earth. The riches of the Country (we see) take
the wings of the morning, and fly into the City: the whole Land emptieth her
treasure into your lapps, as all the Rivers do their waters into the Sea:
Look therefore you use your abundance to Gods glory, and the advancing of
goodness. The Metropolitan City is usually the spleen of the Kingdom; the
bigger the spleen, the less and leaner all the body beside; for the ones
fullness draws the other to emptiness, which if it still swell and swell,
and purge not forth (by good works and almes-deedes) there must be some other
remedy sought; Leeches must be applied. You are but Stewards of the Riches you
possess, improve them therefore for your Masters commodity, not for your own
pomp and bravery. Traffic has brought you forth Wealth, take heed Wealth
bring not forth Luxury; Luxury Pride, and Pride, Vengeance. Poor Tire pays
for it; who, though when she did well, was accepted, yet afterward, when she did
ill, found judgment lying at the door. Her own feet shall carry her a far
off to soiourne.

2 As while the Prophet continued piping, Tire 2. Tyres judgment. 1 The form
and manner of it.
was content to dance, so now he beginns his mourning, she may frame her
self to weep; It was sweet Music in her ears to hear tell of her glory, it
will be a sharp corasiue, to her heart to hear mention of her judgment. That
distilled down like the honey, and the honey Comb, a ioyons City, a crowning
City, whose Merchants are Princes, and her Chapmen the Honorable of the earth;
this goes down like gall, and bitter Aloes. Her own feet shall carry her a
far off to soiourne.

A sharp sentence, and yet in its time severely put in execution; Twice was
this Mother City in the power of the enemy; once laid wast by Nebuchadnezzar,
another time by Alezander: It Is the former blow that is here threatened, for
Ezekiel who names Nebuchadnezzar, Ezekiel 26. Prophecieth there of the same
thing, as here does Esaias. So it was, that that mighty Monarch having newly
sacked Jerusalem, the crowning City of Judea, soon set upon her riual Tire of
the Tribe of Asher: where after three years Siege, and ten months, (when
Ithobalus was her King) at length killing, and carrying captive Prince and
people, he aequall'd her to the ground, and so quite disfigured the face of a
City, that for seventy years together, she was but a plain for Fishermen to
dry their Netts on. Till that time as Venice a Virgin City, because never
overcome; ever after a Harlot, when her own feet had once carried her a far
off to soiourne. And so justly had she deserved such her calamity, that God
gave Nebuchadnezzar a reward for inflicting it on her: Son of man, (says he)
Nebuchadnezzar, King of Babylon, caused his Army to serve a great service
against Tyrus, yet had he no wages, nor his Army for Tyrus, for the service,
that he had served against it; therefore (says the Lord God) behold I will
give the Land of Egypt unto Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon, and he shall take
her multitude, and take her spoil, and take her prey, and it shall be the
wages for his army, Eze. 29. 19. Thus when God punishes, he punishes to
purpose; and yet the same GOD, before he punishes, uses to warn; Tire shall
down because she will not repent, though he hire Nebuchadnezzar to be the
rod of his fury, and yet Tire shall be warned, that she may repent, many years
before hand: in the one see Gods hate against sin, in the other his love unto
the Sinner. The special object of your thoughts, at this time, must be the
latter, only the warning, the thunder before the shower, the threatening before
the stroke, the shaking the rodd before the stripe; Tyres feet shall carry her
a far off to soiourne; shall carry, have not yet, but shall, if she do not
repent. Repentance is a necessary Evangelical condition, still to be supplied,
wheneuer God threatens, and gives space for repentance. Suppose
Nebuchadnezzar were already entered into Phoenicia, and even now laboring to
join Tire unto the shore, from which it was distant seven hundred paces,
nevertheless three years siedge, and ten months was (one would think)
warning sufficient, and yet Tire had much more; for the Prophet deals not so
roundly with her, as Jonas did with Niniue, Yet forty days and Niniue shall be
destroid, but gives her almost as much time to repent as Noah did the old
world, well nigh a hundred years.

O the patience and long suffering of the Almighty, so bearing with sinners,
and so willing to spare, that he would even be glad to see his plagues
prevented by our conversion; Those hands of his that made the World, are not of
a destructive nature, desirous to bring it to naught again, but still labor to
mend rather then to mar; and his heart is so environed with the bowels of
compassion, that (as far forth as Justice will give leave) he ever thinks
blood better spard then spilt. When the Lord proceeds to mercy, he comes
forth merrily, as a Bridegroom out of his chamber, or as a Giant that
rejoices to run his course; Comfort ye, Comfort ye my people will your God
say, speak comfortably to Jerusalem, Isai. 40. 1. But when he is forced to
take vengeance, he hangs back, as unwilling, and his soul seems troubled
within him, How shall I give thee up Ephraim? how shall I deliver thee Israel?
How shall I make thee as Admah? how shall I set thee as Zeboim? mine heart is
turned within me, my repentings are rouled together. Hos. 11. 8. O that
merciful Father, with whom judgment is a work, but so strange a work, an
act, but so strange an act, Isai. 28. 21 that he can very hardly persuade
himself to it! When he was to Create, he went about that most readily; He
but spoke, and things were done, he but commanded, and they stood fast; but,
being to destroy, he deliberates, and he prepares, and he warnes, and he
threatens, and feign he would begin, but Mercy keeps him back; he holds up his
rod ready to strike, and presently flings it away from him; He now takes up
the sword into his hand, and by and by lays it down again; He draws his
arrrow to the head, and yet stopps before he shootes: and though he
continually threaten us from the sky with a bent bow, yet it is such a one (we
see) as has never a string. Thus does Mercy ouermaster Justice, and so works
with the Almighty, that he seldom executes judgment willingly; and when he
does, most leasurely; he will have more days spent in the destruction of one
City Ierico, then in the Creation of the whole World. If his judgment, at any
time, make toward us, it is not with Iehu's furious March, 2 King. 9. but with an
offer first of Peace, Deuteronomy. 20. 10. and if peace refused, force it the faster
on, yet his mercy steps forth, and soon gets before it, as Ahimaaz outran
Cushi, and John did Peter: and therefore never shall you find that God is
called a Father of judgment: but (...), a Father of mercies. 2 Cor. 1. 3.

O man endeavor to be like thy Maker, and be thou merciful, as thy heavenly
Father is merciful; there cannot be such disproportion between any other and
thee, as is between thee Potest poena dilata exigi, exacta non potest reuocari.
and thy God: therefore, if he warn, so do thou; in punishing be deliberate,
and send not presently from the bar to the block, but do that unto man,
which thou would have done unto thee of God. It Was a worthy saying of Saint
Cyprian, and such as showed him to have the bowels of man in him, Remitto omnia,
multa dissimulo, delictis plusquam oportet remittendis pene ipse delinquo etc.
I remitt all things, of some I take no notice for Charities sake, things
committed against God I examine not so strickly as I might, and in pardoning
offenses more then I should, my self almost offend. Thus does the merciful
man on earth, strive to imitate the God of heaven, and no other virtue can make
him more like him. For with God it is ordinary, either to spare when he might
destroy, or at least, to show some mercy, if it be but by delaying of misery.
Yet must not the desperate sinner presume on his long suffering; his hand will
reach him home at last, if he persist in his wickedness. Sera venit, sed certa
venit: though Gods vengeance have leaden feet, and come but slowly, yet it has
iron hands, lays on heavy strokes: his Mills grind but seldom, but when they
do, they grind to powder. God is provoked every day, and if a man will not
turn, he whets his Sword, bends his Bow, prepares instruments of death, and
ordains his Arrows against the persecutors. Psalm. 7. 13. Three, there are in
his Quiver most deadly, (...), Famine, Pestilence, and the Sword; The last
falls to Tyres lot, which when it should first have raged a while within her
walls, and been glutted with eating flesh, and drunk with blood, at length
it should yield the remainder of the people unto Captivity, and send them a
wandering into a far Country, Her own feet should carry her a far off to
soiourne.

And here we may take a survey of the degrees 1. Degree, Banishment.
in the burden of Tire, and in them see the wonderful Wisdom and Justice of
God; Wisdom in so aptly fitting punishment unto sin, and Justice in
appointing extremity of punishment to extreme sin. Tire, at this time had
goodly Buildings, stately Palaces, but abused to Riot, and to Luxury;
therefore it is threatened those houses should shortly spew out their Inhabitants,
and that is the first degree, Banishment; She should be carried to soiourne.

Tyres niceness was Sybariticall, her tender delicacie 2. Degree, Poverty.
would be rowed on the water in Boats and Barges, hurried up and down the
streers in Chariots and Coaches, therefore her Feet should be forced to the
ground, and her dainty legs in spite of her, be made bear the burden of
her body, and that's the second degree, Poverty; Her own feet should carry her
to soiourne.

She could not (forsooth) abide foreign 3. Degree, Remoteness of place.
air, the Country wind might not blow upon her, wedded she was to her own
Paradise, and out of her Eden she would not go, Therefore she must into a
strange Land, as far as Chaldaea, the third degree, Remoteness of place; Her
own feet should carry her a far off to soiourne.

O take heed therefore (ye Daughters of Tire) of turning the graces of GOD
into wantonness, and of abusing those mercies which he so sweetly dropps down
upon you. Make not Riches bring forth Riot, and let not the means, allowed to
maintain life, yield you fuel for your Luxury. If it do, be sure, the same
Lord that has plentifully sent his blessings will (for the abuse of them) as
fast shower down plagues, and instead of the full draughts of the Cup of
Salvation, you shall drink the dreggs of the Viols of Vengeance: the same hand
that has long been wide open to fill you with good things, will (upon just
occasion) be as close shut in withholding them; and those loving arms which
have been gently spread over you, for your protection, will be stretched forth
to reach you blows of destruction. God will pay sin home, where ever he
finds it, and (for the most part) will fit his punishment to the nature of the
offense; The Daughters of Sion may be haughty, and walk with stretched out
necks, and with wandering eyes, walking and minciug as they go, and making a
tinckling with their feet; but mark whether the Lord meet not with them
accordingly; after the taking away the whole Wardrope of their vanity; He will
make their heads bald, and discover their secret parts, instead of sweet
savor, there shall be stincke, instead of a girdle, a rent; instead of
dressing the hair, baldness; instead of a stomacher, a girding of
sackecloath; and burning instead of beauty. Isai. 3. 24. In like manner, if
Tire will dissolve and melt into pleasure, if she will needs give her self
over to niceness and delicacie, let her be sure, she shall be fitted with
pain, and have hardness enough provided for her, Her own feet shall carry
her a far off to soiourne.

From consideration of which judgment here threatened, some (never looking unto
Sin the true cause of Tyres sickness,) will perhaps, tell you of the
reuolutions of times, and of fatal periods of states, beyond which, Kingdoms
and Cities cannot stand; As Physicians make the threescore and third year of
man's life a dangerous Climactericall to the body natural; so will Statists
make the five hundredth year of a City, or Kingdom, as dangerous to the body
politic. But I wonder, who has ever felt a Cities languishing pulse, who
has discerned her fatal diseases? found her Critical days? Does she wax
weak, and heavy, and old, and shriueled, and pine away with years, as the
body of man? No, she may flourish still and grow green, she may continue as
the days of heaven, and be as the Sun before the Almighty; if his wrath be
not provoked by her wickedness. It Is sin, sin, that is both the chief
cause, and the chief Symptom of a Cities sickness, and that, indeed, soon
brings her to a fearful end, and utter desolation; whereas Religion and
honesty would preserve her flourishing estate beyond all fatal periods of
time. What brought the deluge on the old world? what called for fire and
brimstone on Sodom and Gomorrah? What destroyed Jerusalem, and her glorious,
Temple (the vvonder of the earth?) What brought Niniue, and other famous Cities
to ruin? Was it the power of numbers? Was it Plato's multiplying the Suns
retrograde motion by twelve? Was it any dire aspect of the heavens? any
malignant conjunction of stars and planets? No; but the peoples loose
manners, and their ungracious lives, and their enormous sins. Which sins
(all Cities Cankerwormes) if Tire, forewarned by the Prophet, could have shaken
off, she might have stood in her glory until this day: but seeing she chose
rather to flatter and sooth up her self in evil, so blindfolding her eyes
with the veil of her wealth, that she could not perceive what God intended
against her; words, at last, proceeded into works, and the Prophets threatening
ended in performance; no longer then menacing that God will overthrow,
overthrow, overthrow; but he does it indeed; O thou that dwell upon many
waters, abundant in treasures, thine end is come, and the measure of thy
covetousness. Alas, alas, the great City, the mighty City, for in one hour is
her destruction come: O therefore that my head were full of water, and mine
eyes a fountain of tears, that I might weep, day and night, for the slain
of the daughter of my people. For not only her own feet shall carry her a
far off to soiourne; but, at last, her own feet did carry her a far off to
soiourne.

It Is not (I hope) expected, that I should here apply this point: it is a
Prophecy, and I am neither Prophet, nor Prophets son, therefore all I say
unto you, is what Daniel said unto Nebuchadnezzar, The dream be to them that
hate you, and the interpretation thereof to your enemies. But if (of your
selves) you would meditate on Tyres judgment, and that seriously; if in her
ruin, you would but seem to read your own, that by others harms you might
learn to beware, twould be the happiest application of a Text, that ever was
made. You know that like sins draw down like punishments, and that they who
imitate the wicked in their doings, may justly fear to be made partakers of
their sufferings. It Is true you are yet at ease in Sion, and trust in the
mountain of Samaria; you lie upon beds of luory, and stretch your selves on
your beds; you eat the Lambs of the flock, and Calves out of the stall; you
sing to the sound of the Violl, and invent to your selves instruments of
Music like David; you drink Wine in bowls, and anoint your selves with the
chief ointments, Amos 6. But are you certain of the continuance of this your
happiness? Can you secure your selves to abide a joyous City still? Alas, you
know not what may, at this time, be a providing for you, you know not what a
day may bring forth, you know not what may suddenly befall you, unless you
break off your sins by repentance. I have no commission to terrifiey ou with
wars, nor rumors of wars; but your selves have heard the sound of the Trumpet,
and the alarm of the Battle; A great part of the Christian World is already
up in Arms, and the Sword has already made many a mother childlesse, many a
wife a widow; the Lord ever keep it from Jerusalem, and repel it from the
gates of Sion; the Lord guard her from his high heaven, and send his own
pensioners, the holy Angels, to defend her; Peace continue within her walls,
and plenteousnes within her Palaces. Of the three most deadly arrows in Gods
quiver, (Famine, Pestilence, and the Sword) he has shot two at you already,
olet his mercy so hold his hand, that he never shoot the third; you remember,
when he gave you cleanness of teeth in all your Cities, and scarceness of
bread in all places, when your children fainted and swooned, and languisht
away, when your wives and young men failed for hunger, and fell down in the
streets of the City, and by the passages of the gates, and there was no
strength in them. You remember when, after that, once and again, the
destroying Angel came among you, and by a grievous pestilence laid heaps upon
heaps; when he placed Solitariness at your doors, having slain thousands,
and ten thousands in your streets. O then the Lord drew his Bow mightily, and
made his venomous shafts enter into your souls, and though for all this, you
would not turn unto him, yet has he withheld his third arrowe, in hope of
your amendment, and his mercy still persuades him, you will yet take that
warning which Tire would not. Whether your sins be the sins of Sodom,
Pride, Idleness, and fullness of bread, Ezekiel. 16. 49. or the sins of
Samaria, Pride, and Drunkenness, Isai. 28. 1. or the sins of Tire, Pride,
and insulting over Gods People. Ezekiel. 26. 2. or all these put together; yet may
they be washed away with unfeigned tears of repentance, as Naaman the Syrians
leprosy with the waters of Jordan; O therefore in the fear of God, bethink
your selves while you have time, and while the acceptable day of the Lord does
last; yield while the white Flagge of Mercy hangs forth, before the red be
displaied of blood, Praemc^^^i. Pramuniti.
or the black of death; Minae sint Medicinae, be taught before you be
touched; take warning before the decree come forth, for if it be once enacted
in the high Court of heaven, twill be like the Laws of the Medes and
Persians, not to be repealed, not to be altered; It has gone out heretofore
against many famous Cities, and accordingly it has been executed; Where is now
Tanis? and Dumah? and Babylon? and Niniue? and Moab? and Jerusalem? and
Carthage? and Corinth? and No? and Sydon? they are all aequall'd to the ground,
and their honor lies in the dust. Tire her self, that crowning City, is now
but only a haven under the Turks; Her own feet has carried her a far off to
soiourne. But who took this counsel against Tire, and who purposed it,? even
the Lord of Hoasts, to stain the pride of all glory, and to bring into
contempt all the Honorable of the earth: And so from the, form and manner of
Tyres judgment, I pass unto the causes of it, and they in number three.

1 The Effficient or Author of it, the Lord of 2 The causes of Tyres judgment.
Hoasts. He took this counsel against Tire. He it was that purposed it. 2
The Impulsine, or, that that moved him to it, Pride and glory. 3 The Final, or
end, wherefore he did it, first, to stain the pride of that glory, and then (a
degree further) to bring into comtempt all the Honorable of the earth.
Tyres destruction was foretold; a City, because situate in the Sea, on a
Rock; therefore (in her conceit, and in the Worlds) thought impregnable;
whereupon our Prophet (doubting she would not so much fear the judgment
denounced, as admire how it could be effected) guides her eye to see the hand
that should give the blow, as plainly as Belshazzar saw the fingers that
wrote his ruin on the wall. He never mentions to her the arm of flesh, she
would have slighted that, but tells her of the Lord of Hoasts. The Lord of
Hoasts, A name of power, yet not excluding prudence, a name of might yet not
excluding mercy, for it is (...) The Lord of Hoasts has decreed it, did not
headily and hastily rush upon it, but soberly consult and deliberat about it:
he whose word is all one with his work, and that can with the same facility do
a thing as determine it, yet (...) decreed before he executed; as he went down
to see whether Sodom had done according to the cry, before he decreed, Genesis 18.
Now of all the sins that urge him to decree vengeance, and force down the
Viols of his wrath, Pride and glory, seem the chief, therefore he never
leaves till his revenging hand has atcheiued thus much; even, the stayning
the pride of all glory, and the bringing into contempt all the Honorable of
the earth.

More distinctly thus; The three causes of Tyres judgment, yield us three
conclusions.

1 The Efficient (the Lord of hoasts) this; The inflicter of all punishments is
the Lord of hoasts. 2 The Impulsive (Pride and Glory) this; That which chiefly
seems to move him to inflict punishment is Pride and glory. 3 The Final (the
staining, the bringing into contempt) this; His punishment beats not the air,
but works for some end, and effects powerfully what it goes about: Twill
stain the Pride of all glory, and (as if that were to little) twill bring into
contempt all the Honorable of the earth.
First, The inflicter of all punishment is the Lord 1 Efficient, Lord of hoasts
of Hoasts.

The profane Atheist may dream (as the Epicure) that God sits idle in the
heavens, careless of things below; letts men live as they list, and if
vengeance, at any time, do overtake the wicked, it is not long of him but of
Chance or Fortune, or the counsel and power of man, or the like; Kingdoms may
be overthrown, Cities ruined, and he never meddle with them. But Can there
be evil in the City, and the Lord has not done it? Amos 3. 6. Is it not He
that forms light, and creates darkness, makes peace, and creates evil?
Isai. 45. 7. Surely yes; For it is not Chance that domineereth in this inferior
world, nor are things whirld about on Fortunes Weeele, but the Lord is he that
judges the Earth, His own Heritage, and His hand lays the burden on every
sinners back. Whether any evil befall a Private man (evil Malum culpae,
Malum poena.
I mean still of punishment, of which GOD is Author, not of fault, of which he
is auenger.) Whether (I say) any evil befall Author Vltor
a Private man, or a Public person, or a Family, or a City, or a Kingdom, or
the whole World, He, he, it is, even the Lord of Hoasts, that brings it on them.

1 On a private man. The arrows of the Almighty (says Job) are in me, the
poison of them drink up my Spirit; they be the terrors of God, that set
themselves in array against me. Job 6. 4.

2 On a public person. Nebuchadnezzar must be driven from men, and his
dwelling, till seven times pass over him, must be with the beasts of the
field, and (says Daniel) O King, It Is the decree of the most high which is come
upon my Lord the King. Dan. 4. 24.

3 On a Family. I will bring evil on thee (says the Lord to Ahab) and I will
take away thy Posterity, and will cut off from Ahab him that pisseth against the
wall, and I will makethy house like the house of Jeroboam the Son of Nebat,
and like the Son of Baasha the Son of Ahiiah; 1 King. 21. 21.

4 On a City. It Was the Lord that rained upon Sodom, and upon Gomorrah,
brimstone and fire from the Lord out of heaven, and ouerthrewe those Cities,
and all the plain, and all the Inhabitants of the Cities, and that which grew
upon the ground. Genesis 19. 24.

5 On a Kingdom. It Was the Lord sent a Pestilence in Israel from the morning
even to the time appointed, and there dyed of the people, from Dan even to
Beersheba 70000 men. 2 Samuel 24. 15.

6 Lastly, on the whole world. And I (says the Lord) Behold I, will bring a
flood of waters upon the earth, to destroy all flesh, wherein is the breath of
life under the heaven, all that is in the earth shall perish. Genesis 6. 17.

Thus is it he, who sits on High, that punishes all us here below. Therefore,
if there bean end and period set to Tyres flourishing estate, you need not doubt
but it was the Lord of Hoasts decreed it. As by him Kings and Princes reign, so
by him are their Scepters removed; he was the Alpha and beginning of all rule,
and likewife he will be the Omega and ending. He changeeh times and seasous,
he takes away Kings, and he sets up Kings, Dan. 2. 21. The most high bears
rule over the Kingdoms of Men, and gives them to whomsoever he will. Dan. 4.
25. Well may Salmanasar, or Hazael, or Nebuchadnezzar, or some such, put to
their helping hands, but neither of them is more then the Hammer or the
scourge, or the rod of the Almighty, only doing that instrumentally, which he
himself does principally, O Ashur the rod of my wrath, and the staff in their
hands is mine indignation. Isai. 10. 5.

But what? Is God thus angry? or can he possibly execute judgment? Is he that
(I told you) was so unwilling to punish, become now the author of punishment?
Is he that showed mercy to thousands, content to see thousands destroyed? Does
he, that would not the death of a finner, put his own hands to the execution?
and he whose compasson flowed as the rivers of water; delight to see streams
of blood? In a word, does that Father of mercies please himself with Wars? and
Captiuities? and Wounds? and Slaughters? and Deaths? and Funerals? Are such
voices as these befitting him? Slay every man his brother, and every man his
companion, and every man his neighbor? Exodus 32. 27. Those mine enemies, which
would not that I should reign over them, bring hither, and slay them before
me? Luke 19. 27. Is this the same God we spoke of before? and not rather some
other? or is he turned on the sudden from being merciful to be cruel? Sure,
there is not one God of mercy, another of justice; one working good, another
working evil: nor is the God of the old Testament more cruel, then the God
of the New (as some Heretics blasphemously affirmed) nor the same God at one
time more cruel then at another; but he that warns as a Father, is the same
that decrees as a Judge. Cuius and amanda bonitas (says Saint Augustine) and
timenda seueritas, with whom there is mercy, but so that he may be feared.
130. 4. Not altogether composed of Compassion, excluding Justice, but so
participating of either, that as we often hear him promising, so sometime
threatening; as we often see him pardoning, so sometime punishing. Tire was
fairly warned, when the Lord sent his Prophets unto her, rising up early, and
sending them, adding line unto line, precept unto precept, here a little, and
there a little; in this see we God as a kind Father showing mercy; but Tire
would not take that warning, forcing him to decree, and to purpose that Her
own feet should carry her a far off to soiourne. In this we see the same God
as a just Judge, executing Justice; there is mercy indeed in the one of his
Acts, but there cannot be cruelty in the other. It belongs to the Judge of
heaven and earth to do right; therefore it is no more proper to him to show
compassion, then it is upon (just occasion) to inflict punishment.

Well then, if the Lord be he that punishes, beware, ye Sons of men, of
offending, and beware in two respects.

First, in regard he is Omniscient, can so easily find out what ever evil you
do: And secondly, in regard he is Omnipotent, can so easily punnish, when he
has found out evil done. As for the former, trust him, thou Adulterer if thou
dare, get thee forth in the twilight, and in the blackness of the night commit
thy deeds of darkness, hope to walk in a cloud, and say in thy heart,
tush, the Lord sees it not. But mark, whether he do not, one day, reprove
thee, and set before thee the things that thou have done; assure thy self he
sees thy works, hears thy words, understands thy thoughts long before; he is
about thy paths, and about thy bed, and spieth out all thy ways: That which
thou do in secret he sees openly, and what thou plottest, and contriuest on
thy bed by night, in the dark Closet and Cabinet of thy heart, is to him as
clear as the Sun at nooue day, and as it were, apparently set upon the House
top, the eye of heaven that never slumbreth nor sleeps, is still waking, and
waiting, and watching over thee, and when thou think it closed up and fast,
at most it does but wink.

And as the Lords eye is thus piercing to desery thy wickedness, so is his
hand powerful to take vengeance on thee for it, therefore in the second place,
beware, It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God. Heb.
10. 31. For if he be once displeased with thee, he will muster up an Army,
even of the insensible creatures, which shall fight against thee, Earth, Water,
Fire, Sun, Moon, Stars; the Earth opens her mouth, and swalloweth up
Korah, Dathan and Abiram. Number. 16. The Waters, that before stood on heaps,
rush suddenly upon Pharaoh, and drown him with all his Host. Exodus 14. Fire
comes down from heaven, and deuoureth the two Captains with their fifties,
2 Kings 1. The Sun stands still in Gibeon and the Moon in the Valley of
Aiialon, that vengeance may be taken on the Lords Enemies, Hailestones also
fight against the five Kings in the same Chapter.
Josh. 10. and they fight from heaven, even the Stars in their courses fight
against Sisera. Judge. 5. How the^ are we to deal with this Lord of Hosts? and
his so strange Army? not resist him by any means, but presently yield, and
turn unto him, that so his hand like Achilles Spear, Vulnus opemque, as it
wounds may bind up, and as it smites, may also make whole. Job 5. 18. It Was
never so truly said of the Kings of Israel that they were merciful Kings, as
it is of the God of heaven, that he is a merciful God; if we come unto him in
all humility as Benhahads Servants did unto Ahab, with Sackcloath on our bones,
and ropes about our heads, beyond all Peradventure he will save our lives, for
he gives grace unto the humble, as he beholds the proud a far off, and
scatters them in the imaginations of their hearts; yea he so respects the meek
Spirit; that he can least abide him of all other that is most contrary to him,
and therefore is haughtiness so the object of his fury; nor does any sin
more then it, provoke him to take vengeance; the second Conclusion arising from
the Impulsive cause of Tyres judgment, Pride and glory.

2 That that chiefly seems to move God to 2. Impulsive. Pride and glory.
inflict punishment is Pride and Glory.

Though I confess there were other faults in Tire as well as Pride, that moved
the Lord to take vengeance on her; As first, a rejoicing at Ierusalems
calamity, Ezekiel. 26. 2. (which she (...).
might have forborne for that ancient league that was between King Solomon and
Hiram King of Tire, (King. 5.) Secondly, Imposture and iniquity in her Trafique
Ezekiel. 28. 18. Thirdly, Delivering the whole Captivity to Edom, and not
remembering the brotherly covenant, Amos 1. 9. Fourthly, Robbing God of his
silver and gold, Joel 3. 5. and the like. Yet the chief and principal was
Pride: as appears both by this my Text, and by the 28. of Ezekiel, Where the
Prince of Tire is challenged by God for having his heart lifted up, and for
being so proud, as that he said, he was God, and sat in the seat of God.
Which Pride, (described to be, A perverse and inordinate desire of a man's own
excellency) seems a thing wholly irregular, a breaker of all rank and order,
impatient of the state and place wherein God has set it, still arrogating to
its own glory, derogating from his. And it shows its self (says Gregory the
Great) four manner of ways.

First, when arrogant men think the good they have, proceeds from themselves.

Secondly, when they yield it is from above, but given for their own merrits and
deserts.

Thirdly when they vaunt, as if they had that, which they have not.

Fourthly, when despising others they would seem to have, what they have in
some singular manner.

Now in which kind soever of these, proud Tire advanced her Peacock plumes,
and gave the Almighty an affront, she could not choose but greatly provoke his
wrath and indignation against her; for so soon as ever she came into the
number of the haughty, she was one of those that are an abomination unto him,
Prou. 16. 9. and on whom his eyes are set to humble them, 2 Samuel, 22. 28. As all
sins urge him to take vengeance, so Pride (it seems) especially; and that,
probably, for these reasons.

First, Because it is a mother sin. Secondly, because a notorious sin.
Thirdly, because the most heinous sin. Fourthly, because a manifold sin.
1 It Is a mother sin, in that all other offenses arise out of it, as branches
from their root, or streams of water from their fountain: and that two
manner of ways; directly, and indirectly; directly, all sins spring from
Pride, because they all aim at the same end at which Pride does, man's own
excellency: and indirectly, all spring from Pride, because she contemns, and
trampleth under foot that divine law, in which is the forbidding of them all.

2 It Is a notorious sin, because it so impudently declares it self: For
whereas other offenses cover their faces in darkness, fly the presence of
God, desiring to be hid from his eyes; Pride, being brazen faced, walks up and
down the open streets, takes pleasure in the light, and so ietts and struts
it before the Almighty, as if she meant to outbraue him to his face.

3 It Is the most heinous sin, in that, whereas in every offense there is an
Auersion from the Creator, as the formality of it, and a Conversion to the
Creature, as the materiality; though in respect of the latter, Pride be not the
greatest sin, because height, the proud man's aim, carries not the greatest
repugnancy unto moral good; yet in respect of the former, to wit, the Auersion
from the Creator, it is; for whereas in other sins a man turns from GOD,
either through ignorance, or infirmity, or desire of some other good, or the
like, Pride has its auersion from him, only because twill not be subject to
him, and to his rule.

4 Lastly, it is Peccatum multiplex, a manifold sin, because whereas other
vices set only upon those virtues, by which themselves are destroyed, Luxury
batters Chastity; Anger, Patience, and the like; Pride rayseth it self not
against any one, but against all, and as a general and pestilent disease
corrupts them all

These are the Devilish qualities of damned Pride, and therefore where ever
you find it in persons, or in places, you may attribute their ruin to nothing
more. If Moab be as Sodom, and the children of Ammon as Gomorrah, even a
breeding of Nettles and Saltpits, and a perpetual desolation, that they have
for their Pride, Zeph. 2. 10. If Edom be brought down to the ground, it is
because she has exalted her self as the Eagle, and made her nest among the
Stars, Obed. 4. And if Capernaum be thrust low into Hell, it is because she was
lifted up high unto Heaven, Math. 11. 23. It Was this Pride was Lucifers sin,
the Son of the Morning, which made him from prime of Angels become prince of
Devils; and therefore he never doubted, if he once could but work in Adam and
Eve that proud conceit that they should be like gods, but twould be enough to
make them die like men. While Pride is climbing up, it never thinks of coming
down, therefore Satan works that sin in man of all other, that his ruin, as
it is certain, so it may be sudden, and seize upon him at unawares; he knows
they that swell with arrogance must burst at last, and when they least think
of it; and that they (who ambitiously climb over other men's heads, will soon
fall, and break their own necks. To this end he puts a man into a vain of
exalting himself as Haman; or of bragging, as Nebuchadnezzar; or of reuelling,
as Belshazzar, that presently even amids his Pride and Iolsitie he may feel
some strange downfall; And feel it he shall, little hope is there of
escaping, for if there be any weapons in the Armory of heaven, any creatures at
Gods command on earth, any Viols of wrath to be powered forth, then look to thy
Crown, Pride, for thou shall be sure to have thy hairy scalpe smitten. Though
a man were as the Signet of Gods own right hand, as a Frontlet between his
eyes, as a Chain about his neck, yet thence and thence will he soon pluck
him, if he once begin to be proud, and with Ephraim to kick with the heel;
Pride shall have a fall. Well therefore may it be painted with a wry neck, not
so much scornful to look on men over the shoulder; as indeed, to see how
fast shame and destruction comes after.

Now if such be the danger of Pride, and if it so move God to inflict
punishment on it, how dares it so frequently iett up and down the streets,
and not fear the heavy hand of heaven? How comes it to pass there are such
troops of Gallants, every where met, so printed, powdered, perfumed, so kemm'd
and trimmed that a hair may not stand awry? Who Absalon-like are so curious of
their beauty, that they will rather endure three disorders in their lives, then
one in their locks? How comes it that they so ruffle it in their Silks and
Veluets? Cloth of Gold and Tissue? That they carry Houses, and Lordships,
Lands and Livings, Yea sometime Tithes and Offerings on their backs? And wear
Clothes to that value on one day, as was wont to to keep good Hospitality a
whole year? How comes it that young Landlords to maintain their Pride here
in the City, depopulate sundry Villages in the Country? Turn many ancient
Tenants children a begging, and yet keep no house to relieve them with a
morsel of bread? How comes it that where their Grandfathers gave daily alms
to the fatherless and widow? and were content to let poor families renew
their States and Copy-holds, making the eye which saw them bless them, and the
ear which heard them give witness unto them? How comes it (I say) that
there now the sons of these men engrosse all tenements into their own hands,
as fast as they fall, and never care for being better members of the
Commonweal, then to starve others while they fare deliciously themselves?

Again, if great be the danger of pride, and if it seem chiefly to move God
to inflict punishment, how comes it that our women build such turrets and
castles on their heads, with braided hair and gold put about? How comes it
that they so put down the wanton daughters of Syon for bonets, and cawles, and
round-tires, and headbands, and veiles, and wimples, and crisping pinns, and
tablets, and carerings, and rings, and mufflers, and sweet balls, and
bracelets, and glasses, and fine linen, and hoodes, and lawnes, and such like
vanities, whereat devils laugh, and good men bite the lip? I deny not but
there is necessitas personae, as well as necessitas naturae, a rugge or a
mantle does not befit a Lady or a Princess, though it cover nakedness, and
keep away cold, as well as a gown of Satin, or Velvet; but yet the excess
of apparel even in such great personages (though it be far more tolerable in
them then in those of the lower sort) is unwarrantable; and the Lord will
visit them for it, though Princes and Kings children. Zeph. 18. But let me
farther question, how comes it that some women rest not so in gay and
gorgeous clothing, but (as being weary of their sex) are ready to step in to
man's apparel, a thing (I dare say) never heard of in Tire, and I am sure, an
abomination to the God of Israel, Deuteronomy. 22. 5. Again, how comes it that some
painted Iezebels seem discontent with Gods own workmanship? and (being
desirous to mend what he has made) put Art a plaster upon Nature? What do
they with their oils? and waters? and complexions? and colors? and perfumes?
and powders? and such like trumperies? The very thought of which may set a
greater blush, and make more rosy cheeks in a modest face, then all these
unnatural dawbings can, where the forehead is impudent. O the intolerable
pride of these times, and of the age wherein we live! And when (I wonder) will
these painted walls think of repenting, and sorrow for sin? when with Mary
Magdalen, will In fonte^ frontem, atque in flamina lumina vertit.
they make their eyes their basin, their tears the water, their hair the
towell, to wash and wipe their Saviors feet? They may not enter into such a
mournful exercise, twill presently discolor their fresh varnisht countenance:
therefore in their repentance, they (forsooth) will have silks for saceloath,
oils for tears, and sweet powders for ashes: but if there be a God in heaven,
let them be sure, he will visit for these things. But (perhaps) you will say;
these, all this while, are the Chapmen of Tire and their dainty minions, it is
far otherwise with her Merchants and the City Matrons, more humility is
found in Citizens, and in their wives more modesty: God forbid else; and yet
some of them have their pride too, and such as is not to be endured; for, are
not some Merchants ready to kiss their own hands, and to sacrifice to their
own netts, when for their happy return from some dangerous voyage, and for
their prosperous increase of wealth, they should ascribe all unto the Lord?
Again, are not some Merchants in such pomp and bravery, as exceedes their
place, and so clad with riches, as is beyond their rank and calling? Cannot we
see pride peeping through their ruffes and setts, through their iaggs and
cutts, as Diogenes saw Aristippus vanity through a gash of his cloak? Is
there not pride in apparel? pride in gesture? pride in gate? pride in speech?
in almost all their actions pride? And as for their wives and daughters, have
not some of them forgot to attire themselves as Sarah did, and other holy
women, who trusted in God, having the hidden man of the heart vncorrupt, and a
meek and quiet Spirit which is before God, a thing much set by? 1 Pet. 3. 4.
Nay, have they not forgot, how that their own mothers by being grave and stayed
matrons, soberly and modestly attired, were once the ornament and renown of
this place, whereas themselves by dawbing their faces and dressing their heads,
as Iezebel did, and then looking out of their windows, or sitting at their
doors to entrap Solomon's fool as he passes by, become a shame and dishonor
unto the famous City that bred them? Yet so it is; but if there be a God in
heaven: let them be sure, he will visit for these things. And if he take the
matter into his hand, His punishment shall not beat the air, but work for
some end, and effect thoroughly what it goes about, twill stain the Pride of
all their glory, and (if that be too little) twill bring all their honor into
contempt, The third and last conclusion arising from the final cause of Tyres
Judgment, (the 3. Final cause.
staining, the bringing into contempt.)

Gods punishment beats not the air, but etc. Twill stain) that is,
profane, violate, destroy, the pride of all glory) that is, the Pride of all
Tyres glory, though she be so proud, as if she had the pride of all the world
in her, and (because the scorner must be paid in his own Coin, be also
scorned) this more; twill not barely stain, but bring into contempt,) that is,
make vile, and despicable, All the honorable of the earth) that is, all the
Honorable of the Land of the Tyrians, to wit, their Princely Merchants, and of
the Land of her bordering neighbors too, her proud Chap men, if they imitate
Tire in her bravery.

It Is very miserable to be but degraded, and thrown down from a high conceit
of ones own excellency, but, over and above to have scorn, and derision, and
contempt added, is intolerable; yet thus, and thus far proceeds God in
punishing, rather then his stroke shall fall light, and seem to be idle. for
when he once begins, he will also make an end, though he send plague upon
plague, affliction upon affliction, as he dealt with Pharaoh, and the
Egyptians, till they ctied out, We dye all, Exodus 12. He first warns, then
threatens; threatens, then decrees; decrees, then punishes; punishes at
first lightly, but afterward to purpose: Is he (think you) as man that he
should lie? or as the Son of man that he should go back? Has he said, and
will he not perform? has he determined, and shall it not come to pass? and
when he brings it to pass, will he do it imperfectly, and to halfs? No, he
goes through with what he enterpriseth, not only meets with Prides
perriwig, and haleth it from her crown, but continues tugging at her frizled
Locks, till he bring her to the ground, and to be trampled under feet;
First, he will Stain the Pride of all glory, and then bring into contempt all
the Honorable of the earth.

I might here fairly fall into a point, which I touched upon before, to wit,
God so aptly fitting punishment unto sin: For (as I told you) if Tire taking
upon her to be a joyous City, a crowning City, and therefore melting and
dissoluing into pleasure, yielding her self wholly over unto niceness and
delicacy, (as those that are in Kings houses) should for that her wantonness
be fitted with pain, and have hardness enough provided for her, insomuch that
her own feet should carry her a far off to soiourne: then no marvel if
when she grows stately, and proud, scorning and contemning others, the Lord
fit her here in like manner for that too, even Stayning the pride of all her
glory, and bringing into (...) both be honorable, and all the honor ^ ^
soiourne, the dainty City shall be carried on her own feet to soiourne, the
proud City shall have the pride of all her glory stained, and the contemning
City shall have all her honorable brought into contempt: The medicine is
rightly made for the malady, the salve excellently fitted for the soar. But I
am loath to harp twice on the same string, and that the rather, because I
presume, that whatsoever is wanting in the prosecution of this, or any other
point, which I have touched upon, may sufficiently be supplied, by your more
private and retired Meditations. Well then; you see, what Pride must look for,
even to be stained, what Glory and honor must expect, even to be brought into
contempt; that painted Harlot shall be sure, not only to be pulled and haled
out of her high throane, but so violently hurled out of it, that there shall
be no stay, nor footing for her, till she come down, down, unto the ground;
let her carry the matter never so fairly, and sooth up her self, with never
so many flatteries, yet end she must, in that which she can least abide,
contempt.

Wherefore (Beloved) in the fear of God, give me leave thus to bespeake you;
Ye Merchants of Tire that are as so many Princes, and ye, her Chapmen, the
Honorable of the earth, as you desire this place, wherein you live (whose
antiquity is of ancient days) should yet long abide a joyous City, and a
crowning City; as you desire she may still flourish more and more here at
home, to the admiration of Strangers; and that her own feet never carry her a
far off to soiourne; as you desire the continuance of your own plenty, and
prosperity in her, and that you may be able to hold up your heads with credit
in the world; as you desire to avoid disgrace, (the staining of your glory, and
the bringing your honors into scorn and contempt) shun pride, and arrogance,
embrace humility and meekness. God has blessed you with riches, and honors,
and friends, and with what not? and so he did Tire; With riches, She heaped up
Silver as the dust, and Gold as the mire of the streets, Zech. 9. 3. With
honors, her Merchants were Princes, and her Chapmen the honorable of the
earth, the words of my Text; ^astly, with friends, she was confederate (by
reason of her Traffic) almost with all Nations, Eeck. 27. But she had a
quallity that spoild all, (and I could wish twere not found in you) she waxed
Proud. God is exceedingly offended with Pride in whomsoever he finds it; but
especially (it seems) with Pride in Merchants; and that may be, because he
cannot endure they should so forget what they sometime were, and from ^ow mean
place most of them have been raisd. One (whose Family was poor in Manasses,
and he the least in his Fathers house) came up hither villing to labor for his
living, and began the world with a very little, rose up early, went to bed
late, and did eat the bread of carfulness; now (perhaps) God has given him
a stately House, and a Shop full of wares, diverse Tenements, and rich Revenues,
many Men-seruants, and Maid-seruants at his command, so that the lot seems
fallen to him in a fair ground, and he has a goodly Heritage; but shall he
therefore advance his crest, and grow proud? Another was once in as ill a case
as his Savior Christ, though the Foxes have holes, and the Birds of the air
have nests, yet he had not so much as a house to put his head in; but since
that time, perhaps, God has enlarged his room, increased his border, given
him a goodly habitation here in the City, and Lordly Manors in the Country,
a Ship or two at Sea, and rich commodities on the Land, so that in peace and
plenty he enjoys whatsoever heart can wish; with his staff only came he
over the River, as Jacob; now God has given him two Bands: But shall he
therefore advance his Crest, and grow proud? Nay rather, as Agathocles, who of
a Potter was Fictilibus canasse ferunt Agathoclea Regem.
made a Prince, still remembered his former mean place: so should you think of
yours, and with all humility thank God for so bettering your states. As the
Wiseman bids you Remember your end, so do I your beginning, and you shall
never do amiss. The Philosopher says, rich men are naturally (...), Lovers
of God, fearing to displease, because they have somewhat to loose: which Satan
understood well enough, when he said, Job feared not God for naught, but
because he had made a hedge about him and blessed the works of his hands, and
increased his substance in the Land, Job 1. 10. O then shake not off your
Natures you that are rich, and abound in wealth, but be ye lovers of God
still, Though you lie where you may suck your fill at the sweet dugs of a
fruitful I Will, though you inhabit a second Paradise upon earth; yet swell not
with Pride, nor grow big, be not high minded but fear; and Diuitusque sinum,
deliciisque larem.
so the God of peace be with you all, and so prosper you in the way of life,
that from this joyous and crowning City below, you may be made free Denizens of
the new Jerusalem above, and from being princely Merchants and Chapmen on
earth, you may be Kingly Saints sitting on throanes in Heaven. To God the
Father, God the Son, etc.

FINIS.

