THE Articles of the giving over of the large, ample, and imperial City of
GROANING.

Also the Articles and conditions, whereupon his Highness, and the honorable
William Ludowick Earl of Nassow, at this present, with the advice of the
Counsel of the Estates of the united Provinces, are content to agree unto: for
reducing and reconciliation of the City, Citizens, and Indwellers of the said
City of Groaning.

Likewise the agreement, concluded between his Highness, and the chief
Lieutenant Laukema, with the Captains, Commanders, and common Soldiers,
being in Garrison within the fore-sayd City.

Done the xxi. and xxii. of July, 1594. With repetition of the besieging of
the same.

depiction of the capture of Groningen

Printed at London by John Wolf.

The Articles of the giving over of the imperial City of Groaning.
THE excellent Prince and Lord Morris of Nassow, etc. having rescued
Coeuerden, where the common Enemy with all his power on foot and on
horseback, had line all the Winter, and strengthened himself with sundry
Trenches, against the insurrection of our people, has notwithstanding not
tarryed the coming of our Camp, but has left the Castle of Coeuerden, with
all her Trenches and Camps.

Which done, his Highness came before Groaning, the 20. of May, viewed the
City, and summoned it. Their answer was, that they should first lie a year
and a day before it, and then should summon the same. There should you have
seen many kinds of cariages, in very great quantity, of rafters, posts,
Deals, plancks and boords, wherewith many Ships were laden. There was ten
Ships sent from Gorcum with boordes, besides many hundreds which came from
Swoll and other places, and were bespoken.

There came to the Camp before Groaning, from my Lords the States, under the
conduct of his Highness, about one hundred and forty Ensigns of footmen: as
high Dutch, Englishmen, Scots, Netherlanders, and Freeslanders. The
Freeslanders under the conduct of William Earl of Nassow. There was viij.
Ensigns presently sent before the Forte at Aurikeizill, to take in the same:
for they held out stoutly, and attended for five Ensigns, that came with
bridges and Ladders for the assault.

And standing ready to employ all their might thereon, there came three other
Ensigns from the other side, with bridges, many bu^dles of Bulrushes bound
together in sacks, pitched and nailed under Tables made of Deale-bords, over
which they ran to the wall of the Fort. They which had no Ladders, did stick
their daggers in, and climed up by them. The people seeing that they were
ouer-fallen, cried for grace, but it was too late: for they had spoken very
obprobrious words to the Dromster, wherefore they were all overcome, and of
one hundred and thirty, there was not five left alive. Which was no small fear
to them of Groaning* as also the driving out of their folk out of the Trenche
at Hogherbrug. So that they of Groaning, were constrained to drive their Cattle
under the Town wall, where they could not all be kept, but some were fed
with Hay in the City. There was about foure-score of those without, which
were taken by our men.

After this, they issued forth of the City in sundry places upon our men, with
the help of five Ensigns of Soldiers, that lay in Shutendiepe, which place
is strongly defended severally from the City, lying upon ye water called the
Vaert*) which the Coronell made at that time. With this their issuing out, they
did our folks very much harm. But after we had made our Trenches, dug our
Lope-ditches, and strengthened the same, their left they of their issuing out.

Great was the carefulnes of his Highness and my Lords the States, in the
fortifying and making sure of our Camp, toward all quarters, where any fear
was of assaulting. And then employing all their force against the City, with
diging and placing of their Ordinance. Yea, in three places they came to their
very wall, so that in two places, they dug and undermined twenty and thirty
foot within their Wall. They within rested not, but defended themselves:
insomuch that through their manifold shooting, there was found above two
thousand pellets.

Hereby is to be coniectured, that they shot four thousand shot at the
least, with great Ordinance. For at the beginning they were provided with
four hundred Barrells of powder, which were lessned to fifty, and yet were
not they of the best.

Upon the Gate called the Herren Port, were eight great pieces placed, and
wholly shot of. There were many houses shaken, and spoiled with the Ordinance,
and sometimes with fireworks out of the Camp, and balls of wildfire, which
in sunder places did set their houses on fire: where-vppon presently followed
pellets of stone, and hayle-shot mingled with wildfire. Whereby the hearts of
the Citizens began here and there to faint, and were brought to such point,
that they took pledges one of another.

The Rulers were brought to such extremety, and to adgrauiate the matter, (not
so much through the besieging, but by certain Soldiers of Sluiten-deepe,
which were let into the City,) that they were forced to hold their hands,
which made a rumor in the City, insomuch that some lost their lives by it.
This being stilled and pacified, the Soldiers had afterward no good rest or
quietness for want of sleep, by reason of their continual watching. The chief
of them was occasion hereby to write to Don Verdugo, for a supply of
Soldiers, munition, and money. One of the carryers of these Letters was
slain, and hanged up against the City: the other was pardoned, because he
bewrayed the secrets of the City.

Upon the Roundell (which was made long ago, and in the time of Duke Daline,
called The Castle,) were also eight great pieces of Ordinance planted, one of
the corners whereof was wholly shot down, and so made vnfenceable. His Highness
through his diligence and endeavor going here about to see the manner, a
shot light upon his Trench, that those which stood hard by him, were
thereby sprinkled in their faces.

One of the three mines under the said Roundell, named Rauelin, was dug,
which being perceived by them of the City, was countermined, by which our men
entered, placing of their powder, and alarm presently given. Whilst they of the
City were setting of their watch at the said Rauelin, the powder was by a
train suddenly set on fire, with such thundering noise and dust, that for the
space of three hours, one man could not see another. The chiefest Lieutenant
was also slain.

The Reader may well think, how arms, legs and and whole bodies of men,
were blown away in the air, for two of them fell into our Trenches, whereof
one was yet alive. This Bulwark brake and fell down, according as we wished,
and has made a brave bancke. Also the way filled up between Rauelin and the
City, our men crept in, without losing of any one man: where they found six
pieces of Ordinance, and certain men wrapped up in the earth, which were yet
alive. The same day in the Evening in setting of our watch, we lost eight
Soldiers.

They in the City seeing this, were at their wits end, as if the day of
Judgment had been come. Straightwaies John den Boer, or John the Clown, was
sent out with a Taber and a pype, yet that day all was not ended. But the next
day, they of the City, upon good assurance and promise of his Highness, came
forth in four several companies, that is to say, the Clergy, the
Magistrates, the chiefest of the Soldiers, and the men of Occupations. One of
the^ would not trust another. Heerevpon his Highness said unto them, Look what
you agree to, is wholly given you through my liberality: for I count my self
assured of the City. In the end, after many debatings, the xxij. day of Iulie,
these Articles following were agreed upon.

1. First, that his Highness for the first time, may displace the Magistrate,
and place him again, and the sworn Communaltie, at his pleasure. 2. That the
Gildes or Companies shall in that respect, be set a side, that they shall have
nothing to say in the policy of the City. But the Counsel shall deal
therein with the sworn Communaltie, such as the Counsel will use thereunto.
3. That his Highness may put Soldiers into the City at his pleasure: but yet
in such manner as is used in Freesland. 4. That the City shall renounce the
King, and declare him their enemy. And also be seized with Imposts or any
others, as the Cities in Freeselande. 5. That no other Religion be suffered,
but only the true reformed Religion. 6. That during these wars, his Highness
shall yearly choose out five of the sworn Communalty, which shall appoint the
Counsel. 7. That the Garrison of the Enemy shall pass over the Rhine,
leaving their Ensigns behind the^. And swearing in three months not to serve
on this side the same.
But his Highness afterward, at the intercession of certain Gentlemen, bid the
Ensigns to be given them at their departing.

Touching all other Articles, the same shall remain at the disposition of the
general Estates. The Lord give his Highness long life, that thereby all they
may be forced which exercise Spanish tyranny, and oppress the good.

Almighty GOD be thanked for his grace and favor, and this great victory,
for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.

